                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         INTERNATIONAL STUDENT MOBILITY:
                              GROWTH AND DISPERSION

                                       Neeraj Kaushal
                                       Mauro Lanati

                                     Working Paper 25921
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25921


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




The authors are grateful to C. Simon Fan, Ettore Recchi and Martin Ruhs for their extremely
helpful comments and suggestions. Mauro Lanati thanks Stiftung Mercator for financial support
under project number PN 14-297. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Neeraj Kaushal and Mauro Lanati. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
International Student Mobility: Growth and Dispersion
Neeraj Kaushal and Mauro Lanati
NBER Working Paper No. 25921
June 2019
JEL No. J1,J15,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

Recent years have seen an unprecedented growth and geographic dispersion in international
student mobility. In this paper, we empirically test the predictions of two competing theoretical
models underpinning the determinants of student mobility ­ the human capital model and the
migration model ­ across traditional and emerging destinations. Our findings suggest that while
the predictions of the migration model are generally valid in explaining student emigration to
non-English speaking OECD destinations, student flows to English speaking countries and
emerging economies are largely in line with the predictions of the human capital model. The
growing dispersion of international students to emerging economies and continuing large flows to
English speaking countries are therefore indicative of the rising demand to acquire tertiary skills
and much less of the desire to migrate for permanent settlement.


Neeraj Kaushal
Columbia University
School of Social Work
1255 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nk464@columbia.edu

Mauro Lanati
European University Institute
Villa Malafrasca, Via Boccaccio 151,
Florence 50133
Italy
mauro.lanati@eui.eu
Introduction

        Recent years have seen an unprecedented growth in international student flows and their
geographic dispersion globally. In 2015, 4.6 million international students were enrolled
worldwide, three-times the number in 1999 (UNESCO, 2018). This rise has been driven by
students from emerging economies - such as India and China ­ predominantly moving to English
- speaking OECD countries (Zong and Batlava, 2018; Figure 1). The United States continues to
be the top destination, but its share has fallen from almost a third in 1999 to less than a quarter in
2015 (UNESCO, 2018). Meanwhile, several non-OECD countries have joined the ranks of top
destinations with their combined share of international student flow rising to 28% in 2015 and
China emerging as the third top destination.3
        The growth and dispersion of international student flow has implications for both sending
and destination countries. For destination countries, international students have become a major
source of new talent, whose scarcity is widely considered the biggest threat to economic growth
(Manpower Group, 2018, Gordon, 2012). To overcome the scarcity, many countries have special
visas to facilitate entry of international students and several have instituted visas for their long-
term settlement. For sending countries, the outflow of students for higher education creates
issues of brain drain, in the short run, as many students decide to settle in destination countries
permanently. In the long run, sending countries also benefit from brain regain as a substantial
proportion of students return often with human capital they could not have acquired at home.
Understanding the factors that influence these flows therefore has policy relevance for both
origin and destination countries.
        Previous research on international student mobility and its key determinants has generally
focused on flows to rich countries (see for instance Beine, Noel and Ragot, 2014, Rosenzweig,
2008, Abbott and Silles, 2016). Restricting the choice of destination is likely to yield biased
estimates as it involves using partial data on international student emigration. Further, these
studies have diminished relevance in the current context as destinations for international students
have grown in number and become geographically more diverse.
        In this paper, we study international student flows to 141 destinations from 206 origin
countries over a 16-year period to investigate the role of a number of time-varying origin and
origin-destination specific factors across traditional and emerging destinations. We test the
predictions of two primary models of international student mobility - the migration model and
the human capital model - using empirical specifications that allow parsimonious (unrestricted)
controls for observed and unobserved time-invariant origin-destination characteristics as well as
time-varying destination-characteristics. Importantly, year-destination fixed effects allow
controlling for time-varying destination visa policies, and destination-origin fixed effects allow
controlling for visa restrictions that destinations impose on students from specific origins.


3   The list of OECD countries refers to the ones that joined the group prior to 1995 (see Table A1).




                                                                   2
        In addition to the aforementioned large sample of origin and destinations, we also study
five destination clusters: (i) the top 25 destinations that received 88.5% of all international
student flows during our study period; (ii) the top 25 non-OECD destinations (19.6% of the
international student flow); (iii) the top 25 OECD countries (77.7% of the flow), which we
further sub-divide into (iv) the six English speaking countries that have been traditional
destinations for international students, namely the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada,
Australia, Ireland, and New Zealand, (49.1% of the flow) and (v) the top 19 non-English
speaking OECD countries (28.6% of the flow).
         Briefly, our findings suggest that while the predictions of the migration model are
generally valid in explaining student emigration to non-English speaking OECD destinations,
student flows to English speaking countries and emerging new destinations are largely in line
with the predictions of the human capital model of mobility. The growing dispersion of
international students to emerging economies and continuing large flows to English speaking
countries are therefore indicative of the rising demand to acquire tertiary skills and much less of
the desire to migrate for permanent settlement.

Theoretical Issues:

         Economists have used human capital and migration models to study international student
mobility (Beine et al., 2014, 2018; Rosenzweig, 2008). The human capital model postulates that
education is an investment individuals make to maximize lifetime earnings (Becker, 1964).
International students migrate to acquire skills or credentials that they cannot acquire at home.
These credentials and skills improve employability in the labor market abroad as well as in the
home country. Under the human capital model, students generally move to countries with
education systems that have international recognition and provide skills that are portable. A large
proportion of international students settle at the destination, but a substantial number also return
to their origin countries.
         The neoclassical model of migration, or what we call the migration model for brevity, on
the other hand, postulates that individuals decide to emigrate to new destinations if the expected
net difference in income between the destination and the origin is greater than the travel cost and
other monetary and non-monetary costs of emigration (Todaro, 1969; Harris and Todaro, 1970).4
Student emigration, under this model, is primarily not for acquiring higher education but to
eventually settle in the destination country on a permanent basis.
         Rosenzweig and Beine and colleagues have extended the implications of the migration
model in the context of international student mobility. The migration model is important because
for residents of many developing countries who are keen on emigrating to rich countries it is
easier to acquire a student visa than a visa for permanent emigration, which makes temporary


4There are a number of other theories of migration including Douglas Massey's cumulative causation theory. We focus on
human capital and migration models, as we believe these models have greater relevance for international student mobility.




                                                           3
migration using student visa an important means to enter and the first step towards eventual
settlement in the destination country.
        We study four dimensions of origin country characteristics and as we describe below
there are similarities and differences in how the two models predict the association between the
factors that measure these dimensions and international student mobility:

    1. Inter-connectedness between sending and receiving countries, which we measure with
       two variables: immigrant networks of sending country population at the destination and
       volume of bilateral trade between sending and destination countries. Previous research
       suggests that presence of co-ethnic (or co-national) population (diaspora) lowers the cost
       of moving as well as eases assimilation at the destination.5 The migration model predicts
       a positive diaspora effect on future waves of migration, including international student
       flows. Diaspora effects are less strong under the human capital model because students in
       this model attach primary significance to knowledge acquisition and relatively less
       significance to permanent settlement.
       The human capital model predicts strong positive relationship between bilateral trade and
       student mobility. High and rising bilateral trade between two nations create economic
       synergies that are best exploited with access to trading nation specific skills, including
       proficiency in trading nation language, managerial styles, technological advances. Thus
       increase in bilateral trade would increase demand for destination-specific skills. On the
       other hand, if the motive for mobility is permanent settlement bilateral economic
       relations, of which bilateral trade is an important aspect, may not be as significant a
       factor in international student mobility although it would continue to have a positive
       effect on student mobility.
    2. Quality of Political and Administrative institutions in the origin country, measured with
       three variables: an index of political stability and absence of violence in the origin
       country, an index of voice and accountability, and government efficiency (see detailed
       description of these variables in Appendix Table 1). The migration model predicts a
       strong positive association between political instability and student outflow. An increase
       in government effectiveness will likely improve law-and order in the country, which may
       reduce incentives to emigrate to another country for permanent settlement under the
       migration model. Increases in political freedom and civil rights, captured by voice and
       accountability, will also reduce the incentive to migrate for reasons such as political
       coercion. The human capital model, on the other hand, predicts that increased political
       stability and absence of violence, government effectiveness and voice and accountability
       will increase returns to skills at the origin and therefore incentive to acquire them,
       including by traveling to foreign countries.


5Increased presence of co-nationals may also reduce the incentive to socially and culturally assimilate with the host country
population.




                                                             4
     3. Educational infrastructure and demand for higher education at the origin: Educational
        infrastructure is measured with number of high-ranking universities in the country.
        Demand for higher education is measured with number of people in the country likely to
        seek college education (population in the official age for tertiary education), and share of
        graduates in the origin country's population. Both the human capital and migration
        models lead to similar predictions that poor educational infrastructure at origin and higher
        demand for education increase student mobility. Arguably, the association is likely to be
        stronger for the human capital model.
     4. Economic growth at origin measured as per capita GDP at origin. The human capital and
        migration models predict a similar association between GDP growth and student
        mobility. The human capital model predicts that at low levels of GDP, an increase in
        GDP would incentivize students to go abroad for higher education due to lack of high
        quality institutions for higher education in the home country as well as increasing returns
        to higher education at home. As incomes rise, demand for higher-skilled workers rise
        and in response countries generally improve their educational quality, thus, after reaching
        a certain threshold of GDP the incentive to travel abroad for higher education will begin
        to dissipate if similar quality education could be acquired at home without incurring the
        financial and psychological costs of migration. In the migration model, in low-income
        countries, increases in per capita GDP will result in higher mobility indicating rising
        ability and aspirations of the sending country population to migrate. Student migration
        will plateau at a certain per capita GDP level beyond which any further increases in per
        capita GDP will result in lower mobility indicating that the usual incentives for
        emigration (more opportunities abroad) become less compelling.

Previous Research

        In one of the earlier papers on student mobility, Bessey (2007) used five years of student
inflow data (1997-2002) in Germany and found that many of the key determinants of immigrant
location choices (e.g. immigrant networks, distance between origin and destination) were
correlated with international student mobility. But home country disposable income was
unrelated to student mobility; and student flow was less from countries with lower levels of
political freedom. Rosenzweig (2008) studied student flows from Asian countries to the United
States and found that while improvements in the quality of higher education at home reduced
student outflows, increases in per capita number of colleges and universities were associated
with higher student outflow.
        Most studies on international student mobility are single-destination (e.g. the US, the UK,
Italy or Germany) (Rosenzweig, 2008, Beine et al 2017, Beine et al 2018, Bessey, 2012).6 A

6 Dreher and Pautvaara (2010) found that student migration has a positive impact on international migration. Using US State
Department data on visas issued between 1992 and 2010 - Thomas and Inkpen (2016) - found that international student flows to
the United States were particularly driven by a substantial growth in students on J visas, which requires the student to return to




                                                                5
limitation of these studies is that they use partial data on international student flows from any
origin country, which could result in biased estimates. For example, a study of sending country
factors based on data on students from Asian countries to the United States does not capture the
factors that led Asian students to choose other large destinations such as Australia, Japan, the
U.K. and other European countries (see e.g. Rosenzweig, 2008).
        A few recent studies used data on international student flows to multiple-destinations in
OECD countries applying gravity models of mobility.7 Beine, Noel, and Ragot (2014) examined
international student flows to 13-OECD countries during 2004-2007 and found that immigrant
networks and quality of universities had large positive effects and cost factors such as housing
prices had a negative effect on student location choices. Using student exchange data between 31
European countries, Van Bouwel and Veugelers (2013) also found that education quality had a
positive effect on the size and direction of student flows overall. For graduate students, however,
lack of educational opportunity at home was the driving force for student exchange between
European countries. Gonzalez and Mesanza (2011), who studied Erasmus student mobility in
Europe, found significant effects of cost of living differences and distance between sending and
destination countries.8
        Three studies expanded their framework to include non-OECD countries. Perkins and
Neumayer (2014), used student inflow data for OECD and non-OECD countries during 2004-
2009, found that sending country university ranking had only a marginal impact on international
student outflow. But their finding could be confounded by unobserved origin-year effects
correlated with time-varying university rankings, which is also a weakness of Abbott and Silles
(2016), who used 18 destination and 38 origin countries during 2005­2011, to study the role of
destination-specific per capita GDP relative to origin per capita GDP.9 Wei (2012) examined the
effect of economic and educational characteristics of destinations on international student flows
in 48 countries during 1999-2008. A weakness of his regression analysis is that it did not control
for destination country and year fixed effects and therefore, estimates were likely to be
confounded by both time-invariant country fixed effects or country-invariant time effects.
        We contribute to the existing literature in a number of ways: First, we study multiple-
destinations and multiple-origins over a 16-year panel, and an 11-year panel in some models.
Data for multiple-destinations allows us to use models that capture a plethora of choices (host
country-characteristics) that international students are likely to consider before moving. Using
destination-origin dyadic fixed effects, we are able to account for, among other factors,

home country after completing their studies. Wu and Wilkes (2017) analyzed data from 232 interviews with international
students from more than 50 countries who attended a flagship public university in Canada from 2006 ­2013 and found students
who view home as a host plan to stay, and those who view home as ancestral plan to return, those with cosmopolitan and
nebulous conceptions of home have more open migration plans.
7 Gravity models have also been used to study inter-regional student flows within the same country. See for instance Agasisti and

Dal Bianco (2007) for Italy, Alecke and Mitz (2013) and Bruckmeier et al. (2013) for Germany.
8 However, Van Mol (2014) found that participation in the Erasmus programme did not increase student aspirations for

international jobs.
9 In all these studies, the standard gravity indicators of migration costs ­ such as physical distance and common language -

emerge as strong determinants of international student flows. In particular, migration costs matter more for student flows
originating from developing countries (Perkins and Neumayer, 2014, Abbott and Silles, 2016).




                                                               6
multilateral resistance to student emigration that arises from the fact that the choice of a potential
student for a specific destination country depends not only on the attractiveness of the destination
relative to the origin, but also on destination country attitudes and policies towards students from
specific origins including visa policies. Failure to capture multilateral resistance may cause
distortions in the estimated coefficients of gravity models (Bertoli and Fernandez-Moraga, 2013,
Beine and Parsons, 2015, Ortega and Peri, 2013). In the empirical analysis, we include year-
destination fixed effects that allow us to control for, among other factors, time-varying
destination visa policies, and destination-origin fixed effects that allow controlling for time-
invariant visa policies that many destination countries have for specific origin countries.
        Second, we study several dimensions of origin country characteristics that are likely to
impact student mobility and empirically test if our data validate the predictions from the
migration model or the human capital model for the entire sample and across five geographic
clusters of destination countries. If our study validates the human capital model it would imply
that in the long run, sending countries would benefit from brain-regain. It also implies that
international students are not a permanent source of talent at their chosen destinations.
        Third, ours is the first study of student mobility to emerging non-OECD countries and
non-English speaking destinations that captures the recent (post 2010) increases in dispersion of
students across destinations. For comparison, we also study student mobility in traditional
English speaking and non-English speaking OECD countries.

Econometric Specification

        Our first objective is to study the association between time-varying bilateral dyadic
specific characteristics, measuring interconnectedness between origin and destination countries,
and international student mobility. Equation (1) describes our model specification:

                            =  +  +  + -1   +                                                     (1)

where  , the number of international tertiary-level students from origin country (i) who
moved to destination country (j) in year t, is a function of origin-destination time-varying
characteristics (-1 ); a full set of origin-destination fixed effects ( ), origin-year fixed
effects ( ), and destination-year fixed effects ( ), and  denotes the error term. The time-
varying dyadic factors (- ) we include are the logarithm of the stock of immigrants born in
country i and resident in country j to capture the diaspora effect, and the logarithm of aggregate
bilateral trade (exports plus imports) flows between each origin-destination set. Both the
variables are lagged. The bilateral stock of emigrants is lagged five years to partially address
reverse causality between immigrant stock and student flow, and the trade variable by one year.
For consistency, we also estimated models in which bilateral stock of immigrants was lagged by




                                                  7
one year and the results were similar to those reported.10 Following Beine at al. (2011, 2014)
who found that the diaspora effect manifested with a lag larger than one year, we present and
discuss findings from models with the five-year lag of the immigrant stock variable.
        The analysis is done by pooling multiple years of cross-sectional data. The inclusion of a
large set of fixed effects allows us to estimate the association between international student flows
and the two aforementioned time-varying origin-destination dyadic variables in a parsimonious
manner. Origin-destination fixed effects ( ) control for time invariant dyadic associations ­
such as geographic distance, religious and linguistic affinities, as well as certain hard to measure
linkages including cultural similarities between the origin and the destination. Further, as Beine
at al. (2014) argue destination countries may implement migration policies that favor (or
disfavor) students from certain countries. Failing to control for  may bias the estimates from
equation (1). Destination-year fixed effects ( ) and origin-year fixed effects ( ) control for
time varying destination and origin specific factors, observed as well as unobserved, that
influence student mobility. Destination-year effects would include factors such as time-varying
economic and policy changes. Origin-year effects would capture time-varying demographic
changes such as sudden changes in cohort size of student age population and educational
reforms.

       Next, we study the impact of origin country characteristics, specifically economic
development, educational infrastructure, and institutions of governance, on international student
mobility. Equation (2) describes the empirical specification:

                                  =  +  + -1   + -1   +  ,                                                                     (2)

Equation (2) differs from Equation (1) in one respect: it replaces origin-specific time fixed
effects by the term -1 , which encompasses a set of origin specific time-varying
characteristics. 11 This set includes institutional variables ­ namely Political Stability and
Absence of Violence, Voice and Accountability, and Government Effectiveness; economic and
demographic aspects of sending countries are per capita GDP, size of college-age population,
and share of college graduates in total population; and variables capturing educational
infrastructure at the origin, namely number of universities in origin country that are ranked
among the Top500 universities in the world by the Shanghai Ranking and a dummy variable
which takes the value of 1 if the country of origin has at least one university ranked among the
Top 200. Similar to Rosenzweig (2008), share of graduates in total population captures the
demand for higher education at origin and whether the origin country has a university ranked in
the Top 200 measures quality of higher education institutions in the country of origin. Number of

10These results can be obtained from the authors upon request.
11Equation 2 is estimated using standard errors clustered at the origin level to address the potential correlation of the error term
across j for a given i.




                                                                 8
universities ranked in the Top 500 indicates the capacity of national universities with an
international reputation to train students to the highest international standards and making them
eligible for graduate training abroad.
        We estimate equations (1) and (2) for the entire sample and also separately for the five
destination clusters specified above to see if the associations qualitatively differ across these
groups. Some of the variables on educational infrastructure in the origin country are not available
for 2004 or earlier years; therefore the analyses in equation (2) is conducted using post-2004
data. Because international student flows are largely to a small number of countries, our dataset
includes a relatively large number of zeros (around 31 percent of total observations). Hence,
taking logs of student emigration in the dependent variable is likely to cause a considerable loss
of information that could create biased results due to possible selection bias. We use Poisson
PML (PPML), which provides consistent estimates in the presence of heteroscedasticity and
performs well when the dependent variable has a relatively large number of zeros (Santos Silva
& Tenreyro 2006, 2011). We also did separate analyses excluding observations indicating zero
flows (see Table A4 in the Appendix): the PPML estimates were fairly similar to those reported,
suggesting that our estimates were not biased by the presence of origin-destination countries with
zero flows.12

Data

The sample of our empirical analysis includes 141 migrant destination countries and 206 migrant
origin countries covering the period 1999­ 2015.

Dependent Variable: Annual Data on the international students from origin country i to
destination country j are from the UIS UNESCO Dataset. UNESCO data on student inbounds
exclude China, which is attracting an increasingly large number of foreign university students in
recent years. For our regression analysis, we integrate data on Chinese inflows of tertiary
educated students from the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs that are available from 2011 with
the UNESCO data.13

Dyadic Factors: The Bilateral Stocks of Immigrants born in country i and resident in country j in
year t-1 and t-5 are from the World Bank Bilateral Migration Dataset. The World Bank provides
these data for a limited number of years.14 In order to match the information on migrant networks

12 PPML estimator has been used in previous studies, which look at the determinants of student mobility using a gravity model
(see Abbott and Silles, 2016, Beine et al 2014, Beine et al 2018). PPML produces consistent estimates only if the error terms
satisfy the log normality and homoscedasticity conditions, which are indeed strong assumptions (see Aleksinska and Peri 2014,
for a discussion). As a robustness check, we estimate Equations 1 & 2 using ordinary least squares and find similar that are
quantitatively and qualitatively similar. The results are available upon request.
13 As a robustness check we estimate Equation 2 - that includes both dyadic as well as origin specific determinants - on a sample

restricted to 2011-2015. The results ­ available upon request ­ are similar to the ones presented in this paper.
14 The      cross sections are for the years 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010, 2013 and 2017. See
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/migrationremittancesdiasporaissues/brief/migration-remittances-data




                                                               9
with student mobility we have linearly interpolated observations to fill in missing values in
intermediate years. Aggregate Bilateral Trade is from the Base Pour l'Analyse du Commerce
International (BACI) dataset from the Centre d'études prospectives et d'informations
internationales (CEPII) and is the sum of annual bilateral imports and exports expressed in
current US dollars.

Origin Specific Factors: GDP per capita, in 2011 PPP constant dollars, is from the World Bank,
Population in tertiary-education age is from UNESCO Institute for Statistics. As for the quality
of governance in country of origin, we include the World Bank's index of Political Stability and
Absence of Violence/Terrorism that measures the perceptions of the likelihood of political
instability and/or politically-motivated violence, including terrorism. Voice and Accountability
captures citizens' perceptions of their ability to participate in selecting their government, as well
as freedom of expression, freedom of association, and a free media in the country. Government
Effectiveness captures public perceptions of the quality of public services, civil service and
independence from political pressures, and the credibility of the government's commitment to
public policies.15 The variables capturing the quality of tertiary education in country of origin are
from the Shanghai Ranking of World Universities, which provides data on world rankings from
2004. A complete list of variables, including brief descriptions and sources, is in Table A2.

Results

Descriptive Analysis

        Figure 1 presents the trend in the number of international students over the 17 years
period covered in this study, from 1999-2015, for the entire sample and the five sub-groups of
clusters. China is excluded as destination in this figure because inflow data for China prior to
2011 is not available. There are a few points to note. One, student mobility has markedly
increased during our study period with the number of international students rising from
approximately 1.3 million in 1999 to 4.1 million in 2015. Two, international students mobility
indicates an unprecedented degree of dispersion. In 1999, 88% of the international students
chose the top 25-OECD countries and less than 6% chose the top 25 non-OECD countries as
destinations. By 2015, the share of the top-25 OECD countries had fallen to 67% and of the top
non-OECD countries had increased to 28%. Three, throughout the 17-year period, the top six
English speaking countries received a lion's share of the international student flow, although the
trend suggests a decline over time from 58% in 1999 to 48% in 2015.


15These World Governance Indicators (WGI) are constructed by the World Bank averaging data from the following sources -
surveys of households and firms, commercial business information providers, non-governmental organizations and public sector
organizations. These indicators are reported in their standard normal units, ranging from approximately -2.5 to 2.5. More
information on how these indexes are constructed is available at http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/#doc-methodology




                                                            10
        Table 1 lists the top 15 destinations in 2000, 2005, 2010, and 2015 and documents a
rising number of non-OECD countries among these top destinations over time. Flows of
international students to English-speaking countries have continued to grow, but the pace is
much subdued compared to the overall growth in international students. Further, a few non-
English speaking OECD countries, including Germany and Japan, experienced a fall in the
inflow of international students in recent years, indicating the primacy of the English language in
higher learning and global high-skilled professions and the rise of emerging economies as new
destinations.16 A number of Asian countries have joined the ranks of the top destinations with
China emerging as the third most favorable destination, hosting around 400,000 international
students in 2015. 17 Improvements in the quality of Asian universities as well as increasing
economic opportunities in Asia are the likely factors that explain this trend (see Beine et al.,
2014).

Trends in Quality of Education

        Data from the Shanghai Ranking of World Universities show an increase in the share of
emerging economies, especially Asian economies, among the top ranked global universities
(Figure 2). During 2005-2018 the share of Top 500 and Top 200 universities in the Asia Pacific
region has increased from 18% to 27% and from 11% to 21%, respectively. Asia's gain has been
at the expense of European and American universities. China, followed by Singapore, Russia,
Saudi Arabia, and South Korea are driving this trend with the number of Top 500 ranking
universities in Asia rising from 35 to 94. The rising quality in tertiary education is enabling
Asian countries to both directly compete with traditional English speaking destinations in
attracting talent as well as train their native students to high international standards and making
them eligible for graduate training abroad.

International Student Mobility and Per Capita GDP Growth at Origin

        Existing research does not provide any clear guide on whether the association between
international student mobility is linear or nonlinear. Clemens (2014) finds the association
between emigration and origin country per capita GDP to be inverted U-shape. Dao et al. (2018,
Figure 2b), on the other hand, using a sample of 123 countries of origin find that college
educated migration rates decrease with development. In Figure (3), we plot the cross-sectional
association between international student mobility rate (normalized by population) and origin
country per capita income for the top 25 sending countries, that received 88.5% of all
international student flows during our study period, using non-parametric regressions. We find

16 Recent literature has identified student desire to improve their linguistic skills - particularly English language - as one of the
prominent motivations for study abroad (Kahanec and Králiková, 2011). Also see Medrano (2016) on the positive relationship
between fluency in English and employment status in EU countries.
17 In 2015 Chinese students represented 17.6 % of total international student emigrants.




                                                                11
evidence of an inverted U-Shape for most of the yearly cross-sections as predicted by both the
human capital and migration models of student mobility.

Regression Analysis

        Table 2 reports estimates based on Equation (1). Column 1 suggests that both measures
of inter-connectedness ­ co-national density and bilateral trade - positively influence student
mobility. A one percent increase in co-national density (or what we call diaspora effect) is
associated with a three percent increase in student inflow and a one percent increase in trade is
associated with a one percent increase in student flow.
        Estimates differ across destination clusters. The effect size of the diaspora variable is
larger when models are restricted to the top 25 destinations as well as the top 25 OECD
destinations. Estimated effects are statistically insignificant for English speaking countries. One
likely explanation for this finding is the education quality and international reputation of
universities in the six English speaking countries (Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, the United
States, Canada and the United Kingdom) and the associated skill prices that make these countries
universally appealing, reducing the role of diaspora and bilateral trade in attracting inflows. Note
that with English being the global language, education in English-speaking countries is globally
more portable, and therefore less risky, than education in non-English speaking countries.
        For non-OECD countries (column 6) - which include new student destinations such as
China, India, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, and United Arab Emirates ­ our estimates suggest that
bilateral trade has a substantial role in creating student flows, but diaspora has a negligible role.
Lack of diaspora effects in the top 25-non-OECD countries weakens the validity of the migration
model and suggests that the growing dispersion of international students to emerging economies
is indicative of the rising demand to acquire global tertiary skills and much less of the desire to
migrate for permanent settlement to escape poverty and political coercion.
        We also estimate Equation (1) using models that replace country pair fixed effects with a
number of origin-destination characteristics (Appendix Table A3). These models are comparable
to those in previous research. In these models, even for the top 25-nonOECD countries the
diaspora effects are positive, as documented in previous studies (see Perkins and Neumayer 2014
and Beine et al 2014). However, we believe that our more parsimonious model in Table 2 is
superior to the model used in Appendix Table A3.
        One criticism of the models in Table 2 is that for many origin-destination groups the
student flow is zero and presence of a large number of zeros might bias our estimates. We re-
estimated the models in Table 2 after excluding observations with zero flows. Results presented
in Appendix Table A4 are similar to those in Table 2 suggesting that the presence of zero flows
has not qualitatively affected our estimates.
        Table 3 shows estimates based on Equation (2). We present two models for the entire
sample and for each country-cluster. In model 1, log of income per capita is a linear variable and
in model 2, it is introduced as a quadratic. For the entire sample, the association can be



                                                 12
interpreted as weakly quadratic suggesting that student mobility rises with income and plateaus
or begins to decline at very high incomes, as shown in Figure 3. However, the link between per
capita income and student mobility differs across samples. In samples restricted to English
speaking destination countries, student flow monotonically increases with the log of income per
capita at origin, suggesting that even students from very high income countries (e.g. Japan,
Germany) expect returns to education acquired in English speaking countries (relative to home
country) to remain positive. Our estimates show the classic inverted U-shaped link between per
capita income and student mobility for the top 25 destinations and a weak quadratic link for
students moving to the top non-English speaking OECD countries and the top 25 non-OECD
destinations.
        Note that these regressions control for home country educational infrastructure, which is
likely correlated with GDP. We also estimated models without including sending country
educational infrastructure variables, and the estimated coefficients on the GDP variable were
similar to those reported from models that included these controls.
        As for the quality of education at the origin, our estimates generally suggest that number
of universities in the sending country that are ranked among the Top 500 has a positive impact
on student mobility, but the effects are statistically insignificant in samples restricted to flows to
non-English speaking top OECD countries and non-OECD countries. The presence of a
university among the top 200 world universities in the sending country generally has a negative
effect on student mobility, but the estimated effect is statistically significant only for arrivals in
non-English-speaking OECD and non-OECD countries.
        Estimates in Table 3 indicate that sending country population in the tertiary age group has
no statistically significant association with student outflow. The association between number of
graduates in the sending country and international student outflow is also insignificant except
when the sample is restricted to non-OECD destinations, where the relationship is negative. One
possible explanation could be that student emigration to non-OECD countries is more likely for
undergraduate or graduate education and less for post-graduate education.
        In Table 4, we include controls for sending country characteristics that capture quality of
administrative and political institutions in the sending country. Generally speaking, estimates are
robust to the inclusion of these controls.18 Among the institutional variables, the results suggest
that more politically stable countries are associated with lower outflows of students when we
consider non-OECD destinations whereas improvement in quality of governance at the origin
increased student flow to English speaking destinations.




18Dao et al (2018) showed that macroeconomic drivers of migration - that do not change in the short-run - are among the most
important factors which explain the upper segment of the mobility transition curve.




                                                            13
Concluding Remarks

        In this paper, we tested the theoretical predictions of the human capital and migration
models on the determinants of international student mobility on a sample of 141 destination
countries and 206 origin countries spanning a period of 17 years. We also estimate empirical
models across five types of destination clusters: top 25 destinations; top 25 OECD countries, six-
English-speaking destinations; top 19 non-English-speaking OECD countries; and top 25 non-
OECD countries. Time series data on multiple origins and destinations allow use of
parsimonious models with unrestricted controls for observed and unobserved time-invariant
origin-destination characteristics as well as time-varying destination- and origin-characteristics.
        Several interesting findings emerge. The association between international student flow
and co-ethnic density of immigrants, or what we call the diaspora effect, varies across
destinations. It is large and positive for inflows to top non-English speaking OECD destinations,
but statistically insignificant to English speaking countries and non-OECD destinations. One
important inference that can be drawn from these findings is that while student flows to the top
non-English speaking OECD countries validate the migration model of mobility, student flows to
the top non-OECD countries and English speaking countries do not. Estimates for the latter two
clusters of countries validate the human capital model. This suggests that the predominance of
English speaking destinations and the growing dispersion of international students to emerging
economies is indicative of the rising demand to acquire global tertiary skills and much less of the
desire to migrate for permanent settlement to escape poverty and political coercion.
        Our estimates show the classic inverted U-shaped link between per capita income and
student mobility for the top non-English speaking OECD destinations and a weak quadratic link
for students moving to the top non-OECD destinations. In samples restricted to English Speaking
destination countries, student flow monotonically increases with the log of income per capita at
origin, suggesting that students from even very high-income countries (e.g. Japan, Germany)
expect the returns to education acquired in English speaking countries (relative to home country)
to remain positive.
        Our estimates of the association between educational infrastructure at origin and student
outflow yield expected estimates, but do not strongly validate either the human capital or the
migration model. The quality of education at the origin, measured using the number of
universities in the sending country that are ranked in the Top 500, has a positive impact on
student mobility, but the effects are statistically insignificant in samples restricted to flows to
non-English speaking top OECD destinations and top non-OECD destinations. The presence of a
university among the top 200 world universities in the sending country, as expected, generally
has a negative effect on student mobility, but the estimated effect is statistically significant only
for arrivals in non-English-speaking OECD and non-OECD countries. Estimates remain robust
to inclusion of controls that capture quality of administrative and political institutions in the
sending country. Among the institutional variables, our results suggest that more politically
stable countries are associated with lower outflows of students when we consider non-OECD



                                                 14
destinations whereas improvement in quality of governance at the origin increased student flow
to English Speaking destinations.
        These findings have important policy implications for both sending and destination
countries. Importantly, our results suggest that emergence of new destinations for international
students in non-OECD countries portend increase in competition for talent not just among rich
OECD countries but also emerging economies. Evidence validating predictions of the human
capital model suggests that sending countries can contain the student outflow by strengthening
their educational infrastructure or increase return of their nationals by improving governance and
accountability and increasing political stability.




                                               15
                                           Figure 1: Student Mobility - Trend Over Time
                                       Aggregate Number of international Inbound Students by Subsample
                             4500000
                             4000000
   Number Student Inbounds




                             3500000
                             3000000
                             2500000
                             2000000
                             1500000
                             1000000
                              500000
                                   0
                                       1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                                                               Year

                                             English Speaking       Top 25 Destinations    OECD - Non-English
                                             Top 25 OECD            Top 25 Non-OECD        All Destinations

Notes: The graph reports the trend over time of the aggregate number of inbound tertiary educated students by destination
clusters. These statistics are obtained by aggregating all the bilateral flows of student inbounds for which we have data by
destination. The country composition of each subsample is showed in Table A1. Source: UIS UNESCO.




                                                                         16
                                  Figure 2 ­ Share of Top Universities by Region
              Share of Top 500 Universities - 2005                             Share of Top 500 Universities - 2018
                             Africa                                                         Africa
                              1%                                                             1%
       Asia/Pacific
          18%                                                        Asia/Pacific
                                                                        27%
                                                                                                                     Americas
                                                                                                                      33%
                                                     Americas
                                                      40%




            Europe
             41%                                                                        Europe
                                                                                         39%
        Americas        Europe        Asia/Pacific   Africa               Americas      Europe       Asia/Pacific     Africa

              Share of Top 200 Universities - 2005                            Share of Top 200 Universities - 2018
                             Africa                                                          Africa
              Asia/Pacific                                              Asia/Pacific
                              0%                                                              0%
                 11%                                                       21%



                                                                                                                      Americas
                                                                                                                       39%

                                                     Americas
                                                      50%

     Europe
      39%


                                                                               Europe
                                                                                40%


        Americas        Europe        Asia/Pacific   Africa               Americas      Europe        Asia/Pacific     Africa

Notes: Data are from Shanghai World University Rankings.




                                                                17
  Figure 3 ­ Cross-Section Nonparametric Regressions of Student Emigrant Rate on Real Income per capita, 2000-2015




Note: Lowess smoothing on the top 25 sending countries in 2005 (left) and in 2010 (right). Hong Kong is excluded as it has unusually large
emigration rates compared to its population. Emigration rates are constructed as the total number of student emigrants to all destinations
normalized by country's population.




                                                                   18
                                                   Table 1: Top 15 Destinations
        Country           Year              Country            Year            Country           Year                 Country            Year
                          2000                                 2005                              2010                                    2015

Turkey                    17643     Ukraine                   18997       Czech Republic         34666      Austria                      65805
Sweden                    20647     Jordan                    20606       Switzerland            37301      Turkey                       71848
Italy                     21250     Kyrgyzstan                23458       New Zealand            37880      United Arab Emirates         72968
Switzerland               24875     Switzerland               36710       Spain                  55696      Saudi Arabia                 73076
South Africa              25581     New Zealand               40778       South Africa           57321      Italy                        90256
Austria                   30226     South Africa              42290       Republic of Korea      59194      Malaysia                     111324
Canada                    34491     Italy                     42638       Italy                  61227      Japan                        131969
Belgium                   37986     Russian Federation        48881       Austria                68570      Canada                       162930
Spain                     40689     Canada                    67776       Canada                 98184      Russian Federation           209085
Russian Federation        41210     Japan                     125902      Japan                  141561     Germany                      212295
Japan                     59682     Australia                 167246      Germany                185622     France                       224280
Australia                 93458     France                    211692      France                 242948     Australia                    291950
France                   136171     Germany                   257815      Australia              251306     China                        396517
UK                       222203     UK                        310879      UK                     391415     UK                           430632
USA                      475169     USA                       590120      USA                    684517     USA                          907047
Notes: The top Non-OECD destinations are in bold. UIS UNESCO Statistics do not provide information on Student Inbounds for Germany prior
to 2004. Data on Chinese inflows of tertiary educated students are from the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs that are only available from 2011
onwards.




                                                                       19
   Table 2: Estimated Association between Dyadic Time Varying Origin-Destination Characteristics and International Student Mobility
                              (Poisson PML Model: Dependent Variable International Student Inbounds in,t)
                                                                (1)                   (2)                      (3)                    (4)                    (5)                    (6)
Sample (Destination Countries)/                           Entire Sample             Top 25            English Speaking          Top 19 OECD             Top 25 OECD          Top 25 Non-OECD
                                                                                  Destinations            Destinations           Non-English             Destinations           Destinations
                                                                                                                                  Countries
Log Stock Emigrants in, t-5                                  0.0268*                0.0526**                0.0428                 0.178***                0.0630**                -0.0209
                                                              (1.98)                 (3.15)                 (1.41)                  (5.51)                  (2.77)                  (-1.50)

Log Trade Total in,t-1                                      0.00891**               0.00561*                0.0322                  0.0282*                0.0262*                 0.0104**
                                                              (3.28)                 (2.09)                 (1.86)                   (2.50)                 (2.54)                  (3.00)

N                                                            153816                  67303                   18995                  47410                   66627                   45006
Dest*Year Fixed Effects                                        X                       X                       X                      X                       X                       X
Dest*Origin Fixed Effects                                      X                       X                       X                      X                       X                       X
Origin*Year Fixed Effects                                      X                       X                       X                      X                       X                       X
Origin Countries                                              141                      26                      6                      19                      25                      25
Dest. Countries                                               206                     206                     206                    202                     206                     206
Zeros                                                        48,605                  13,073                  2,294                  14,264                  11,992                  15,434

Notes: t statistics are in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Standard Errors are clustered by country-pair.
Estimates are obtained using the Stata Command ppml_panel_sg to estimate Poisson PML gravity specifications. The dependent variable is the number of inbound tertiary educated students for 1999-
2015. Column heading describes the sample. Figures reported in the Table are estimates of Equation (1). See Appendix Table 2 for the description of explanatory variables listed in column 1.




                                                                                                 20
                         Table 3: Estimated Association between Origin-Country Characteristics and International Student Mobility
                                       (Poisson PML Model: Dependent Variable International Student Inbounds in,t )
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)          (7)            (8)         (9)            (10)          (11)          (12)
Sample (Destinations)           Entire        Entire        Top 25        Top 25         English         English     OECD           OECD          Top 25         Top 25        Top 25        Top 25
                               Sample        Sample                                     Speaking        Speaking       Non-           Non-        OECD           OECD           Non-          Non-
                                                                                                                     English        English                                    OECD          OECD
Log Stock Emigrants in, t-5    0.0518*       0.0501*       0.0705**       0.0673**       0.142*          0.141*      0.0786         0.0699        0.114**        0.110**       0.0188        0.0183
                                (2.47)        (2.36)        (2.75)         (2.60)        (2.20)          (2.14)       (1.81)         (1.58)       (2.78)         (2.67)        (0.99)        (0.98)

Log Trade Total in,t-1         0.00384       0.00362       0.00308        0.00258        0.0137          0.0110      -0.0247        -0.0259       0.00670       0.00520        0.00330       0.00330
                                (1.32)        (1.27)        (1.17)         (1.04)        (0.86)          (0.74)       (-0.81)        (-0.87)       (0.53)        (0.43)         (1.42)        (1.38)

Origin characteristics:

Log GDP ppp pcn,t-1            0.516***       2.747*       0.605***        3.091*       0.817***         3.081        0.184         2.172         0.586**        2.383         -0.449         3.298
                                (3.47)        (2.06)        (3.62)         (2.17)        (3.65)          (1.69)       (1.19)        (1.40)        (3.25)         (1.48)        (-1.80)        (1.88)

(Log GDP ppp pcn,t-1)2                        -0.123                      -0.137                         -0.124                     -0.109                      -0.0988                      -0.208*
                                              (-1.74)                     (-1.81)                        (-1.31)                    (-1.28)                      (-1.16)                     (-2.12)

Log Population n,t-1           0.155          0.135         0.212          0.196         0.146           0.146        0.112         0.0691         0.126         0.116          0.316         0.231
                               (0.71)         (0.61)        (0.87)         (0.80)        (0.52)          (0.52)       (0.58)        (0.37)         (0.52)        (0.47)         (1.31)        (1.00)

Share of Graduates. n,t-1      -7.014         -6.803        -7.318        -7.254         2.594           0.799        -4.833        -3.432        -2.093         -2.293        -36.75**      -32.91**
                               (-0.84)        (-0.86)       (-0.73)       (-0.77)        (0.19)          (0.07)       (-0.46)       (-0.33)       (-0.19)        (-0.22)        (-3.05)       (-2.73)

Log Number of Univ.            0.359*         0.388*        0.347*         0.379*        0.440*          0.474*       0.0494        0.0583         0.378*        0.401*         0.123         0.176
among Top 500 n,t-1            (2.20)         (2.44)        (2.01)         (2.24)        (2.05)          (2.31)       (0.36)        (0.42)         (2.06)        (2.26)         (1.39)        (1.87)

Any Ranked Univ.n,t-1          0.0255        0.0399         0.0308        0.0464         0.0824          0.0921      -0.0902*       -0.0758       0.0504         0.0613        -0.195*       -0.172*
(among the top 200)            (0.30)        (0.49)         (0.36)        (0.56)         (0.91)          (1.03)       (-2.16)        (-1.79)      (0.55)         (0.68)        (-2.52)       (-2.08)
N                              57191         57191          24041         24041           6293            6293        16716          16716        23054          23054          17517         17517
Dest*Year FE                      X             X              X             X              X               X             X             X            X              X             X             X
Dest*Origin FE                    X             X              X             X              X               X            X              X            X              X             X             X
Origin Countries                126           126            126           126            126             126           126            126         126            126            126           126
Dest. Countries                 113           113             25            25              6               6            19             19          25             25             25            25
Zeros                          12,572        12,572         2,746         2,746           321             321          1680           1680        2,003          2,003          4,046         4,046

Notes: t statistics are in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Standard Errors are clustered by country of origin.
Estimates are obtained using the Stata Command POI2HDFE to estimate Poisson PML gravity specifications using data from 2005-2015. The dependent variable is the number of inbound tertiary
educated students. Column heading describes the sample. Figures reported in the Table are estimates of Equation (2). See Appendix Table 2 for the description of explanatory variables listed in column
1.




                                                                                                   21
                          Table 4: Estimated Association between Origin-Country Characteristics and International Student Mobility
                         (Poisson PML Model: Dependent Variable International Student Inbounds in,t ) Adding Institutional Variables
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)               (8)             (9)          (10)          (11)            (12)
Sample (Destinations)            Entire      Entire      Top 25       Top 25       English       English        OECD              OECD             Top 25       Top 25       Top 25          Top 25
                                Sample      Sample                                Speaking      Speaking      Non- English      Non- English       OECD         OECD        Non-OECD        Non-OECD

Log Stock Emigrants in, t-5     0.0496*     0.0470*     0.0681**      0.0636*      0.133*        0.130*         0.0883*            0.0800          0.114**      0.109**       0.0163           0.0151
                                 (2.41)      (2.27)      (2.71)        (2.52)      (2.24)        (2.14)          (1.99)            (1.77)          (2.86)       (2.73)        (0.87)           (0.83)

Log Trade Total in,t-1          0.00341     0.00309      0.00231     0.00164      0.00938       0.00526         -0.0261            -0.0272        0.00417      0.00231        0.00304         0.00300
                                 (1.25)      (1.17)       (0.99)      (0.77)       (0.64)        (0.39)          (-0.89)            (-0.94)        (0.36)       (0.21)         (1.34)          (1.28)

Origin characteristics:

Log GDP ppp pcn,t-1              0.499**     3.085*      0.576***     3.446*      0.789***       3.645*          0.142             1.912           0.538**      2.470         -0.294           4.380*
                                 (3.19)      (2.39)       (3.39)      (2.54)       (3.78)        (2.02)          (0.91)            (1.29)          (3.02)       (1.58)        (-1.14)          (2.57)

(Log GDP ppp pcn,t-1)2                      -0.142*                   -0.158*                    -0.156                            -0.0970                      -0.106                        -0.258**
                                            (-2.08)                   (-2.19)                    (-1.65)                            (-1.19)                     (-1.28)                        (-2.69)

Log Population n,t-1             0.240       0.232        0.304       0.305        0.271         0.296           0.0300           -0.00194         0.171        0.174          0.508           0.426
                                 (1.06)      (1.01)       (1.22)      (1.22)       (1.02)        (1.10)          (0.15)            (-0.01)         (0.71)       (0.71)         (1.86)          (1.63)

Share of Graduates. n,t-1        -5.527      -4.941      -5.879       -5.399       5.698         4.285           -7.065            -5.717          -2.201       -2.095        -34.69**        -29.23**
                                 (-0.68)     (-0.64)     (-0.60)      (-0.58)      (0.46)        (0.39)          (-0.67)           (-0.55)         (-0.21)      (-0.20)        (-3.20)         (-2.76)

Log Number of Univ.              0.353*      0.384*      0.343*       0.376*       0.436*        0.472*          0.0620            0.0690          0.384*       0.406*        0.0931           0.152
Among Top 500 n,t-1              (2.27)      (2.52)      (2.10)       (2.35)       (2.24)        (2.56)          (0.45)            (0.50)          (2.19)       (2.38)        (1.10)           (1.70)

Any Ranked University n,t-1      0.0149      0.0301      0.0175       0.0337       0.0612        0.0710         -0.0695            -0.0576         0.0430       0.0533        -0.193*          -0.161
(among the top 200)              (0.20)      (0.42)      (0.24)       (0.48)       (0.83)        (0.97)          (-1.67)            (-1.37)        (0.56)       (0.71)        (-2.35)          (-1.80)

Voice & Accountability n,t-1    -0.0423     -0.0616      -0.0279     -0.0486       -0.137        -0.172          0.0356            0.0299         -0.00462     -0.0176        -0.0747          -0.130
                                 (-0.64)     (-0.91)      (-0.38)     (-0.63)      (-0.79)       (-1.01)         (0.60)            (0.51)          (-0.05)      (-0.20)       (-0.65)          (-1.23)

Govt. Effectiveness n,t-1        0.143       0.157        0.171       0.189        0.279*        0.305*         -0.0377            -0.0330         0.150        0.164         0.0355           0.0339
                                 (1.53)      (1.68)       (1.72)      (1.89)       (2.12)        (2.30)          (-0.42)            (-0.36)        (1.38)       (1.51)        (0.30)           (0.30)

Political Stability n,t-1       -0.0266     -0.0396      -0.0176     -0.0323       0.0545        0.0342          0.100             0.0946          0.0479       0.0368       -0.150***        -0.165***
                                 (-0.55)     (-0.93)      (-0.32)     (-0.66)      (0.80)        (0.53)          (1.62)            (1.57)          (0.86)       (0.69)        (-3.37)          (-4.06)

N                                    57176        57176          24035       24035         6288          6288            16716              16716           23048     23048      17513            17513
Dest*Year FE                           X            X              X           X             X            X                 X                 X                X        X           X               X
Dest*Origin FE                         X            X              X           X             X            X                X                  X               X         X           X               X
Origin Countries                      126          126            126         126           126          126              126                126             126       126         126             126
Dest. Countries                       113          113            25           25            6             6               19                 19              25        25         25               25
Zeros                               12,564        12,564         2,744       2,744          319          319              1680               1680           2,000     2,000       4,044           4,044
t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Standard Errors are clustered by country of origin. Estimates are obtained using the Stata Command POI2HDFE to estimate Poisson PML
gravity specifications using data from 2005-2015. The dependent variable is the number of inbound tertiary educated students. See Appendix Table 2 for the description of explanatory variables.




                                                                                                  22
                                                                     Table A1: Samples @ Destination
Top 25                         English Speaking                     OECD                                OECD Non-English Speaking                  Top 25 Non-OECD
Australia                      Australia                            Australia                           Austria                                    Belarus
Austria                        United Kingdom                       Austria                             Belgium                                    Brazil
Belgium                        United States                        Belgium                             Denmark                                    Bulgaria
Canada                         Canada                               Canada                              Finland                                    Cuba
Czech Republic                 New Zealand                          Denmark                             France                                     Cyprus
France                         Ireland                              Finland                             Germany                                    Czech Republic
Germany                                                             France                              Greece                                     Hong Kong
Italy                                                               Germany                             Iceland                                    Hungary
Japan                                                               Greece                              Italy                                      India
Jordan                                                              Iceland                             Japan                                      Jordan
Korea (REP)                                                         Ireland                             Luxembourg                                 Kazakhstan
Netherlands                                                         Italy                               Mexico                                     Korea (REP)
New Zealand                                                         Japan                               Netherlands                                Kyrgyzstan
Poland                                                              Luxembourg                          Norway                                     Macau
Russian Federation                                                  Mexico                              Portugal                                   Malaysia
Saudi Arabia                                                        Netherlands                         Spain                                      Poland
South Africa                                                        New Zealand                         Sweden                                     Romania
Spain                                                               Norway                              Switzerland                                Russian Federation
Sweden                                                              Portugal                            Turkey                                     Saudi Arabia
Switzerland                                                         Spain                                                                          Serbia and Montenegro
Turkey                                                              Sweden                                                                         Slovakia
Ukraine                                                             Switzerland                                                                    South Africa
United Arab Emirates                                                Turkey                                                                         Thailand
United Kingdom                                                      United Kingdom                                                                 Ukraine
United States                                                       United States                                                                  United Arab Emirates
Notes: China is added in the Top 25, and Top 25 Non-OECD samples even though data are only available from 2011. The OECD sample is composed of countries that were part of the OECD group
prior to 1995. More information can be found here: http://www.oecd.org/about/membersandpartners/list-oecd-member-countries.htm




                                                                                          23
                                Table A2: Variables Used and Corresponding Sources
Variable                              Short description                                      Source


Dependent variable

                                                                                             UIS UNESCO Institute for Statistics;
                                                                                             Center for Strategic and International
                                                                                             Studies, Washington DC; China Power
                                      Inbound Internationally    Mobile    Students     by
Student Flows                                                                                project.
                                      Country of Origin
( )                                                                                          https://chinapower.csis.org/data/inboun
                                                                                             d-international-students-china-2005-
                                                                                             2016/

Explanatory variables


GDP Per Capita                        GDP per capita, expressed in PPP constant US$
                                                                                             The World Bank
(Log GDP ppp pcn,t-1)                 (2011 prices)


                                      Population of the age-group theoretically
Population                            corresponding to tertiary education as indicated by
(Log Population n,t-1)
                                                                                             UIS UNESCO Institute for Statistics
                                      theoretical entrance age and duration (number, both
                                      sexes)


                                      Dummy =1 if country pair ever in a colonial
Colony                                                                                       CEPII
                                      relationship, 0 otherwise (var: colony)


Stocks Emigrants                      Stock of migrants born in country i and resident in
                                                                                             The World Bank
(Log Stock Emigrants in, t-5)         country j in a given year t.

                                      =1 if common language is spoken by at least 9% of      CEPII
Comlang Ethno
                                      population

Distance                              Weighted Distance, pop-wt, km (var: distw)             CEPII


                                      Index ranging from -2.5 to 2.5 with higher value       World Development Indicators, the
Political Stability
                                      indicating more political stability.                   World Bank



                                      Index ranging from -2.5 to 2.5 with higher value       World Development Indicators, the
Government Effectiveness
                                      indicating better government effectiveness.            World Bank




Voice and Accountability              Index ranging from -2.5 to 2.5 with higher value       World Development Indicators, the
                                      indicating better voice and accountability.            World Bank

Trade Flows                           Aggregate Bilateral Trade in Current US dollars        BACI, CEPII
(Log Trade Total in,t-1 )


                                      The share of graduates over total population in the
                                                                                             UIS UNESCO Institute for Statistics
Share of Graduates                    country of origin




                                                                24
                               The number of universities ranked among the
Number of Universities among                                                          Shanghai     Ranking   of   World
                               Top500 universities in the world by the Shanghai
the Top 500                                                                           Universities
                               Ranking


                               Dummy variable which takes the value of 1 if the
Any ranked University among                                                           Shanghai     Ranking   of   World
                               country of origin has at least one university ranked
the top 200                                                                           Universities
                               in the Top 200, zero otherwise.




                                                         25
Table A3 ­ Estimated Association between International Student Mobility and Origin-Country
Characteristics (Less Parsimonious Gravity Model with Destination*Year and Origin*Year Fixed
Effects but excluding Origin-Destination Effects) (Poisson PML Model: Dependent Variable
International Student Flow in,t)
                                           (1)           (2)                (3)           (4)               (5)             (6)
Sample (Destinations)                    Entire        Top 25            English        Top 25           Top 25          Top 25
                                        Sample                          Speaking      Non-English        OECD           Non-OECD
Lagged Diaspora in, t-5                 0.277***       0.297***         0.201***       0.258***          0.314***        0.209***
                                        (15.71)        (13.38)            (3.67)        (11.10)          (10.67)         (10.74)

Log Trade Total in,t-1                 0.0986***       0.165**           0.0905         0.0604*          0.328***         0.0354**
                                         (3.42)        (3.00)            (1.59)          (2.56)           (8.63)           (2.69)

Colony in                               0.348***       0.313**           0.130          0.351**           0.336**          0.158
                                         (3.29)        (2.77)            (0.67)         (3.01)            (2.75)           (0.79)

Comlang in                              0.769***       0.781***          0.679          0.935***         0.809***         0.440**
                                         (8.12)         (7.63)           (1.65)          (9.30)           (8.45)          (3.28)

Log Distance in                        -0.724***       -0.591***        -0.733***      -0.918***         -0.433***        -1.046***
                                       (-14.31)         (-8.73)          (-9.49)       (-14.14)           (-7.09)         (-16.39)

N                                                149557             64988           18047               59559           64241 44538
Dest*Year Fixed Effect                              X                 X               X                   X               X     X
Origin*Year Fixed Effect                            X                 X               X                   X               X     X
t statistics are in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Standard Errors are clustered by country-pair.
Estimates are obtained using the Stata Command POI2HDFE to estimate Poisson PML gravity specifications.. The dependent variable is the
number of inbound tertiary educated students.




Table A4 ­ Estimated Association between International Student Mobility and Origin-Country
Characteristics (Poisson PML Model: Dependent Variable International Student Flow in,t)
Model with only positive Student Flows, no Zeros
                                            (1)            (2)                 (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)
Sample (Destinations)                 Entire Sample       Top 25            English       Top 25           Top 25         Top 25
                                                                           Speaking     Non-English        OECD          Non-OECD
Lagged Diaspora in, t-5                 0.0347**         0.0557***          0.0428       0.0489***        0.0645**        -0.0133
                                         (2.77)            (3.65)            (1.41)        (3.55)          (2.82)          (-1.16)

Log Trade Total in,t-1                 0.00945***        0.00568*           0.0375*      0.00956**        0.0341**        0.00946**
                                         (3.50)           (2.15)             (2.07)        (3.08)          (2.90)           (2.96)

N                                                 105211              54230             16701              46914        54635 29572
Dest*Year FE                                         X                  X                 X                  X            X     X
Dest*Origin FE                                       X                  X                 X                  X            X     X
Origin*Year FE                                       X                  X                 X                  X            X     X
t statistics are in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Standard Errors are clustered by country-pair.
Estimates are obtained using the Stata Command POI2HDFE to estimate Poisson PML gravity specifications using data from 2005-2015. The
dependent variable is the number of inbound tertiary educated students.




                                                                   26
References

Abbott, A., Silles, M. (2015) Determinants of international student migration. World Economy, 39: 621 ­635.

Agasisti, T., Dal Bianco, A. (2007) Determinants of college student migration in Italy: empirical evidence from a
gravity approach. Technical Report, Paper Presented at the Congress of the European Regional Science Association.
Paris, September. Available at SSRN 1063481.

Alecke, B., Burgard, C., Mitze, T. (2013) The effect of tuition fees on student enrollment and location choice
interregional migration, border effects and gender differences. Technical Report, Ruhr Economic Papers 404.

Aleksynska, Mariya, and Giovanni Peri. "Isolating the network effect of immigrants on trade." The World Economy
37.3 (2014): 434-455.

Becker, G. S. (1964) Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to Education.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Beine, M., & Docquier, F. c. Ozden (2011):"Diasporas,". Journal of Development Economics, 95(1), 30 -41.

Beine, Michel, Romain Noël, and Lionel Ragot (2014). "Determinants of the international mobility of students."
Economics of Education review 41: 40-54.

Beine, M., Delogu, M., Ragot, L. (2017) Understanding the Impact of Tuition Fees for Foreign Students: The Case
of the UK. CREA Discussion Paper, 2017-07.

Beine, Michel, Marco Delogu, and Lionel Ragot (2018). "The role of fees in foreign education: Evidence from
italy." Journal of Economic Geography.

Beine, Michel, and Christopher Parsons (2015). "Climatic factors as determinants of international migration." The
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 117.2: 723-767.

Bessey, D. (2012) "International student migration to Germany." Empirical Economics 42.1: 345-361.

Bertoli, Simone, and Jesús Fernández-Huertas Moraga. "Multilateral resistance to migration." Journal of
Development Economics 102 (2013): 79-100.

Bruckmeier, K., Fischer, G.-B., Wigger, B. U. (2013) Does Distance Matter? Tuition Fees and Enrollment of First-
Year Students at German Public Universities. Technical Report, CES IFO Working Paper 4258.

Clemens, M. A. (2014). Does development reduce migration? International Handbook on migration and Economic
development, 152.

Dao, Thu Hien (2018), et al. "Migration and development: Dissecting the anatomy of the mobility transition."
Journal of Development Economics 132: 88-101.

Dreher, Axel, and Panu Poutvaara. "Foreign students and migration to the United States." World Development 39.8
(2011): 1294-1307.

González, C. R., Mesanza, R. B., & Mariel, P. (2011). The determinants of international student mobility flows: an
empirical study on the Erasmus programme. Higher Education, 62(4), 413-430.

Gordon, Robert J. 2012. Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds, NBER
Working Paper No. 18315




                                                       27
Guimaraes Paulo and Pedro Portugal. "A Simple Feasible Alternative Procedure to Estimate Models with High-
Dimensional Fixed Effects", Stata Journal, 10(4), 628-649, 2010.

Harris, J. R., & Todaro, M. P. (1970). Migration, unemployment and development: a two-sector analysis. The
American economic review, 126-142.

Head, K., and T. Mayer (2014). Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook. Handbook of International
Economics, Volume 4, Chapter 4: 131-195.

Kahanec, M. and R. Králiková (2011), `Pulls of International Student Mobility', Discussion Paper No. 6233 (Bonn:
IZA).

Larch, M., Wanner, J., Yotov, Y., & Zylkin, T. (2017). The Currency Union Effect: A PPML Re-assessment with
High) Dimensional Fixed Effects. Drexel University School of Economics Working Paper Series (2017). Drexel
University.

Manpower Group, 2018. "Solving the Talent Shortage Build, Buy, Borrow and Bridge."

Medrano, J. D. (2016). Globalization, transnational human capital, and employment in the European Union.
International Journal of Comparative Sociology, 57(6), 449 ­470. https://doi.org/10.1177/0020715216684182

Ortega, F., and G. Peri (2013). The effect of income and immigration policies on international migration. Migration
Studies 1(1): 47-74.

Perkins, R., Neumayer, E. (2014) Geographies of educational mobilities: exploring the uneven flows of international
students. The Geographical Journal, 180: 246­259.

Rosenzweig, M. (2008). Higher education and international migration in Asia: Brain circulation. Annual World
Bank conference on development economics (pp. 59­100).

Santos Silva, J., & Tenreyro, S. (2006). The log of gavity. Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4), 641 ­658.

Santos Silva, J., & Tenreyro, S. (2011). Further simulation evidence on the performance of the Poisson pseudo-
maximum likelihood estimator. Economics Letters 112(2): 220-222.

Thomas, K. J., & Inkpen, C. (2017). Foreign student emigration to the United States: Pathways of entry,
demographic antecedents, and origincountry contexts. International Migration Review, 51(3), 789 -820.

Todaro, M. P. (1969). A model of labor migration and urban unemployment in less developed countries. The
American economic review, 59(1), 138-148.

UNESCO (2018) UIS.Stat. UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS). https://data.uis.unesco.org

Van Bouwel, L., & Veugelers, R. (2013). The determinants of student mobility in Europe: the quality dimension.
European Journal of Higher Education, 3(2), 172-190.

Van Mol C (2014) Erasmus student mobility as a gateway to the international labour market? In Gerhards J, Hans S
and Carlson s (eds) Globalisierung, Bildung und grenzu¨berschreitende Mobilita¨t. Wiesbaden: Springer VS, pp.
295­314.

Zong, Jie and Jeanne Batlava, 2018. International Students in the United States, Migration Policy Institute,
Migration Information Source.

Wei, H. (2013). An empirical study on the determinants of international student mobility: a global perspective.
Higher Education, 66(1), 105-122.




                                                        28
