                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DOES TRADE REFORM PROMOTE ECONOMIC GROWTH?
                        A REVIEW OF RECENT EVIDENCE

                                      Douglas A. Irwin

                                     Working Paper 25927
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25927


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




I thank Chad Bown, Anne Krueger, David Lindauer, Nina Pavcnik, Robert Staiger, and Alan
Winters for helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Does Trade Reform Promote Economic Growth? A Review of Recent Evidence
Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 25927
June 2019
JEL No. F13,F14,F43

                                         ABSTRACT

Do trade reforms that significantly reduce import barriers lead to faster economic growth? In the
two decades since Rodríguez and Rodrik's (2000) critical survey of empirical work on this
question, new research has tried to overcome the various methodological problems that have
plagued previous attempts to provide a convincing answer. This paper examines three strands of
recent work on this issue: cross-country regressions focusing on within-country growth, synthetic
control methods on specific reform episodes, and empirical country studies looking at the
channels through which lower trade barriers may increase productivity. A consistent finding is
that trade reforms have a positive impact on economic growth, on average, although the effect is
heterogeneous across countries. Overall, these research findings should temper some of the
previous agnosticism about the empirical link between trade reform and economic performance.


Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu
Does Trade Reform Promote Economic Growth? A Review of Recent Evidence

1. Introduction
        Economists will look back on the decade from 1985 to 1995 as a remarkable period in

which developing countries were swept up in a dramatic wave of trade reform that led to much

greater openness in the world economy. Did the reduction in import restrictions and other trade

barriers pay off in terms of faster growth, greater investment, or higher productivity for the

countries that chose this path?

        An early set of papers, including Dollar (1992), Sachs and Warner (1995), and Edwards

(1998), found support for the idea that openness to trade was associated with better economic

outcomes. But these papers were subjected to a wide-ranging critique by Rodríguez and Rodrik

(2000, 266), who concluded that "the relationship between trade policy and economic growth

remains very much an open question" and "is far from having been settled on empirical

grounds." 1

        Twenty years have elapsed since Rodríguez and Rodrik last surveyed the field and there

are several reasons why this question deserves reexamination. First, many of the early papers had

sample periods that ended in the early 1990s, around the time when many big reforms were just

being implemented. Any assessment of the impact of these reforms would have been premature

at that point, given the length of time it takes to determine if changes in policy have been

rewarded with an economic payoff. More recent studies have additional data with which to

evaluate the trade reforms undertaken in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

        Second, more countries have undertaken trade reforms, giving us a larger sample of

country experiences than were considered in the earlier literature. For example, at the time of


        1
          Edwards (1993) was equally critical of the research undertaken in the 1970s and 1980s, much of which
consisted of country case studies and simple regressions linking exports to growth.

                                                            2
Sachs and Warner (1995), China and India were considered "closed" economies, as were

Vietnam, Cambodia, and Bangladesh. Such countries provide additional evidence on the

economic consequences of a more open trade regime.

        Third, recent work has employed new and varied empirical methods that address many of

the concerns raised about earlier studies. Studies have moved away from cross-sectional

(between-country) comparisons to looking at within-country growth following a reform episode.

These studies have been supplemented with synthetic control methods that allow for a more

structured "counterfactual" scenario against which to judge the outcome of reforms. In addition,

empirical studies and model-based simulations of particular countries have focused on the

channels through which reductions in trade barriers might improve economic performance.

These papers often use cross-industry variation in the reduction of trade barriers to identify the

impact of increased imports on domestic producers, with a focus on how the reduction in cost

and increase in variety of intermediate goods improves the productivity of final goods producers.

        This paper reviews recent work on trade reform and economic growth as a way of

understanding what progress has been made in uncovering the link between the two. 2 A

consistent finding is that trade reforms have a positive impact on economic growth, on average,

but as one would expect the effects differ considerably across countries. These results are fairly

uniform across methods of analysis, different indicators of trade policy, and other dimensions.

The microeconomic evidence that lower tariffs on intermediate goods lead to improved

productivity performance of domestic final goods producers is even stronger. Overall, these




        2
           Winters and Masters (2013) provide a shorter, less comprehensive review of some of this literature. Other
earlier surveys, such as Baldwin (2002) and Winters (2004), focus more on the relationship between "openness" and
growth rather than "changes in trade policy" and growth.

                                                              3
research findings suggest that the outcome of trade reforms can be seen in a more positive light

than the agnosticism left in the wake of the Rodríguez and Rodrik critique.

       This positive assessment is consistent with recent findings in two different but somewhat

related areas of research. First, until recently the consensus among economists was that poorer

countries were not growing faster and therefore not catching up to richer countries, although

there was evidence in favor of "convergence clubs." Patel, Sandefur, and Subramanian (2018)

find strong evidence of unconditional income convergence across countries starting around 1990

but especially since 1995.

       Second, research during the 1980s and early 1990s failed to find a significant relationship

between policy reform and economic outcomes. The subtitle of Easterly (2001) was "developing

countries' stagnation in spite of policy reform." He concluded in Easterly (2005, 1017):

"Although extremely bad policy can probably destroy any chance of growth, it does not follow

that good macroeconomic or trade policy alone can create the conditions for high steady state

growth."

       In updating these previous studies, Easterly (2018) now finds that policy and economic

outcomes have improved considerably since the 1990s and are positively correlated. As he puts

it: "If the old stylized facts on disappointing growth accompanying reforms led to widespread

doubts about the value of economic reforms, the new stylized facts should lead to some more

positive updating of such beliefs."

       This paper begins by documenting the wave of trade reform that swept the world in the

late 1980s and early 1990s. It then looks at the different methods used to assess the links between

trade reform and economic performance, including cross-country regressions, synthetic control,

and empirical or quantitative country studies, discussing the virtues and vices of each approach.



                                                    4
         The paper focuses on the impact of trade reforms, meaning unilateral reductions in trade

barriers; it does not discuss research on several related issues, including the relationship between

trade and the level of national income, a question examined by Frankel and Romer (1999),

Noguer and Siscart (2005), Feyrer (forthcoming), and others. The general finding of this research

is that an exogenous increase in trade has a positive, and potentially large, impact on national

income. 3 However, a policy decision to change trade barriers that leads to an increase in trade

may not have the same impact on income as an exogenous increase in trade driven by other

factors, such as declining trade costs. This paper does not examine the cross-sectional

relationship between the level of trade barriers and economic growth. 4 The focus is on how

changes in a country's own trade barriers (trade liberalization episodes) affect its own economic

growth. 5

         This paper does not examine the domestic distributional impact of trade reform, such as

the implications for inequality (surveyed by Pavcnik 2017), labor market adjustment (surveyed


         3
            Rodríguez and Rodrik argue that the Frankel and Romer result is not robust to controlling for omitted
variables, such as institutions or distance from the Equator. Feyrer (forthcoming) overcomes this problem by
generating a time-varying geographic instrument (based on air versus sea travel). This time-series variation allows
controlling for country fixed effects, eliminating the bias from time-invariant variables such as historically
determined institutions or distance from the Equator. Trade has a significant effect on income, with an elasticity of
roughly one-half (meaning that a 10 percent increase in trade leads to a 5 percent increase in national income). Not
all studies have found this result; see, for example, Pascali (2017) on the period 1870­1913, during which only
countries with inclusive institutions benefited from increased integration. Other studies assess the gains from
increased market access, such as lower transportation costs. Donaldson (2015) surveys this literature, most of which
focuses on domestic regional gains from the extension of railroads in India and the United States, the expansion of
the highway network in China and the United States, and similar episodes.
          4
            Yanikkaya (2003) finds a positive relationship between a country's average tariff and its economic growth
for a cross-section of countries for 1970­97. DeJong and Ripoll (2006) look at the same relationship in greater
detail. They find a negative relationship for high-income countries and a positive relationship between low-income
countries. Nunn and Trefler (2010) document a positive correlation between the skill bias of a country's tariff
structure and its long-term growth in per capita income. The positive cross-country relationship between the level of
tariffs and economic growth could simply reflect the fact that low-income countries have higher tariffs than high-
income countries and have tended to grow faster or that developing countries, despite the higher level of their tariffs,
have been reducing them faster than high-income countries and growing faster as a result. Whatever the case, by
using the level of tariffs rather than the change in tariffs, these studies are not examining within-country growth as a
result of trade reform episodes.
          5
            The focus is also on own-country liberalization, not the impact of a foreign market opening on an
exporting country.

                                                               5
by McLaren 2017), or the incidence of poverty (surveyed by Winters and Martuscelli 2014). 6

The paper does not look at the impact of a reduction in trade barriers that come about from free

trade agreements (Baier, Yoto, and Zylkin 2019) or regional free trade areas, such as the

European Union (Campos, Coricelli, and Moretti 2019).

         The evidence in recent studies comes mainly from developing countries and emerging

markets rather than from advanced countries. Developing countries have had much higher

barriers to trade than advanced countries and have much greater opportunities for catch-up

growth, because they are farther behind the technological frontier. While many OECD countries

have undertaken trade reforms, sometimes significant ones, over the past few decades,

developing countries are where the largest potential payoffs to increased participation in world

trade are likely to have been. 7



2. The Trade Liberalization Wave in Developing Countries

         From the 1950s and into the 1980s, most developing countries had in place an extensive

array of policies that restricted imports (Krueger 1984). These policies went far beyond high

import tariffs. They included foreign exchange controls and payment restrictions that




         6
            However, the recent paper by Artuc, Porto, and Rijkers (2019) dealing with the tradeoff between the
aggregate income gains from trade liberalization and the costs of increased inequality is worth noting in the context
of this paper. They calculate the static gains from trade for many countries, look at how it affects household income,
and assess the outcome using an Atkinson social welfare function. They find average income gains for 45 countries
and average losses for 9 countries, with the static gains amounting to 1.9 percent of average household expenditures
(with no accounting for any growth benefits from freer trade). Inequality rises in most countries as a result of trade
liberalization, but the income gains typically more than offset the increase in inequality in the social welfare
function.
          7
            Several OECD countries took significant steps to open further to trade in the 1980s. Australia and New
Zealand began scaling back trade protection, and several countries, such as Spain, had to open their markets to more
competition when they joined the European Union. On the payoff from these and other reforms, see Prati, Ornorato,
and Papageorgiou (2013); Marrazzo and Terzi (2017); and Campos, Coricelli, and Moretti (2019).

                                                               6
accompanied overvalued currencies; quantitative restrictions, such as import quotas and licenses;

and multiple exchange rates.

         At various points, countries began to reduce these barriers to trade, often slowly but

sometimes rapidly. In some cases, there was a dramatic reorientation of a country's trade regime.

Early examples of reforming economies include Taiwan (1958­62), South Korea (1964­68),

Chile (1974­79), and a few others. Some countries, such as Brazil (1964­68), Indonesia (1966­

71), and Argentina (1976­82), had brief spells of liberalization followed by a later return to

greater restrictions. By 1980, however, the number of reforming countries was still relatively

small.

         In the late 1980s and early 1990s, however, developing countries embarked on a wave of

trade reforms, as many countries moved swiftly to open their markets (Dean, Desai, and Riedel

1994). They often did so by devaluing their currencies and unifying their exchange rates,

allowing exporters to retain foreign currency earnings, reducing licensing and quantitative

restrictions, and then--often last in the mix--cutting tariffs, usually on intermediate goods first

and consumer goods later, sometimes much later.

         There are several ways to provide a broad picture of the extensive changes made in this

period. Figure 1 shows the number of countries that flipped from being "closed" economies to

being "open," according to the classification developed by Sachs and Warner (1995) and

extended by Wacziarg and Welch (2008), as discussed below. While there were few reformers in

the 1970s or early 1980s, the decade after 1985 saw a dramatic increase in the number of

countries changing their policies.

         Figure 2 presents the average tariff in developed and developing countries. The average

tariff in developing countries declined steadily in the 1980s, dropped more sharply in the early



                                                      7
1990s, and continued to fall at a slower pace thereafter. According to Martin and Ng (2004), the

weighted average tariff in developing countries declined from 30 percent in 1983 to 11 percent in

2003. They find that three-quarters of this reduction came from unilateral actions taken by the

countries involved; only about 5 percentage points of the decline reflected concession giving in

the Uruguay Round negotiations, which took effect starting in 1995. 8

         Figure 3 shows that the reduction in tariffs was not symmetric across regions. South

Asian countries, such as India, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka, started with very high tariffs but

reduced them sharply. Latin America and East Asia saw significant reductions as well. By

contrast, Africa and the Middle East did not change their policies nearly as much.

         One problem with focusing on tariffs is that nontariff barriers have often been a bigger

impediment to imports than border duties. Many developing countries have a history of

governments allocating foreign exchange to control imports. Exporters were forced to surrender

foreign exchange earnings to the central bank, and spending on imports was fixed through a

system of import licenses (Bhagwati and Krueger 1973). These foreign exchange controls--often

introduced or tightened when countries had overvalued currencies or encountered balance of

payments difficulties--are inherently difficult to measure.

         Figure 4 presents two indirect indicators of such policies. One shows the share of

countries with a nonunified exchange rate (i.e., multiple exchange rates or a parallel market that

exists alongside the official rate). It reveals a steady drop from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s.

The other shows the share of countries in which exporters were required to turn over foreign



           8
             As Finger, Ingco, and Reincke (1996) document, most developing countries did not reduce their applied
tariffs as a result of the Uruguay Round. Their concessions amounted to reductions in bound tariffs, which were
substantially above their applied tariffs. For example, Argentina increased its number of bound tariffs from 17
percent to 100 percent of all tariff lines. Its average tariff on merchandise was bound at 31 percent, but its applied
average tariff was 10 percent. Brazil also increased its tariff bindings, from 16 percent to 100 percent of all tariff
lines, but its bound tariff was 29 percent and its applied tariff 12 percent (see Finger, Ingco, and Reincke 1996).

                                                                8
exchange earnings to the government (export surrender requirements), which dropped sharply in

the late 1990s.

        The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) strongly supported these

moves by developing countries to open up their markets and seemed confident that there would

be a significant payoff from doing so. 9 Academic economists were more guarded at the time, as

reflected in two prominent articles in the Journal of Economic Perspectives. Rodrik (1992, 90)

argued that the presumption that a liberal trade regime would be good for economic development

"is not tremendously helpful for policy at the present time," adding that "in most of the countries

that have undertaken radical trade reforms in the 1980s, the direct efficiency consequences of

trade liberalization are still uncertain and likely to be small." Dornbusch (1992, 73) welcomed

the reform efforts, but noted that "measuring the benefits of trade reform has been a frustrating

endeavor. Although the discussion of trade policy at times gives the impression that a liberal

trade regime can do wonders for a country's economy, and most observers believe firmly that

trade reform is beneficial, yet systematic attempts at quantification fail to single out trade policy

as a major factor in economic growth."

        Standard theory suggests that reducing trade barriers should lead to efficiency gains. But

why might it be expected to increase economic growth as well? The strongest case is that trade

reform can promote efficiency in a way that leads to an increase in potential GDP, which leads to

an increase in the transitional rate of growth, which is a function of the gap between the current

level of GDP and its potential level. The magnitude of the higher transitional growth rate

depends on how much the efficiency gains (productivity improvements) or factor accumulation



        9
            See Edwards (1997), Krueger and Rajapatirana (2003), and Jinjarak, Salinas, and Tsikata (2013) on
World Bank support for trade liberalization and Wei and Zhang (2010) for evidence on IMF support for trade
liberalization.

                                                             9
(greater investment) increase potential GDP and the length of time it takes for current GDP to

converge to potential GDP, both of which differ considerably across countries. When policy

reforms (trade related or otherwise) are limited and phased in, there is no reason to expect an

immediate burst of growth. But if a country is significantly behind the technological frontier and

advanced technologies become available to an economy as a result of new opportunities to trade,

some acceleration in growth would be expected.

         Suppose trade reform did affect a country's growth rate. How would researchers be able

to know it, given the many factors that affect a country's economic growth at the same time?

Economists have long recognized that it is exceedingly difficult to isolate individual factors;

social scientists cannot run natural experiments in which two countries differ only in their trade

policies. To understand the impact of trade policies, they have compiled empirical evidence,

identified trade reform episodes in different ways, and made various kinds of counterfactual

comparisons.



3. Cross-Country Regressions

         A seemingly straightforward way to evaluate the impact of a country's trade policy on its

economic performance is to compare an outcome variable (growth in real per capita income)

under different trade regimes, controlling for as many other covariates as possible. There are

many formidable obstacles to doing so, one of which is coming up with a single variable that

represents a country's trade policy. 10 Table 1 summarizes some of the studies reviewed in this

section.




          Pritchett (1996) shows how various measures of trade policy--tariffs, nontariff barriers, coverage ratios,
         10

black-market premiums on foreign exchange markets--are essentially uncorrelated with one another.

                                                             10
         In a widely cited paper, Sachs and Warner (1995) reduce trade policy to a single binary

variable. They construct a dummy variable indicating whether a country is "open" or "closed" to

trade, defining a country as closed if it had at least one of the following five characteristics: an

average tariff of 40 percent or more, nontariff barriers covering 40 percent or more of trade, a

black-market exchange rate that was at least 20 percent lower than the official exchange rate, a

state monopoly on major exports, or a socialist economic system. Figure 1 shows the number of

new countries that became "open" by this tally. Sachs and Warner estimate a simple cross-

sectional regression

                        log ,1970-89 =  log ,1970 +  ,1980 +  + 

that relates economic growth in real per capita income (y) between 1970 and 1989 to the initial

level of income in 1970; the openness dummy variable (in the 1980s); and other political and

economic control variables, such as schooling rates, investment, and government spending. The

estimated coefficient on "open" is 2.4, implying that open economies grew 2.4 percentage points

faster than closed economies. In this regression, the identification comes from comparing open

with closed countries, raising the problem of omitted variables, because the two sets of countries

could differ on many dimensions the controls do not capture. The results focus on a single-period

cross-section; no use is made of the timing of the transitions to openness shown in figure 1.

Sachs and Warner thus did not look at the impact of reform episodes on subsequent growth.

         Questions were raised about both the dependent and the independent variables. 11 In terms

of the openness dummy variable, the question is whether a simple zero-one indicator accurately

characterizes the broad stance of a country's trade policy. Sachs and Warner concede that their


         11
            The question is whether real per capita GDP is the appropriate measure for the impact of a trade reform.
In theory, a tariff reduction should lead to an increase in welfare or real consumption, not necessarily real GDP,
which might actually decline, if the changing production mix is evaluated at prereform prices (see Bajona et al. 2010
and Burstein and Cravino 2015).

                                                             11
measure is crude but argue that it usefully places countries into two different and meaningful

categories. Winters and Masters (2013, 1062) note that "the thresholds are not estimated nor

justified, it is not clear which policies really matter and a liberalization is registered only if it

flips a country across a threshold." A simple dummy variable does not capture the quantitative

significance of a country's trade restrictions or the extent to which a country reforms its policy at

a given point in time. 12 In addition, the variable is unidirectional (from closed to open) and does

not capture countries that go through multiple periods of being open or closed. For example,

Argentina's trade policy moved in the direction of openness during the 1970s, closed up during

the 1980s, opened up again with big reforms starting in 1991, and then began restricting trade

again in the 2000s.

         A basic question is which of the five components of the Sachs-Warner measure is most

responsible for their empirical findings. Harrison and Hanson (1999) unpack the Sachs-Warner

indicator. They find that tariffs and quotas do not have any explanatory power on growth but that

exchange rate distortions do. When they try a different tariff measure--the average tariff

measured by customs revenues divided by imports--they find that both tariffs and distorted

exchange rates have a negative impact on growth. 13

         Rodríguez and Rodrik (2000) argue that the explanatory power of the Sachs-Warner

indicator comes mostly from the black-market exchange rate premium and state monopoly of

exports. In their view, neither of these factors clearly represents a trade policy variable: State

monopoly is effectively a dummy variable for Africa, and a black-market premium is more




         12
            For example, a country that goes from complete autarky to complete free trade would be represented by
the same transition from 0 to 1 as a country that goes from 41 percent tariffs (and other barriers) to 39 percent tariffs
(and other barriers).
         13
            Sachs and Warner used the average tariff on intermediate goods (gathered from the mid-1980s, the
middle of the sample period) collected by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).

                                                               12
reflective of macroeconomic distortions. They conclude that the most direct indicators of trade

policy (tariffs and quotas) are not clearly linked to growth outcomes.

        Warner (2003) points out that Africa would be categorized as closed even without the

state monopoly variable and argues that the black-market premium does not simply represent

macroeconomic distortions, as it shows no correlation with inflation. 14 In fact, an overvalued

currency, which a black-market premium reflects, has long been known to be a breeding ground

for nontariff import restrictions. The use of trade measures to safeguard the balance of payments

and prevent the loss of foreign exchange reserves is a common occurrence in countries that are

reluctant to devalue their currencies. There is clear evidence that balance of payments difficulties

in countries with overvalued currencies lead them to adopt exchange controls and import

compression policies. 15

        The trade reform process often begins with a currency devaluation to eliminate the black-

market premium. A devaluation stabilizes the loss of foreign exchange reserves and enables the

government to end the rationing of foreign exchange, which allows foreign currency to be

allocated to its most efficient use. A devaluation also encourages exports and discourages

imports, which permits the removal of import licenses and the relaxation of other quantitative

import restrictions. Traditional import liberalization--namely, the reduction in import tariffs--­

often occurs later in the reform process.

        A shortcoming of the Sachs-Warner analysis is that they do not take advantage of the

dates of specific trade reform episodes and investigate whether a move toward more open



        14
           The coauthors of the two studies later responded to each other; see Warner (2003) and Rodríguez (2007).
        15
           See Shatz and Tarr (2002). Foreign exchange controls have a significant detrimental effect on trade. Wei
and Zhang (2007) find that a 1 standard deviation increase in foreign exchange controls has the same effect on trade
as a 14 percentage point increase in tariffs. Eichengreen and Irwin (2010) show that during the Great Depression of
the 1930s, imports were 23 percent lower in countries imposing exchange controls than in comparable noncontrol
countries.

                                                             13
policies leads to more rapid economic growth. In fact, the Sachs-Warner variable is probably

more useful as a marker of the timing of a country's trade reform process than it is as a way of

categorizing countries as open or closed. 16 Instead of comparing growth rates in open versus

closed countries, one could examine what happens when a country moves from being closed to

being open.

        Wacziarg and Welch (2008) examine the within-country effect of trade, updating the

Sachs-Warner openness variable to include data from the 1990s (in what will be called the

SWWW indicator). They find that the openness variable no longer separates high-growth from

low-growth countries the way it could in the 1970s and 1980s. However, they focus on using the

dating of reform episodes to estimate the within-country impact of reform on growth and

investment through the following regression:

                                          =  +  + 

where yit is per capita income between two periods and LIB is the date of the SWWW

liberalization variable, which takes the value of 0 for "closed" economies" and 1 when a country

becomes "open" according to the SW criteria. The error term is modeled as it = i + t + it,

where  reflects country and  reflects time fixed effects. The country and time fixed effects

mean that the authors do not need to control for other time- and country-specific factors that

influence growth.

        Wacziarg and Welch find that the within-country estimates of trade reform had a positive,

economically large, and statistically significant impact on growth and investment. Over the

1950­98 period, countries that liberalized their trade regimes experienced growth rates that were



        16
           One could also raise questions about the particular dates. In commenting on the Sachs and Warner paper,
for example, Stanley Fischer questioned the demarcation of Israel as open in 1985, when he believed trade reform
occurred in 1963 (Sachs and Warner 1995, 103).

                                                            14
1.4 percentage point higher than in the prereform period. Wacziarg and Welch also break out the

coefficient by decade. The coefficient is 0.6 for 1950­70, 1.8 for 1970­90, and 2.5 for 1990­98.

The implication is that countries that liberalized in the 1950s and 1960s saw little payoff, but

countries that did so in the 1980s and 1990s saw large payoffs. (These results were not driven by

two of the largest countries that opened up, China and India, both of which the SWWW indicator

still classified as "closed.")

        Wacziarg and Welch also examine whether liberalization increases the investment rate

and the trade share in GDP. They find that the investment rate rose by 1.5­2.0 percentage points

over the prereform period and conclude that about 21 percent of the effect of liberalization on

growth came from increased capital investment. They also find that liberalization increased

openness (the trade-to-GDP ratio) by nearly 6 percentage points.

        Wacziarg and Welch also look at the path of growth around the time of the reform. They

find that growth was depressed three years before reform, rose slightly in the three years after

reform but was indistinguishable from zero, increased to 1.44 percent in the period three to six

years after a reform, and declined to 1.0 percent thereafter. These findings are consistent with a

1.0­1.5 percent increase in growth three years after reform.

        Wacziarg and Welch note the high variance in the outcomes: Although the average effect

was positive, about half of the countries did not experience more rapid growth after opening.

This heterogeneity in outcomes arises from various factors. "Countries that experienced negative

or no effects on growth tended to have suffered from political instability, adopted contractionary

macroeconomic policies in the aftermath of reforms, or undertaken efforts to counteract trade

reforms by shielding domestic sectors from unnecessary adjustments," they note.




                                                    15
        Growth effects could differ markedly across countries for a variety of reasons. The extent

that countries undertake reforms could vary significantly in a way that the binary openness

variable does not capture. In addition, if complementary reforms, such as freeing the labor

market from regulatory restrictions or ensuring greater competition in the service sector, are not

undertaken, the gains from trade may be limited. Many factors could impede the success of a

reform in bringing about faster growth and exploring this issue seems like a worthwhile area for

further research. 17

        One problem with the SWWW dates is that they do not allow for policy reversals--a

frequent occurrence in Latin America--and the use of a binary indicator means that the speed

and depth of policy changes are not captured. Feyrer and Irwin (2019) expand the SWWW

sample to include new liberalizing countries, such as China and India, and allow for the

possibility that countries (such as Argentina) go through cycles of liberalization and

protectionism. They also employ a continuous time indicator of current account openness (from

Quinn 1997) and other measures of trade policy that reflect the speed and depth of such episodes.

Looking at the impulse response functions to a change in trade policy, they find that most of the

increased growth occurs in the first five years after a reform episode, after which the impact

diminishes. For countries going from closed to open, income is about 10 percent higher a decade

after the reform.

        Another problem in interpreting economic growth after the SWWW dates is that many

countries that adopted reform packages also changed many other policies, not just their trade and

exchange rate policies, making it difficult to attribute the growth outcomes exclusively to trade


        17
            Kneller, Morgan, and Kanchanahatakij (2008) explicitly identify some of the big winners and losers from
these liberalization episodes, meaning improvement in growth experience before and after reform. Some of the
biggest winners were Nicaragua, Guyana, and Mozambique; losers included Guinea-Bissau, the Gambia, and Cape
Verde. They do not successfully explain why some countries did well and others did not.

                                                            16
reforms. 18 To account for this issue, Wacziarg and Welch focus on a subsample of 22 relatively

"pure" trade liberalization episodes, mainly developing countries in the 1980s, 8 of which

occurred without other major shifts in domestic policy. The results are roughly the same as the

results based on the full sample, leading the authors to conclude that it is plausible that the results

are in large part attributable to the reform of the external sector.

         Prati, Onorato, and Papageorgiou (2013) also try to separate out the contributions of

different policies in a reform package to economic performance in a cross-country context.

Focusing on the period 1973­2006, they use different indicators for real (trade, agriculture, and

networks) and financial (banking, finance, capital account) policy. For trade they use the average

tariff and an indicator of current account restrictions, both of which are scaled from 0 to 10. In

the baseline regression, the coefficient on trade is 1.9 and the coefficient on the current account

is 3.3, indicating that both sets of reforms independently improve growth prospects, although it is

difficult to interpret the precise meaning of these coefficients.

         Other researchers explore the same questions using different indicators of trade reform. 19

Salinas and Aksoy (2006) take an indicator of trade reform from the World Bank Trade

Assistance Evaluation, an ex ante signal of World Bank assistance in helping to initiate a trade



         18
             As Wacziarg and Welch point out, "It is difficult to attribute differences in growth purely to trade
liberalization. Countries carrying out trade reforms often simultaneously adopt policies favoring domestic
deregulation, privatization, and other microeconomic reforms and macroeconomic adjustments, making it difficult to
interpret the coefficient on liberalization in a within-country regress as the total effect of trade liberalization per se."
          19
             Several other regression-based studies deserve brief mention. Based on panel regression, Greenaway,
Morgan, and Wright (1998) conclude that 32 countries that reformed after 1985 (identified by Dean, Desai, and
Riedel [DDR] 1994) did not have stronger growth than other countries. Greenaway, Morgan, and Wright (2002)
published a similar exercise, using a panel of 69 developing countries with several binary indicators (SWWW, DDR,
World Bank). All of the indicators had a qualitatively similar result: Reforming countries experienced 2.7
percentage point faster growth, with a two-year lag, than other countries. Using similar methods, Falvey, Foster, and
Greenaway (2012) look at whether trade reform that occurs during a crisis (internal versus external) affects its
subsequent growth impact. They do not find that a crisis matters much: Liberalization in both crisis and noncrisis
periods raised subsequent growth. Falvey, Foster-McGregor, and Khalid (2013) look at the dynamic adjustment of
various variables to trade reforms over the period 1970­2005. They find that the impact on the trade share appears
after four years and the impact on investment is strongest after seven years.

                                                                 17
reform (rather than the SWWW indicator, which might indicate a mid- or postreform period).

The dating marks the start of a trade reform, not the crossing of some arbitrary threshold. 20 Their

variable also includes other countries (such as China, Croatia, and India) that are considered

closed by SWWW. They exclude from the sample transition economies, oil exporters, and small

countries (countries with fewer than 1 million people), as well as countries with internal conflict.

They also rule out years of crises (such as hyperinflation), which they argue artificially reduce

the growth rate. After culling, their sample includes 39 countries with nonreversed trade

liberalization between 1970 and 2004.

        In a cross-country panel regression with country and time fixed effects, they find that the

coefficient on the start of a trade reform indicates that economic growth is 1.2 percentage points

faster after liberalization than before. Widening the window of the reform period still yields

growth that is about 1 percentage point faster. They report that this finding is robust to the

inclusion of many other variables that might affect growth, that the results are positive for Sub-

Saharan African countries, and that the reform has no impact on industrialization but does result

in a higher fraction of manufactured exports and a reduction in export concentration. Overvalued

real exchange rates limit the supply response to trade reform.

        Estevadeordal and Taylor (2013) argue that not all tariff reductions should be expected to

increase growth: Reducing tariffs on final consumption goods may increase economic welfare,

but it would not necessarily increase a country's potential growth in the same way that a

reduction in tariffs on capital and intermediate goods could increase the capital stock and

improve technology. Consequently, they focus on the differential growth impact of these

different tariffs (arguing that broad measures such as average tariffs overall would conflate the


        20
            Of the 39 reforming countries, the SWWW dates coincide for 25 country years, with most divergences
less than three years.

                                                           18
different impacts). They look at a long difference-in-difference regression comparing liberalizing

and nonliberalizing countries in two long periods, 1990­2004 and 1975­89, in order to avoid

contaminating the results with short-run business cycle fluctuations, crises, or lags in policy

implementation.

       They start by using an openness indicator variable like SWWW and find that reduced

tariffs on capital and intermediate goods resulted in a 1 percentage point growth acceleration for

liberalizing countries. They then switch to using data on actual tariff changes, to provide greater

variation in policies across countries. The results are stronger for countries that reduced tariffs on

intermediate and capital goods than for countries that reduced tariffs only on consumption goods

or the overall average tariff. Their key finding is that a 25 percent reduction in the tariff on

capital or intermediate goods is associated with a 0.75­1 percentage point increase in economic

growth for liberalizers compared with nonliberalizers. They show a dramatic divergence in the

path of real per capita GDP between the two groups: By 2004 the liberalizers were 10 percent

above the 1975­98 trend of both and nonliberalizers had fallen almost 10 percent below trend,

creating a 15­20 percent gap between the two sets of countries.

       Their basic results survive several placebo checks (such as using 1960­75 as the

pretreatment period) and the endogeneity of the treatment (the decision to liberalize). They also

check to see if the findings are confounded by other policy reforms, such as financial openness,

monetary stability, and fiscal stability. They find that the growth acceleration "cannot be

attributed to favorable changes in financial openness and macroeconomic policies."

       The Estevadeordal and Taylor findings are important because they confirm that using

actual tariff data (on intermediate goods) leads to results that are similar to results from the




                                                      19
SWWW indicator. As the summary in table 1 indicates, either measure of trade reform is

associated with about a 1 percentage point increase in economic growth relative to the baseline.

        A related strand of research examines whether "growth accelerations" are systematically

related to economic reform episodes. Hausmann, Pritchett, and Rodrik (2005) identify about 80

episodes of rapid acceleration in economic growth that were sustained for at least eight years

during the period 1957­92. 21 Of many potential factors, they find that accelerations occur when

there is an increase in trade, an increase in investment, and a large depreciation in the exchange

rate. Using the SWWW dates, they find that although economic reform is a statistically

significant predictor of sustained growth accelerations, most instances of economic reform do

not produce growth accelerations: Only about 20 percent of sustained growth episodes are

preceded or accompanied by economic liberalization, suggesting that many other factors are at

work. They conclude that the predictability of growth acceleration episodes is low.

        Jong-A-Pin and De Haan (2011) argue that the filter Hausmann, Pritchett, and Rodrik use

to select the starting dates of the growth accelerations leads to some anomalous results. 22 By

simply requiring that economic growth in the first year of the acceleration be higher than the year

before, they identify 89 accelerations over the period 1957­93 and report stronger evidence that

growth accelerations are preceded by economic liberalization. This result does not depend on the

SWWW indicator; it also holds for the Economic Freedom indicator of Gwartney and Lawson

(2008). 23


        21
             They define a growth acceleration as meeting three requirements: Growth must be at least 3.5 percent
over an eight-year period, growth must be at least 2 percentage points higher than in the previous eight years, and
the level of real GDP must be higher at the end of the acceleration than in all years before it.
          22
             For example, they point out that the Hausmann, Pritchett, and Rodrik method picks up 27 growth
accelerations in which the country experienced higher growth in the year before the start of the acceleration.
          23
             They also argue that Hausmann, Pritchett, and Rodrik introduced a coding error in the political regime
variable that led to the erroneous conclusion that political regime changes but not economic policy changes lead to
growth accelerations. Using another definition of growth acceleration, Peruzzi and Terzi (2018) identify 135
episodes between 1962 and 2002. Using the Giuliano, Mishra, and Spilimbergo (2013) measure of structural reforms

                                                            20
         Related work by Freund and Pierola (2012) uses the SWWW dates as a potential trigger

for "export surges." They find that periods of rapid export growth are more likely to occur in

open or liberalizing countries, that they are usually preceded by a large depreciation of the real

exchange rate, and that new exports (on the extensive margin) account for much of the

acceleration. About 58 percent of export surges occurred in open countries or countries that

opened within five years before a surge, 24 percent occurred in closed countries, and 19 percent

occurred before a country's opening.

         In sum, trade liberalization seems related in some way to instances of sustained growth

accelerations. Pritchett et al. (2016) document some of the largest and most important growth

accelerations (in Taiwan [1962], Brazil [1967], China [1991], India [ 1991], and Poland [1991]),

without noting that they seemed to occur around the time of major trade reforms. The magnitude

of the gains from these growth accelerations was enormous. The decade-long growth

acceleration in India after 1993, for example, amounted to an extra $1.1 trillion in national

income. Even if more open trade was responsible for just a fraction of the resulting income gains

in these cases, trade would have yielded enormous benefits for the countries opening up.

         To conclude, a consistent finding of many cross-country regression studies, often using a

variant of the SWWW indicator variable, is that countries that reduce high import barriers

usually experience a pickup in economic growth. The results may not hold for every country, but

on average the results are positive and of an order of magnitude of 1 percentage point or more.

While attributing all of the immediate postreform growth to trade policy alone is difficult,

researchers have made reasonable, if imperfect, efforts to try to isolate, in a rough way, the

impact of trade policy changes from other changes in policy.


(trade, product market, financial sector, etc.), they find that almost 60 percent of growth accelerations were preceded
by large changes in economic policy.

                                                              21
       In interpreting the results from such regressions, Winters and Masters (2013) make a

critical point: Researchers tend to focus on statistical significance, asking whether we have

confidence that an estimated coefficient is different from zero, whereas policymakers care about

the distribution of possible outcomes. These are very different questions. They consider the

following hypothetical scenario: Suppose a policymaker is considering whether to implement a

10 percentage point tariff reduction when the estimated elasticity of income with respect to the

tariff is 1 and the standard error is 0.7. The null hypothesis that the coefficient is 0 cannot be

rejected at the 5 percent confidence level. But for a policymaker, it is much more relevant that 91

percent of the probability mass of outcomes is positive and the best guess is that the tariff

reduction would raise income by 10 percent. In virtually all of the papers considered in this

section, researchers focused on statistical significance rather than the distribution of outcomes.

But in considering the probabilities of various outcomes, the expected value of a trade reform is

positive and sometimes quite large.



4. Synthetic Control Methods

       Focusing on within-country growth as a result of trade liberalization is an improvement

over a cross-sectional comparison, but it still does not quite get at the key issue. The sharper

counterfactual is not whether growth is faster after a reform episode than before but whether

growth performance is stronger than it would have been in the absence of the reform. Answering

this question depends on an explicit modeling of what would have happened to an economy had

a trade reform not taken place.

       Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) propose a way of setting up a reasonable counterfactual

scenario against which a reform episode can be evaluated. A synthetic control is a weighted



                                                      22
combination of potential comparison countries constructed to fit the prereform economic growth

path of the country that undertakes liberalization. This "synthetic" country acts as a control,

representing what would have happened to the reforming country had it not reformed. Evaluating

the impact of a reform in country W involves taking a weighted combination of outcomes in

nonreforming countries X, Y, and Z that match country W's prereform growth path and then

comparing the postreform outcomes. This method comes closest in spirit to addressing the

problem of finding a counterfactual for what would have occurred in the absence of a reform.

       The synthetic control method rests on identification assumptions that are weaker than the

assumptions required by estimation techniques commonly used in the trade and growth literature.

Panel models, for example, control only for confounding factors that are time invariant (fixed

effect) or share a common trend (difference-in-differences). The synthetic control allows the

effect of unobservable confounding factors to vary with time.

       Billmeier and Nannicini (2013) apply the synthetic control method to 30 trade

liberalization episodes from 1963­2005 using the SWWW reform dates. In each case, they

choose a set of appropriate comparison countries in which the prereform growth paths in the

reforming country and the weighted nonreforming countries are closely matched. The pooled

regression-based approaches yield only an average treatment effect across all countries, around

which there are successes and failures that are not clearly revealed; the synthetic control

approach is essentially a quantitative case study in which each episode constitutes its own

individual case.

       Billmeier and Nannicini conclude that trade reforms had a positive impact on income, but

with much heterogeneity across country and time. This heterogeneity is not surprising and can be

attributed to wide differences in the scale of reforms adopted by different countries and whether



                                                     23
complementary policies (such as labor market reforms) were in place. In general, they find that

economic reforms in Asia and Latin America had positive outcomes; growth in real per capita

GDP was higher than the counterfactual composite after the reform. Some early reformers in

Africa also experienced gains, but that was less true for late reformers. The results were

inconclusive for the few reformers in the Middle East and North Africa.

        In this approach, no single number quantifies the average impact of trade reform on

growth, as each country is a separate case. Indonesia, for example, is presented as an example of

an economic liberalization episode (in 1970) that had a large economic payoff. The average

income in the years before liberalization was nearly identical to that of the synthetic control, a

weighted average of Bangladesh (41 percent), India (23 percent), Nepal (23 percent), and Papua

New Guinea (13 percent). After trade reforms, Indonesia's per capita GDP soared. It was 40

percent higher than the estimated counterfactual after five years and 76 percent higher after 10

years. These results are robust to placebo testing, as none of the "fake" experiments for the eight

(regional) potential comparison countries showed treatment effects that were larger than the

baseline estimates.

        This example also illustrates one of the pitfalls of the synthetic control approach.

Indonesia is endowed with abundant reserves of petroleum, which became very valuable after the

1973 oil shock, something the synthetic control countries lacked. The posttreatment growth path

may thus have been contaminated by factors unrelated to trade reform. 24

        Turning to other Asian countries, South Korea, where trade reforms took effect in 1968,

is also deemed a success story, with income about twice as high as in the counterfactual case



        24
            Indonesia's economic performance improved dramatically after 1966, when increased growth could not
be attributed to high oil prices. According to the SWWW dating method, Indonesia becomes "open" in 1970,
although the reform process began in 1966.

                                                          24
after 10 years. The results are also positive but not as great for the Philippines (1988) and Nepal

(1991). In each case, the credibility of the results depends almost entirely on whether the

synthetic control is a plausible representation of what would have happened had there been no

reform, something that can be judged only on a case-by-case basis.

        The results are also generally positive in Latin America. In Barbados, Colombia, Costa

Rica, and Mexico, economic outcomes improved after economic liberalization. A decade after

liberalization, per capita income was about 57 percent higher in Barbados, 23 percent higher in

Colombia, 26 percent higher in Costa Rica, and 21 percent higher in Mexico than in the synthetic

control. The placebo tests confirm that these findings are largely robust. Chile turns out to be a

particularly hard case to assess, because of the prereform collapse in income and the financial

crisis in 1982, which make finding a suitable synthetic control difficult.

        The results are more mixed in Africa. Broadly speaking, only the early liberalizations

seem to have had a positive impact on per capita income; almost all of the later attempts had only

slightly positive or no effects. The authors suggest that the late liberalizers in Africa adopted

gradual reform strategies, leading to attenuation bias in the results. In Middle East and North

Africa, the results are inconclusive and sometimes the treated countries perform poorly in

comparison to a synthetic control.

        Billmeier and Nannicini conclude that trade reforms were generally positive and that late

liberalizations had a lower payoff or lacked the complementary policies needed to ensure

growth. 25



         25
            Marrazzo and Terzi (2017) use a synthetic control approach to examine the impact of 29 structural
reform episodes between 1961 and 2000. They find that, on average, reforms had a significant positive impact on
per capita GDP, but only after five years. After 10 years, per capita GDP was about 6 percentage points higher than
the synthetic counterfactual scenario. However, they consider only reform packages (including trade policy,
measured by the average tariff, and other policies together) and cannot quantify the impact of a single policy
measure.

                                                             25
       Billmeier and Nannicini (2011) use synthetic control to examine five transition

economies from the former Soviet Union: Armenia and Azerbaijan, which liberalized in 1995;

Georgia and Tajikistan, which liberalized in 1996; and Uzbekistan, which failed to liberalize.

Ten years after liberalization, real per capita GDP was 44 percent higher in Georgia and almost

100 percent higher in Armenia compared with each country's synthetic control. Placebo tests

support these results. The results for Azerbaijan were confounded by civil conflict and a drop in

natural resource extraction. For Tajikistan no set of countries formed an acceptable synthetic

control in which the pretreatment fit was adequate. For the one nonliberalizer, Uzbekistan, the

counterfactual synthetic control suggests that real per capita income would have been 75 percent

higher had it liberalized trade.

       Once again, a big issue affecting the interpretation of these results is whether the SWWW

dating marks just a trade reform or a more general market-oriented reform package. If the

postreform growth path differs from the synthetic control, the question is whether that

divergence is caused by trade reforms or other parts of the reform package. If even a fraction of

the income gains can be attributed to the trade component of the reforms, the value of the reform

appears to be very large. To the extent the reform package involves a macroeconomic austerity

program, such as tighter fiscal and monetary policies, one might expect growth performance to

have been worse in the short run.



5. Channels of Impact: Tariffs on Intermediate Goods

       Rodríguez and Rodrik (2000) suggested that the search for a general empirical

relationship between trade policy and economic growth was "futile." They were more hopeful

that microeconomic evidence could reveal the channels by which trade policy might affect



                                                    26
productivity at the industry or firm level. An important body of microeconomic research has

made significant progress on this question over the past 20 years. 26

       The increased availability of firm-level data in developing countries has allowed

researchers to determine the economic adjustments that were made in the wake of trade reforms

or the opening of export opportunities. One benefit of this approach is that it does not rely on an

aggregate indicator variable as a measure of trade policy or the single-year dating of a trade

reform. Instead, specific measures, such as tariffs, yield detailed information on the variation in

protection levels across different sectors of the economy and how those barriers changed over

time, creating a measure of differential exposure to foreign competition across industries. This

tariff variation helps identify the effects of lower import barriers (on such outcome variables as

output or labor productivity), as there are multiple margins on which trade policy measures differ

across sectors (such as the initial height of the tariffs and the differential speed with which tariffs

are reduced).

       This approach requires detailed investigation of one country, at the cost of not necessarily

being able to generalize the results across countries. In addition, the firm- or industry-level

outcome variables, such as productivity, can be difficult to measure. For example, a standard

method has been to estimate a production function (using revenue deflated by a price index as a

proxy for output) and treat as total factor productivity the difference (residual) between actual

and estimated production (based on capital, labor, and material inputs). De Loecker (2011)

argues there may be a spurious relationship between this way of measuring productivity and

openness to trade, given the impact of policy changes on prices and demand but that new

methods have improved upon past practices.



       26
            For a recent survey, see De Loecker and Van Biesebroeck (2018).

                                                           27
         Most of this literature focuses on whether lower tariffs (on both intermediate goods and

final goods) lead to within-industry efficiency gains as domestic producers face intensified

competition. 27 A reduction in trade barriers could improve productivity in two ways. First,

greater head-on competition forces firms to become more efficient and reduce their costs to

compete in the same market. Second, increased trade in intermediate goods gives domestic

purchasing firms access to a wider array of less expensive intermediate goods that they can use

to produce final goods. The increased availability of intermediate goods can affect final goods

producers through lower prices, increased quality, and increased variety of inputs, all of which

improve efficiency. The improved productivity of final goods producers as a result of the

reduction in tariffs on intermediate goods has been a primary focus of this work. 28

         Table 2 summarizes a few of the studies in this area. Pavcnik (2002) examines the

response of Chilean manufacturing to increased competition in 1979­86 to document the

productivity effects arising from a reduction in import barriers. She compares sectors facing

liberalized trade (import-competing and export-oriented sectors) to the nontraded-goods sector in

order to distinguish the productivity effects stemming from more open trade from other sources.

She finds that the productivity of plants in import-competing sectors grew 3­10 percent faster

than in nontraded-goods sectors. Greater competition was presumably the source of these


         27
            Several papers document the consumer gains from lower tariffs on final goods. Tovar (2012) examines
the reduction in Colombia's tariff on automobiles. He finds consumer gains of about $3,000 per vehicle. Sheu
(2014) studies the gradual elimination of the 20 percent tariff on imported printers in India, which resulted in a large
increase in imports. She disentangles three factors--lower prices, higher quality, and greater variety--all of which
could boost consumer welfare. She finds that the higher quality of imports was the most important factor in
generating gains from trade. The contribution of price was slightly smaller; variety lagged farther behind. The
strength of these effects varied across buyers, with gains largest for small businesses.
         28
            Feenstra, Markusen, and Zeile (1992) discuss the theory that access to new intermediate goods and
cheaper existing goods can lead to higher productivity in the production of final goods. Most research is unable to
directly measure the adoption of new technology as a result of trade. One exception is Bustos (2011), who studies
the impact of Brazilian tariff reductions on Argentine exporting firms. She finds that Argentine firms in industries
facing greater reductions in Brazil's tariffs increased investment in technology faster than firms facing smaller tariff
reductions. This situation is different from looking at the impact of changes in Argentinian trade policy on firms in
Argentina; it looks at export market access rather than the effect of changing a country's own import policy.

                                                               28
productivity gains, although much of the increase came from the forced exit of existing plants,

which were about 8 percent less productive on average than the plants that continued to produce.

         In a similar vein, Fernandes (2007) examines a period of substantial variation in

protection across manufacturing industries in Colombia (1977­91) to see whether increased

exposure to foreign competition generated productivity gains. She finds a strong positive impact

of tariff liberalization on plant productivity, even after controlling for plant and industry

heterogeneity, real exchange rates, and cyclical effects. Productivity improvements under trade

liberalization are linked to increases in imports of intermediate inputs, skill intensity, and

machinery investments and to reallocations of output from less to more productive plants. The

impact was stronger for plants in industries initially facing less competition.

         Brazil has been another country of focus, with some divergent results using firm-level

data. 29 Muendler (2004) finds evidence that the pressure of foreign competition raised

manufacturing productivity markedly but that the use of foreign inputs played only a minor role

in productivity change. Schor (2004) reports that increased exposure to competition led to

productivity improvements but that access to new inputs embodying better foreign technology

also contributed to productivity gains.

         More refined data on the use of imported intermediate goods have allowed researchers to

trace that channel more clearly. Amiti and Konings (2007) use plant-level data on imported

inputs from Indonesia during 1991­2001. They find that the largest productivity gains arise from

lower input tariffs: A 10 percentage point reduction in input tariffs led to a 12 percent

productivity gain for importing firms; the productivity gain associated with a 10 percentage point

reduction in output tariffs was 1­6 percent. Although it is not possible to determine the precise


         29
            At the industry level, Ferreira and Rossi (2003) estimate that Brazil's early liberalization, in 1988­90, led
to a 6 percent increase in the growth rate of total factor productivity and had a similar impact on labor productivity.

                                                               29
channel that gives rise to this higher productivity, the large impact for importing firms compared

with nonimporting firms suggests that direct benefits may accrue from the technology embodied

in the imported inputs. 30

        Using data from Chile, Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008) determine that a plant can

immediately improve productivity by switching from being a nonimporter to being an importer

of foreign intermediate goods. Although the point estimates differ across estimators, even the

within-group estimate, which they suspect is downward biased, indicates a 2.6 percent positive

productivity effect from importing. They also find some evidence of a positive dynamic effect

from the use of imported materials.

        Several detailed studies look at India's trade reforms in 1991. Topalova and Khandelwal

(2011) use the variation in liberalization across sectors to evaluate the effect of reforms on firm-

level productivity. They find that reduced tariffs increased competition in general and forced

firms facing that competition to improve their efficiency. Reduced tariffs on imported inputs

increased their availability, making their purchasers more efficient. The availability of cheaper

inputs was a more significant driver of productivity than increased final goods competition.

        For India's trade policy changes between 1989 and 1996, the cuts in final goods tariffs

accounted for a 1.7 percent increase in productivity, and the cuts in intermediate goods tariffs

accounted for a 10.6 percent increase in productivity. The impact on productivity of lower input

tariffs was thus greater than the pro-competitive effects of lower final goods tariffs. Firms in

heavily regulated industries did not enjoy productivity benefits, either because they did not




         30
            Similar effects have been found in more advanced economies. Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2015)
investigate the effect of imported inputs on productivity using microdata from importers in Hungary. They find that
importing all input varieties would increase a firm's revenue productivity by 22 percent, with about half of the
increase arising from imperfect substitution between foreign and domestic inputs. They attribute one-quarter of
Hungary's productivity growth over the 1993­2002 period to increased imports of intermediate goods.

                                                             30
respond to competitive pressure or because they lacked the freedom to adjust their production

technology after the reforms.

       Goldberg et al. (2010) link the decline in India's input tariffs to an expansion in a

downstream firm's product scope, finding that industries experiencing the greatest decline in

input tariffs introduced more new products. Lower input tariffs accounted for a third of the

observed increase in firms' product scope. They also improved firm performance, measured by

output, total factor productivity, or research and development spending. The authors separate

changes into a "price" and a "variety" channel and find substantial gains from access to new

varieties of imported inputs. Accounting for new imported varieties lowers the import price

index for intermediate goods by an additional 4.7 percent a year beyond the conventional gains

through lower prices of existing imports. The availability of more varieties relaxed the

technological constraints facing producers, who were able to source new and better inputs that

were not available before liberalization.

       Other papers focus on China, another big reforming country. Brandt et al. (2017) examine

China's tariff reductions as it sought entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) in the mid-

to late 1990s. They find that lower tariffs increased competition in the industry directly facing

foreign competition. Their point estimate of this effect in China is similar to that estimated for

India: Each percentage point reduction in output tariffs lowered markups by 0.10­0.15 log

points. In particular, state-owned firms were forced to improve their efficiency (and reduce

markups) to avoid bankruptcy when faced with increased competition. The pro-competitive

effects were most important among incumbents. New entrants were poised to achieve greater

efficiency gains. Brandt et al. show that lower input tariffs increased efficiency in downstream




                                                     31
purchasing industries, with a 1 percentage point lower tariffs on inputs reducing output prices by

1.6 percent.

        Lower input tariffs have also been found to reduce the costs of domestic producers in a

way that increases exports. Using detailed firm-level data from Argentina, Bas (2012) finds that

the probability of entering the export market was higher for firms producing in industries that

experienced greater input tariff reductions. Amiti et al. (2017) exploit the cross-industry variation

in trade liberalization in China. They find that lower input tariffs reduced the costs to purchasers,

boosting Chinese firms' productivity and their exports.

        In sum, while reducing tariffs on final goods increases the pressure of competition on

domestic producers to improve their productivity, a growing body of evidence points to the

benefits of reducing tariffs on intermediate goods and other inputs. Domestic producers benefit

from lower prices, improved quality, and greater variety of imported inputs, all of which help

them improve their productivity performance. 31

        Unfortunately, this literature has not succeeded in providing an aggregate or

economywide measure of the productivity improvement resulting from this channel. While

improved productivity performance in manufacturing is an important driver of overall

productivity in many developing countries, the contribution of trade openness at the aggregate

level has yet to be established. There is still debate about the role of trade in expanding or

shrinking the size of the manufacturing sector in developing countries. The benefits of achieving

greater productivity in labor-abundant countries that export manufactured goods have been

readily apparent. In contrast, for developing countries that export natural resources or

agricultural goods, an increase in openness to trade could shrink the overall size of the


        31
          Other studies have focused on the positive productivity effects emanating from trade reforms in Mexico
(Luong 2011), Vietnam (Ha 2015), and Uruguay (Casacuberta and Zaclicever 2016). The results are broadly similar.

                                                           32
manufacturing sector. If it does, aggregate productivity growth could fall, because improvements

in firm-level productivity would be offset by a decline in the size of the manufacturing sector.



6. Qualitative and Quantitative Country Studies

        A perennial problem with empirical evidence, particularly across countries, is that

questions can always be raised about the quality of the data, the method of analysis, the

robustness of the results, and so forth. Srinivasan and Bhagwati (2001) go so far as to reject all

cross-country regression methods, arguing that the most compelling evidence on the

consequences of trade reform can come only from careful case studies of policy regimes in

different countries.

        There have been several multivolume country studies of trade reform and the lessons to

be derived therefrom. In the late 1960s, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and

Development (OECD) sponsored a series of books on trade policy and industrialization in

selected developing countries. The two most famous volumes to emerge from that effort were

Bhagwati and Desai's book India: Planning for Industrialization and Little, Scitovsky, and

Scott's summary volume Industry and Trade in Some Developing Countries, both published in

1970. In the early 1970s, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) published a series

of studies on foreign trade regimes and economic development, along with two summary

volumes, by Bhagwati (1978) and Krueger (1978). Both the OECD and NBER studies

documented the costs of inward-oriented, import substitution trade regimes and the benefits of

outward-oriented, export promotion policies. 32



        32
           At the World Bank, Belassa (1982, 57) also looked at country case studies of the early reformers in the
1960s and 1970s. He concluded that "trade orientation has been an important factor contributing to intercountry
differences in the growth of income."

                                                             33
         In 1991 the World Bank published the seven-volume series Liberalizing Foreign Trade,

which covers 36 liberalization episodes in 19 countries over 1950­84 (the only reformers from

the 1980s were Turkey and New Zealand). The overview volume, by Papageorgiou, Choksi, and

Michaely (1990, 41) confidently reported that "[trade] reform can work anywhere, regardless of

initially unfavorable circumstances, and without serious short-term drawbacks. Governments

with highly distorted trade regimes need not fear the consequences of a well-designed

liberalization program."

         This massive effort was very informative and provided an abundance of detail on

different reform episodes. But such sweeping conclusions drew criticism. Greenaway (1993)

argued that "the conviction with which the conclusions are reported is misleading" and stated

that the narrative approach led to "impressionistic" conclusions about the consequences of

various trade policies, because it was hard to disentangle the impact of trade policies from other

policies pursued at the same time. Collier (1993) lamented the lack of any analytical framework

guiding the World Bank effort and feared that the sample of countries chosen was small and not

random. He also worried that "there seem to be few simple empirical regularities" because every

country seemed to have its own path and face its own difficulties, making broad generalizations

difficult. 33

         The qualitative nature of the country-study approach has often provided useful

information, but it has never been entirely satisfactory to most economists. It seems to have

fallen out of favor, as there was no major attempt to provide a complete record of reforms




         33
           The World Bank also published a summary volume on macroeconomic adjustment (Little et al. 1993)
that touches on some trade reforms in the 1980s.

                                                         34
between the late 1980s and the early 1990s. 34 The OECD, NBER, and World Bank studies deal

mainly with trade reform undertaken in the 1960s and 1970s.

         Of greater interest to economists are quantitative country studies based on detailed

structural models. These models can be built for a particular country, calibrated to match country

data for a prereform year, and then used to simulate counterfactual scenarios in which particular

policies are adjusted to understand their impact on various economic outcomes. There are only a

few examples of such studies, because conducting them requires a relatively large investment

that yields information for only one country, raising questions of external validity.

         The best example of this type of research is the Connolly and Yi (2015) study of South

Korea. South Korea moved from economic isolation (caused in part by heavy protection) to

export promotion in the mid-1960s. Exports as a share of GDP rose from 2 percent in 1962 to 30

percent in less than two decades, and its growth experience has been miraculous. But the Korean

case is also controversial because there is a debate about the contribution of trade policy to its

growth performance and whether industrial policy and other factors played a significant role. 35

         To help untangle the role of trade policy, Connolly and Yi develop a two-sector

neoclassical growth model, calibrated with Korean data, to simulate the trade policy changes that

occurred between early 1962 and 1989. The model can explain almost all of Korea's trade

growth and most of its increase in imports of investment goods. They then examine three distinct

trade policy changes: (a) the elimination of tariffs on intermediate goods and capital equipment

for goods produced for export in the mid-1960s, (b) the reduction in general tariffs from about 40


         34
             One incomplete effort, focused more on the political economy of the reforms than their economic
consequences, is Williamson (1994).
          35
             For example, Westphal (1990) argues that "import liberalization was not an important element of the
reforms that put Korea on the path of export-led development." It is unclear whether his statement included the
liberalization of intermediate goods or referred only to liberalization of final goods. The latter is certainly true in the
1960s and 1970s; the former would certainly be contested. For a recent survey of new work on industrial policy, see
Lane (2019).

                                                                 35
percent in early 1970s to about 13 percent by 1989, and (c) the reduction in foreign tariffs on

Korean exports as a result of the Kennedy and Tokyo Rounds of the General Agreement on

Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in the 1960s and 1970s. Taken together, their model suggests that

these tariff reductions can explain 17 percent of South Korea's catch-up to advanced countries in

value added per worker in the manufacturing sector. Although more than 80 percent of the catch-

up is left unexplained, trade policies alone account for a sizable share of the productivity

improvement. In addition, trade reforms account for a 19 percent increase in consumption per

worker (their measure of welfare).

        Two transmission channels--multistage production and imported investment goods--

drive these efficiency gains, as well as most of the welfare gains. Connolly and Yi argue that the

results from their neoclassical growth model constitute a lower bound on the contribution of

trade policy reform to Korea's growth miracle, because it does not address other mechanisms by

which trade could affect growth, such as learning or technological spillovers that enhanced

through exporting and importing activities or the impact on human capital formation. The model

also does not allow them to examine factors such as industrial policies and credit subsidies. 36

        External validity is always a question: What happened to South Korea might not be

expected to happen in Cameroon. Unless other economists create such models for other

countries, it will not be possible to know how trade reform affects economic structure and

performance in different contexts. Nevertheless, the detailed approach of Connolly and Yi in the

setting of one country helps separate the contributions of particular reforms to economic

outcomes and is a useful alternative to a simple indicator variable in a multicounty regression.




        36
           Betts, Giri, and Verma (2017) develop a model of Korea to examine structural change but do not directly
address trade policy.

                                                            36
7. Conclusion

       Economists have been interested in the relationship between trade restrictions and

economic growth since the time of Adam Smith. The great trade reform wave of the late 1980s

and early 1990s provides new historical evidence on the matter. There is no one perfect method

that can provide decisive evidence on this question, so researchers have tried to understand the

relationship using a variety of approaches.

       The findings from recent research have been remarkably consistent. For developing

countries that are behind the technological frontier and have significant import restrictions, there

appears to be a measurable economic payoff from more liberal trade policies. As table 1 reports,

a variety of studies using different measures of policy have found that economic growth is

roughly 1.0­1.5 percentage points higher than a benchmark after trade reform. Several studies

suggest that this gain cumulated to about 10­20 percent higher income after a decade. The effect

is heterogeneous across countries, because countries differ in the extent of their reforms and the

context in which reform took place.

       At a microeconomic level, the gains in industry productivity from reducing tariffs on

imported intermediate goods are even more sharply identified. They show up time and again in

country after country.

       Some questions remain about how much of the economic growth following trade reform

can be attributed to trade policy changes alone, as other market reforms are sometimes adopted at

the same time. Even if the reduction of trade barriers accounts for only a part of the observed

increase in growth, however, the cumulative gains from reform appear to be substantial. As

Estevadeordal and Taylor (2013, 1689) ask, "Is there any other single policy prescription of the




                                                     37
past twenty years that can be argued to have contributed between 15 percent and 20 percent to

developing country income?"




                                                  38
References


Abadie, Alberto, and J. Gardeazabal, 2003. The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of
       the Basque Country. American Economic Review 93: 113­132.
Amiti, Mary, Mi Dai, Robert C. Feenstra, and John Romalis. 2017. How Did China's WTO Entry
       Affect U.S. Prices? NBER Working Paper 23487. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
       Economic Research.
Amiti, Mary, and Jozef Konings. 2007. Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and
       Productivity: Evidence from Indonesia. American Economic Review 97: 1611­38.
Artuc, Erhan, Bob Rijkers, and Guido Porto. 2019. "Trading Off the Income Gains and the
       Inequality Costs of Trade Policy." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 8825.
Baier, Scott L., V. Yotov Yoto, and Thomas Zylkin. 2019. On the Widely Differing Effects of
       Free Trade Agreements: Lessons from Twenty Years of Trade Integration. Journal of
       International Economics 116: 206­26.
Bajona, Claustre, Mark J. Gibson, Timothy J. Kehoe, and Kim J. Ruhl. 2010. Trade
       Liberalization, Growth, and Productivity. Working paper. Minneapolis: University of
       Minnesota.
Baldwin, Robert E. 2002. Openness and Growth: What's the Empirical Relationship? In
       Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics, ed. Robert E. Baldwin and L.
       Alan Winters. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bas, Maria. 2012. Input-Trade Liberalization and Firm Export Decisions: Evidence from
       Argentina. Journal of Development Economics 97: 481­93.
Belassa, Bela. 1982. Development Strategies in Semi-industrial Countries. Baltimore: Johns
       Hopkins Press for the World Bank.
Betts, Caroline, Rahul Giri, and Rubina Verma. 2017. Trade, Reform, and Structural
       Transformation in South Korea. IMF Economic Review 65: 745­91.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1978. Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes.
       Cambridge, MA: Ballinger for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bhagwati, Jagdish N., and Padma Desai. 1970. India: Planning for Industrialization. New York:
       Oxford University Press for the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
       Development.

                                                  39
Bhagwati, Jagdish N., and Anne O. Krueger. 1973. Exchange Control, Liberalization, and
       Economic Development. American Economic Review 63: 419­27.
Billmeier, Andreas, and Tommaso Nannicini. 2011. Economies in Transition: How Important Is
       Trade Openness for Growth? Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 73: 287­314.
Billmeier, Andreas, and Tommaso Nannicini. 2013. Assessing Economic Liberalization
       Episodes: A Synthetic Control Approach. Review of Economics and Statistics 95: 983­
       1001.
Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, Luhang Wang, and Yifan Zhang. 2017. WTO
       Accession and Performance of Chinese Manufacturing Firms. American Economic
       Review 107: 2784­820.
Burstein, Ariel, and Javier Cravino. 2015. Measured Aggregate Gains from International Trade.
       American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7: 181­218.
Bustos, Paula. 2011. Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the
       Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms. American Economic Review 101: 304­40.
Campos, Nauro F., Fabrizio Coricelli, and Luigi Moretti. 2019. Institutional Integration and
       Economic Growth in Europe. Journal of Monetary Economics 103: 88­104.
Casacuberta, Carlos, and Dayna Zaclicever. 2016. The Effect of Input and Output Protection on
       Productivity in Uruguay. Universidad de la República Uruguay. Photocopy.
Collier, Paul. 1993. Higgledy-Piggledy Liberalisation. World Economy 16: 503­11.
Connolly, Michelle, and K. Yi. 2015. How Much of South Korea's Growth Miracle Can Be
       Explained by Trade Policy? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7: 188­221.
Dean, Judith M., S. Desai, and James Riedel. 1994. Trade Policy Reform in Developing
       Countries since 1985: A Review of the Evidence. World Bank Discussion Paper 267.
       Washington: World Bank.
DeJong, David N., and Maria Ripoll. 2006. Tariffs and Growth: An Empirical Exploration of
       Contingent Relationships. Review of Economics and Statistics 88: 625­40.
De Loecker, Jan. 2011. Product Differentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Estimating the Impact
       of Trade Liberalization on Productivity. Econometrica 79: 1407­51.
De Loecker, Jan, and Johannes Van Biesebroeck. 2018. Effect of International Competition on
       Firm Productivity and Market Power. Oxford Handbook of Productivity Analysis, ed.



                                                   40
       Emili Grifell-Tatjé, C. A. Knox Lovell, and Robin C. Sickles. New York: Oxford
       University Press.
Dollar, David. 1992. Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More Rapidly:
       Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976­1985. Economic Development and Cultural Change 40:
       523­44.
Donaldson, Dave. 2015. The Gains from Market Integration. Annual Review of Economics 7:
       619­47.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1992. The Case for Trade Liberalization in Developing Countries. Journal
       of Economic Perspectives 6: 69­85.
Easterly, William. 2001. The Lost Decades: Developing Countries' Stagnation in Spite of Policy
       Reform 1980­1998. Journal of Economic Growth 6: 135­57.
Easterly, William. 2005. National Economic Policies and Economic Growth: A Reappraisal.
       Handbook of Economic Growth, vol. 1A., ed. Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf.
       Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Easterly, William. 2018. In Search of Reforms for Growth: New Stylized Facts on Policy and
       Growth Outcomes. New York University. Photocopy.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1993. Openness, Trade Liberalization, and Growth in Developing Countries.
       Journal of Economic Literature 31: 1358­93.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1997. Trade Liberalization Reforms and the World Bank. American
       Economic Review 87: 43­48.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1998. Openness, Productivity, and Growth: What Do We Really Know?
       Economic Journal 108: 383­98.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Douglas A. Irwin. 2010. The Slide to Protectionism in the Great
       Depression: Who Succumbed and Why? Journal of Economic History 780: 871­97.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. Is the Washington Consensus Dead? Growth,
       Openness, and the Great Liberalization, 1970s­2000s. Review of Economics and
       Statistics 95: 1669­90.
Falvey, Rod, Neil Foster, and David Greenaway. 2012. Trade Liberalization, Economic Crisis,
       and Growth. World Development 40: 2177­93.
Falvey, Rod, Neil Foster-McGregor, and Ahmed Khalid. 2013. Trade Liberalization and Growth:
       A Threshold Analysis. Journal of the Asia Pacific Economy 18: 230­52.

                                                  41
Feenstra, Robert C., James R. Markusen, and William Zeile. 1992. Accounting for Growth with
       New Inputs: Theory and Evidence. American Economic Review 82: 415­21.
Fernandes, Ana. 2007. Trade Policy, Trade Volumes and Plant-level Productivity in
       Colombian Manufacturing Industries. Journal of International Economics 71: 51­72.
Ferreira, Pedro Cavalcanti, and José Luiz Rossi. 2003. New Evidence from Brazil on Trade
       Liberalization and Productivity Growth. International Economic Review 44: 1383­405.
Feyrer, James. Forthcoming. Trade and Income: Exploiting Time Series in Geography. American
       Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Feyrer, James, and Douglas A. Irwin. 2019. Trade Policy Reform and Economic Growth
       Revisited. Working Paper. Hanover, NH: Dartmouth College.
Finger, J. Michael, Merlinda D. Ingco, and Ulrich Reincke. 1996. The Uruguay Round: Statistics
       on Tariff Concessions Given and Received. Washington: World Bank.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer. 1999. Does Trade Cause Growth? American Economic
       Review 89: 379­99.
Freund, Caroline, and Martha Denisse Pierola. 2013. Export Surges. Journal of Development
       Economics 97: 387­95.
Giuliano, Paolo, Prachi Mishra, and Antonio Spilimbergo. 2013. Democracy and Reforms:
       Evidence from a New Dataset. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5: 179­
       204.
Goldberg, Penelopi, Amit Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova. 2010. Imported
       Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 125: 1727­67.
Greenaway, David. 1993. Liberalising Trade through Rose-Tinted Glasses. Economic Journal
       103: 208­22.
Greenway, David, C. Wyn Morgan, and Peter Wright. 1998. Trade Reform, Adjustment and
       Growth: What Does the Evidence Tell Us? Economic Journal 108: 1547­61.
Greenway, David, C. Wyn Morgan, and Peter Wright. 2002. Trade Liberalisation and Growth in
       Developing Countries. Journal of Development Economics 67, no. 1: 229­44.
Gwartney, James, and Robert Lawson. 2008. Economic Freedom of the World: Annual Report.
       Vancouver: Fraser Institute.



                                                 42
Ha, Doan Thi Thanh. 2015. Trade Liberalization, Product Differentiation and Firm Productivity:
       Evidence from Vietnam. Yokohama National University. Photocopy.
Halpern, László, Miklós Koren, and Adam Szeidl. 2015. Imported Inputs and Productivity.
       American Economic Review 105: 3660­703.
Harrison, Ann, and Gordon Hanson. 1999. Who Gains from Trade Reform? Some Remaining
       Puzzles. Journal of Development Economics 59: 125­54.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Lant Pritchett, and Dani Rodrik. 2005. Growth Accelerations. Journal of
       Economic Growth 10: 303­29.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2017. Exchange Arrangements
       Entering the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold? NBER Working Paper 23134.
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). Various years. Annual Report on Exchange Restrictions and
       Exchange Arrangements. Washington: IMF.
Jinjarak, Yothin, Gonzalo Salinas, and Yvonne M. Tsikata. 2013. The Effect of World Bank
       Trade Adjustment Assistance on Trade and Growth, 1987­2004: Is the Glass Half Full or
       Half Empty? Economic Systems 37: 415­30.
Jong-A-Pin, Richard, and Jakob De Haan. 2011. Political Regime Change, Economic
       Liberalization, and Growth Accelerations. Public Choice 146: 93­115.
Kasahara, Hiroyuki, and Joel Rodrigue. 2008. Does the Use of Imported Intermediates Increase
       Productivity? Plant-level Evidence. Journal of Development Economics 87: 106­18.
Kneller, Richard, C. W. Morgan, and Sunti Kanchanahatakij. 2008. Trade Liberalisation and
       Economic Growth. World Economy 31: 701­19.
Krueger, Anne O. 1978. Liberalization Attempts and Consequences. Cambridge: Ballinger for the
       National Bureau of Economic Research.
Krueger, Anne O. 1984. Trade Policies in Developing Countries. In Handbook of International
       Economics, vol. 1, ed. Ronald Jones and Peter Kenen. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Krueger, Anne O., and Sarath Rajapatirana. 2003. World Bank Policies toward Trade and Trade
       Policy Reform. World Economy 22: 717­40.
Lane, Nathaniel. 2019. The New Empirics of Industrial Policy. Monash University. Photocopy.
Little, Ian, Tibor Scitovsky, and Maurice Scott. 1970. Industry and Trade in Some Developing
       Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

                                                  43
Little, I.M.D., Richard N. Cooper, W. Max Corden, and Sarath Rajapatirana. 1993. Boom, Crisis,
       and Adjustment: The Macroeconomic Experience of Developing Countries. New York:
       Oxford University Press for the World Bank.
Luong, Tuan Anh. 2011. The Impact of Input and Output Tariffs on Firms' Productivity: Theory
       and Evidence. Review of International Economics 19: 821­35.
Marrazzo, Pasquale Marco, and Alessio Terzi. 2017. Wide-Reaching Structural Reforms and
       Growth: A Cross-Country Synthetic Control Approach. Center for International
       Development Working Paper 82. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
Martin, Will, and Francis Ng. 2004. A Note on Sources of Tariff Reductions in Developing
       Countries 1983­2003. Washington: World Bank.
McLaren, John. 2017. Globalization and Labor Market Dynamics. Annual Review of Economics
       9: 177­200.
Muendler, Marc-Andreas. 2004. Trade, Technology, and Productivity: A Study of Brazilian
       Manufacturers, 1986­1998. Working paper. San Diego: University of California.
Noguer, Marta, and Marc Siscart. 2005. Trade Raises Income: A Precise and Robust Result.
       Journal of International Economics 65: 447­60.
Nunn, Nathan, and Daniel Trefler. 2010. The Structure of Tariffs and Long-Term Growth.
       American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2: 158­94.
Papageorgiou, Demetrios, Armeane M. Choksi, and Michael Michaely. 1990. Liberalizing
       Foreign Trade in Developing Countries: The Lessons of Experience. Washington: World
       Bank.
Pascali, Luigi. 2017. The Wind of Change: Maritime Technology, Trade, and Economic
       Development. American Economic Review 107: 2821­54.
Patel, Dev, Justin Sandefur, and Arvind Subramanian. 2018. Everything You Know about Cross-
       Country Convergence Is Wrong. October 15. Washington: Center for Global
       Development. https: //www.cgdev.org/blog/everything-you-know-about-cross-country-
       convergence-now-wrong.
Pavcnik, Nina. 2002. Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
       Chilean Plants. Review of Economic Studies 69: 245­76.
Pavcnik, Nina. 2017. The Impact of Trade on Inequality in Developing Countries. NBER
       Working Paper 23878. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                 44
Peruzzi, Michele, and Alessio Terzi. 2018. Growth Acceleration Strategies. Center for
       International Development Working Paper 91. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
Prati, Alessandro, Massimiliano Gaetano Onorato, and Chris Papageorgiou. 2013. Which
       Reforms Work and under What Institutional Environment? Evidence from a New Data
       Set on Structural Reforms. Review of Economics and Statistics 95: 946­68.
Pritchett, Lant. 1996. Measuring Outward Orientation in LDCs: Can It Be Done? Journal of
       Development Economics 49: 307­35.
Pritchett, Lant, Kunal Sen, Sabyasachi Kar, and Selim Raihan. 2016. Trillions Gained and Lost:
       Estimating the Magnitude of Growth Episodes. Economic Modeling 55: 279­91.
Quinn, Dennis P. 1997. The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation.
       American Political Science Review 91: 531­51.
Rodrik, Dani. 1992. The Limits of Trade Policy Reform in Developing Countries. Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 6: 87­105.
Rodríguez, Francesco. 2007. Openness and Growth: What Have We Learned? In Growth
       Divergences: Explaining Differences in Economic Performance, ed. José Antonio
       O'Campo, K. S. Jomo, and Rob Vos. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rodríguez, Francesco, and Dani Rodrik. 2000. Trade Policy and Growth: A Skeptic's Guide to
       the Cross-National Evidence. NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2000. Cambridge, MA:
       MIT Press.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew Warner. 1995. Economic Reform and the Process of Global
       Integration. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1­118.
Salinas, Gonzalo, and Ataman Aksoy. 2006. Growth before and after Trade Liberalization.
       Policy Research Working Paper 4062. Washington: World Bank.
Schor, Adriana. 2004. Heterogeneous Productivity Response to Tariff Reduction: Evidence from
       Brazilian Manufacturing Firms. Journal of Development Economics 75: 373­96.
Shatz, Howard J., and David G. Tarr. 2002. Exchange Rate Overvaluation and Trade Protection.
       In Development, Trade and the WTO: A Handbook, ed. Bernard Hoekman, Aaditya
       Mattoo, and Philip English. Washington: World Bank.
Sheu, Gloria. 2014. Price, Quality, and Variety: Measuring Gains from Trade in Differentiated
       Products. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6: 66­89.



                                                  45
Srinivasan, T.N., and Jagadish Bhagwati. 2001. Outward-Orientation and Development: Are
       Revisionists Right? In Trade, Development and Political Economy: Essays in Honour of
       Anne O. Krueger, ed. Deepak Lal and Richard H. Snape, 3­26. New York: Palgrave.
Topalova, Petia, and Amit K. Khandelwal. 2011. Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity:
       The Case of India. Review of Economics and Statistics 93: 995­1009.
Tovar, Jorge. 2012. Consumer Welfare and Trade Liberalization: Evidence from the Car Industry
       in Colombia. World Development 40: 808­20.
Wacziarg, Romain, and Karen Horn Welch. 2008. Trade Liberalization and Growth: New
       Evidence. World Bank Economic Review 22: 187­231.
Warner, Andrew. 2003. Once More into the Breach: Economic Growth and Integration.
       Working Paper 34. Washington: Center for Global Development.
Wei, Shang-Jin, and Zhiwei Zhang. 2007. Collateral Damage: Exchange Control and
       International Trade. Journal of International Money and Finance 26: 841­63.
Wei, Shang-Jin, and Zhiwei Zhang. 2010. Do External Interventions Work? The Case of Trade
       Reform Conditions in IMF Supported Programs. Journal of Development Economics 92:
       71­81.
Westphal, Larry E. 1990. Industrial Policy in an Export-Propelled Economy: Lessons from South
       Korea's Experience. Journal of Economic Perspectives 4: 41­59.
Williamson, John. 1994. The Political Economy of Policy Reform. Washington: Peterson
       Institute for International Economics.
Winters, L. Alan. 2004. Trade Liberalisation and Economic Performance: An Overview.
       Economic Journal 114: F4­F21.
Winters, L. Alan, and Antonio Martuscelli. 2014. Trade Liberalisation and Poverty: What Have
       We Learned in a Decade? Annual Review of Resource Economics 6: 493­512.
Winters, L. Alan, and Andrew Masters. 2013. Openness and Growth: Still an Open Question?
       Journal of International Development 25: 1061­70.
World Bank. 2001. Global Economic Prospects and the Developing Countries. Washington.
Yanikkaya, Halit. 2003. Trade Openness and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical
       Investigation. Journal of Development Economics 72: 57­89.




                                                 46
Figure 1 Number of countries undertaking trade reforms, 1960­2001


                                     16


                                     14


                                     12
 Number of Liberalization Episodes




                                     10


                                      8


                                      6


                                      4


                                      2


                                      0
                                          1950   1955   1960     1965       1970     1975        1980    1985      1990         1995     2000
                                                        Sachs Warner OECD    Sachs Warner LDCs    Sachs Warner Eastern Europe     Wacziarg Welch


Sources: Sachs and Warner (1995); Wacziarg and Welch (2008).




                                                                                       47
Figure 2 Average unweighted tariff rate in developed and developing countries, 1980­2010


              40

              35
                                                                   Developing Countries
              30
                                                                   Developed Countries
              25
    percent




              20

              15

              10

               5

               0
                   1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010




Source: World Bank Data on Trade and Import Barriers,
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRES/Resources/469232-1107449512766/tar2010.xls.




                                                           48
Figure 3 Average unweighted import tariffs, by region, 1980­98


                                          1980-85      1986-90    1991-95     1996-98

            70

            60

            50

            40
  percent




            30

            20

            10

             0
                 South Asia   Latin America &   East Asia &   Sub-Saharan   Middle East &    Europe &       Industrial
                                 Caribbean        Pacific        Africa     North Africa    Central Asia   Economies


Source: World Bank (2001, 53).




                                                                  49
Figure 4 Percent share of countries imposing export surrender requirements or setting
nonunified exchange rates

                       100

                       90

                       80                                                 Export Surrender
                                                                          Requirements
                       70
  Share of Countries




                                                                          Non-unified Exchange Rates
                       60

                       50

                       40

                       30

                       20

                       10

                        0
                             1970   1975   1980   1985   1990    1995   2000   2005   2010    2015



Sources: Nonunified exchange rates are from Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017); export
surrender requirements are from IMF (various years).




                                                                50
Table 1 Selected studies of trade reform and economic growth
 Study                  Period       Policy indicator         Sample size              Main finding
                                         Growth regressions
 Greenaway, Morgan,    1975­93   Various dichotomous      69 developing            +2.7 percentage point
 and Wright (2002)               indicators               countries               increase in growth

 Salinas and Aksoy     1970­     World Bank episodes          39 developing        +1.2 percentage point
 (2006)                2004                                   countries           increase in growth

 Wacziarg and Welch    1950­98   Updated Sachs-Warner          133 countries       +1.4 percentage point
 (2008)                          indicator                                        increase in growth

 Falvey, Foster, and   1970­     Wacziarg-Welch               39 developing        +1.8 percentage point
 Greenaway (2012)      2003      indicator                    countries           increase in growth

 Falvey, Foster-       1970­     Wacziarg-Welch                50 developing       +1.7 percentage point
 McGregor, and         2005      indicator                    countries           increase in growth
 Khalid (2013)

 Estevadeordal and     1975­     Average import tariff         44 developed and    +1 percentage point
 Taylor (2013)         2004      (aggregate,                  developing          increase in growth,
                                 disaggregated)               countries           income 15-20 percent
                                                                                  higher after 20 years

 Feyrer and Irwin      1950­     Updated Wacziarg-          125 countries         Income  10­20 percent
 (2019)                2015      Welch, current account                           higher after 5-10 years
                                 openness, other
                                 measures
                                          Synthetic control
 Billmeier and         1963­     Wacziarg-Welch               30 developing-      Positive but
 Nannicini (2013)      2005      indicator                    country cases       heterogeneous effect of
                                                                                  trade reform on growth
 Billmeier and         1993­     Wacziarg-Welch               5 transition        Positive but
 Nannicini (2011)      2005      indicator                    economies           heterogeneous effect of
                                                                                  trade reform on growth
                                             Country study
 Connolly and Yi       1962­89   Tariffs and quantitative  South Korea            Tariff reductions
 (2015)                          restrictions                                     explain 17 percent of
                                                                                  Korea's catchup




                                                         51
Table 2 Selected studies of trade reform and industry productivity
 Country/study               Period        Measure of                     Main finding
                                           productivity
 Chile

 Pavcnik (2002)             1979­86   Plant total factor    The productivity of the import-competing
                                      productivity (TFP)    sector was 3­10 percent higher than the
                                      (revenue)             productivity of the nontraded goods
                                                            sector.

 Kasahara and Rodrigue      1979­96   Plant TFP (revenue)   Imported intermediates boosted
 (2008)                                                     productivity 2.6 percent.
 Colombia

 Fernandes (2007)           1977­91   Plant TFP (revenue)   A 10 percentage point reduction in tariffs
                                                            increased TFP by 0.8­1.2 percent in
                                                            affected industries.
 Indonesia

 Amiti and Konings (2007)   1991­     Plant TFP (revenue)   A 10 percentage point reduction in input
                            2001                            tariffs was associated with a 12 percent
                                                            increase in TFP.
 India

 Topalova and Khandelwal    1987­     Plant TFP (revenue)   A reduction in final goods tariffs
 (2011)                     2001                            increased TFP by 1.7 percent. A
                                                            reduction in input tariffs increased it by
                                                            10.6 percent.
 Goldberg et al. (2010)     1987­97   Plant TFP (revenue)   A reduction in input tariffs increased
                                                            product scope; new imported varieties
                                                            reduced the price index for intermediate
                                                            goods by 4.7 percent a year.
 China

 Brandt et al. (2017)       1994­     Plant TFP (revenue)   A reduction in final goods tariffs reduced
                            2007                            markups (procompetitive effect); a 1
                                                            percentage point reduction in input tariffs
                                                            reduced output prices by 1.6 percent.
 Amiti et al. (2017)        1998­     Firm TFP (revenue)    A reduction in input tariffs increased firm
                            2007                            TFP.




                                                    52
