                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SHOULD WE TRUST CLUSTERED STANDARD ERRORS? A COMPARISON
                 WITH RANDOMIZATION-BASED METHODS

                                       Lourenço S. Paz
                                        James E. West

                                      Working Paper 25926
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25926


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




Thanks to our colleagues at Baylor University, Dean Karlan for authorizing the use of his lab
experiments data that were published in Karlan (2005), and to the Baylor Department of
Economics for the purchase of a node on the Baylor High Performance Computer Cluster. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lourenço S. Paz and James E. West. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Should We Trust Clustered Standard Errors? A Comparison with Randomization-Based Methods
Lourenço S. Paz and James E. West
NBER Working Paper No. 25926
June 2019
JEL No. C18,C33

                                          ABSTRACT

We compare the precision of critical values obtained under conventional sampling-based methods
with those obtained using sample order statics computed through draws from a randomized
counterfactual based on the null hypothesis. When based on a small number of draws (200),
critical values in the extreme left and right tail (0.005 and 0.995) contain a small bias toward
failing to reject the null hypothesis which quickly dissipates with additional draws. The precision
of randomization-based critical values compares favorably with conventional sampling-based
critical values when the number of draws is approximately 7 times the sample size for a basic
OLS model using homoskedastic data, but considerably less in models based on clustered
standard errors, or the classic Differences-in-Differences. Randomization-based methods
dramatically outperform conventional methods for treatment effects in Differences-in-Differences
specifications with unbalanced panels and a small number of treated groups.


Lourenço S. Paz
Department of Economics
Baylor University
One Bear Place #98003
Waco, TX 76798
lourenco_paz@baylor.edu

James E. West
Department of Economics
Baylor University
One Bear Place #98003
Waco, TX 76798
and NBER
j_west@baylor.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25926
1       Introduction

In evaluating the quality of their statistical models, applied social scientists place great
emphasis on the level of significance, or probability of type I error. Based upon a random
sample drawn from a large (and usually unknown) population, a statement is made on the
probability that the observed statistical correlation is the outcome of random sampling if the
null hypothesis is correct. For sample sizes not particularly large, this exercise relies upon the
asymptotic properties of estimated parameters to project critical values at customary levels of
significance at which the null hypothesis would be rejected in favor of an alternate. Being the
result of statistical estimation, these critical values are themselves stochastic. We illustrate
in Figure 1 an estimated parameter, 2  N (0, 1) and the approximate distribution of its
0.01 critical value. The distribution of estimated critical values has not been of much interest
to econometricians, as its properties are a straightforward application of the properties of
the variance of the parameter estimate.
    Studies using data that are natural, field, or lab experiments are fundamentally different.
Variation in such studies is not the result of sampling variation, as the entire population is
observed and is itself the data set. In such circumstances, the theoretical source of variation
is the choice of to whom the treatment is applied. Athey and Imbens (2017) argue that
randomization based inference is more appropriate to the design of such experiments than
conventional sampling-based inference. In addition, randomization-based inference can be
useful in situations with few observations available (such as historical data), or in an exper-
imental lab context where it is time consuming, expensive, or infeasible to collect additional
data.
    Randomization based inference utilizes randomly generated counterfactuals to obtain an
empirical distribution of estimated parameters under the null hypothesis. As an example,
Karlan (2005), whose experiment we discuss in section 4, implements a trust game in a
lab setting. To distinguish systematic choices from random play, in the counterfactual we


                                                2
replace the actual choices made by players with randomly chosen outcomes. After performing
a number of draws, we compare model parameters estimated using actual choices with the
distribution of parameters using generated counterfactual data. This is distinct from a
randomized control trial, where a control group is denied treatment and presumed to follow
random behavior.
       A growing number of papers based on natural, field, or lab experiments are using randomization-
based methods.1 In the papers of which we are aware, authors have not employed systematic
methods to determine the appropriate number of randomized counterfactual draws to per-
form in which to achieve acceptably accurate type I error estimates and reasonable statistical
power. This exercise is of fundamental importance because the process of drawing random-
ized conterfactuals can require substantial computing resources for large datasets such as
matched employer-employee data or retail scanner data.
       In this paper, we compare the performance of conventional inference-based statistical
methods with that of randomization-based methods. In symmetric distributions, we exam-
ine type I statistical error at the 0.05, 0.025, and 0.005 level as well as statistical power
in a variety of commonly encountered frameworks in which the statistical properties of Or-
dinary Least Squares (OLS) estimated parameters are not desirable, up to and including
difference-in-difference models with unbalanced panels, a small number of clustering units,
heteroscedasticity by cluster, and treatment in as little as one cluster.
       Even under the most difficult assumptions, we find that randomization-based inference
methods compare favorably to conventional inference-based methods. In cases with as few as
one treated group where inference-based methods are severely biased toward over-rejecting
the null hypothesis of no treatment effect, randomization-based methods continue to exhibit
   1
    Recent examples employing this technique include papers where students are assigned to peer groups,
(Carrell, Sacerdote, and West, 2013) classrooms, (Lim and Meer, 2017) and career mentors, (Kofoed and
McGovney, 2017), and the matching of college roommates within a dorm (Carrell, Hoekstra, and West, 2018).
These methods can be used to construct appropriate counterfactuals, even when the entire population is not
observed. (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft, 2009)




                                                    3
a slight under-rejection of the null hypothesis using 200 draws which corrects with a larger
number of draws. In cases with more treated groups, the severe bias of OLS toward over-
rejection of the null lessens. We find power using randomization-based methods to be less
than with inference-based methods, but attribute some of this to the over-rejection of the null
hypothesis by conventional methods. For models estimated using larger data sets, we propose
that the number of draws be a multiple of 200, but not less than 7G, where G is the number
of cluster groups. We also compare the accuracy and power of conventional sampling-based
methods with randomization-based methods when the number of draws greatly exceeds 7G.
We find that accuracy improves rapidly as the number of draws increases beyond 7G, but
at a diminishing rate.
   The techniques we investigate have some similarities but are distinct from a percentile-t
bootstrap and a wild-cluster bootstrap. A percentile-t bootstrap computes estimated param-
eters on data resampled at the cluster level with replacement as an intermediate step in the
resampling process. Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) find that a percentile-t bootstrap
is subject to over-rejection and proposed the wild-cluster bootstrap, in which weights of -1
or 1 are randomly assigned to clusters. In contrast, the methods we investigate involve the
generation of a number of counterfactuals, in which the treatment status is varied at the
individual observation level.
   In the remainder of this paper, section two describes the statistical methods employed in
our analysis. Section three presents and discusses the results of our Monte Carlo simulations.
Section four presents the application of our methodology to Karlan (2005). The last section
concludes.




                                              4
2     Statistical Methods

Let the entire population or census of an outcome of interest Yn×1 be a linear function of a
nonstochastic matrix of variables Xn×k with a first column of 1's.


                                        Y = X +                                            (1)


Equation (1) is assumed to be correctly specified with a stochastic error function


                                        IID(0,  2 In ).


Under these conditions, the Ordinary Least Squares estimate


                                 --- N ,  2 (X X )-1
                                    n



and the OLS estimate of  2 is


                           2 (Y - X  ) (Y - X  )           2 2 4
                         S =                               ,         .
                                   n-k                        n

    Using conventional sampling-based inference methods, a one-tailed confidence interval at
an  level of significance for i can be constructed around a hypothesized value, i,0 , as


                                        i,0 - t,df Si .                                    (2)


In a correctly specified model where E(S 2 ) =  2 and under the null hypothesis, the proba-
bility that i is strictly less than Equation (2) is .




                                              5
       The variance of the critical value of the one-tailed confidence interval is


              V i,(0) - t,df Si      = (t,df )2 V Si                                                  (3)
                                                                                   n-k+1
                                                                2 2 n - k 2
                                     = (t,df )2 (X X )- 1
                                                      i,i                - 2         2
                                                                                    n-k
                                                                                                      (4)
                                                               n-k    2              2


since
                 
                 n-k                     n-2
                                           k+1
                                                                   n - k 2     n-k+1
                                                                                 2
                     · S  n-k          2                      ,2        - 2
                                          n-
                                           2
                                             k                       2          n-k
                                                                                 2


       Using d draws of i under an appropriately constructed counterfactual, the resulting
i,(1) , . . . , i,(d) would be IID with a cumulative distribution function (CDF) F . Assume that
F has a density f that is positive and continuous for every F -1 (q ), where q is the q th sample
quantile, 0 < q < 1. For a sufficiently large d, the q th sample quantile is approximately
normally distributed (Ruppert and Matteson (2015)) with mean equal to the population
quantile F -1 (q ) and variance equal to:

                                                      q (1 - q )
                                        V (q ) =                     .                                (5)
                                                   d[f (F -1 (q ))]2

       We report in Table 1 the mean and standard deviation of order statistics from a standard
normal distribution which can be used to estimate a  = 0.005, 0.025, and 0.05 critical value.
To estimate a 0.005 critical value, multiples of 200 draws are required. With the minimum
200 draws, the expected value of first order statistic at -2.7460 is approximately 0.2 standard
                                                   2
deviations less than (0.005) = -2.5758.                As a consequence of this bias, type I error from
randomization-based inference using 200 draws will be too small and type II error elevated.
As the number of draws is increases and the estimator of the 0.005 critical value is that of
higher order statistics, both the bias and the dispersion of the estimator (as measured by the
standard deviation) rapidly decreases. In a sample of 10,000 draws, the bias of 50th order
   2
   This bias of the first order statistic in small samples as an estimator of population quantiles is well
documented in the literature. For further detail, see (Petzold, 2000).


                                                        6
statistic as an estimator of -1 (0.005) is 0.0031. The increased precision associated with
higher value order statistics can also be seen in comparing the estimates of the 0.005 critical
values with 0.025 and 0.05 values. Estimates of the 0.025 critical value based on the fifth
order statistic from 200 draws has both bias and standard errors roughly comparable to the
fifth order statistic of 1,000 draws, which is used to estimate the 0.005 critical value.
   To more directly compare the precision of inference-based critical values with those ob-
tained by randomization-based methods, we set Equations (4) and (5) equal, and solve for the
number of randomized draws d to equate the variance of randomization and inference-based
methods for selected sample sizes n. We note that the number of draws is approximately
seven times the sample size to equate the variance of the 0.005 confidence interval obtained
under randomization and sampling-based inference, or d  7n.
   For regressions based on homoskedastic data, we conclude that the dispersion of 0.005
critical values obtained using randomization-based methods is roughly similar to those ob-
tained using conventional sampling-based methods when the number of draws is approxi-
mately seven times the sample size. To obtain two-tailed critical values at a one-percent
level, the number of draws must be multiples of 200. Critical values based on 200 draws will
be biased toward under-rejection of the null hypothesis, however this bias declines rapidly
in draws of higher multiples of 200.


2.1    Clustered Data

Empirical economists frequently encounter panel data which is homoskedastic within each
cross-sectional group g , but potentially heteroskedastic across groups (g = 1, . . . , G) of an
unspecified form. For a balanced panel, containing an equal number of observations in each




                                               7
cross sectional group, N , the variance of the error term is

                                                     
                                      2
                               1,1  1 0 . . . 0 
                               .                  .  
                               .
                               .     0 2          .
                                                  .  
                                          2          
                            V  . =.                    IN
                               .    .        .       
                               .  .            ..    
                                                     
                                                   2
                              N,G    0 . . . 0 G


    Under these circumstances, the estimated variance of the OLS estimator computed with
clustered standard errors is
                                                           
                                       2
                                    S1 0 . . . 0           
                                                   .       
                                     0 S   2       .
                                                   .       
                                           2               
              V (OLS ) = (X X )-1 X  .                  IN  X (X X )-1                     (6)
                                     .        ..           
                                     .           .         
                                                           
                                                    2
                                      0 . . . 0 SG


To derive results comparable to Table 2, where (6) is set equal to (5) for various d and
N would require assumptions on X and Si2 . Instead, we compare the distributions of (6)
and (5) for both balanced and unbalanced cluster sizes using Monte Carlo methods in the
following section.



3     Monte Carlo Methods

To investigate the distributions of confidence intervals under a variety of statistical distri-
butions, we begin with a set of 100,000 p-values distributed uniformly [0, 1]. Using these
p-values, we generate realizations of the generalized Lambda distribution that has the fol-
lowing inverse CDF. (Ramberg, Dudewicz, Tadikamalla, and Mykytka, 1979)


                                  F -1 (p) = µ +  [pa - (1 - p)b ]                         (7)



                                                 8
The generalized lambda distribution with appropriate choices of a and b can resemble light-
tailed, medium-tailed, heavy-tailed, normal-like, and exponential distributions. (Harrell
and Davis, 1982) Table 3 shows the values of a and b used to generate samples of these
distributions. Summary statistics of the generated samples are also reported in Table 3, and
their histograms are exhibited in Figure A.1. We set the mean adjustment parameter µ to
0 and the scale parameter  to 1 for the initial homoskedastic cases. We also generate a
spurious explanatory variable, Xi  N ID(0, 1).
   Using these variations of the generalized lambda distribution and Xi , we compute the
probability of Type I error and statistical power for three separate Monte Carlo designs; the
simple regression slope in a linear model with a homoskedastic error term, the regression
slope in a linear model with clustered standard errors, and the treatment effect in a linear
difference-in-differences model with clustered standard errors. We further consider both
balanced and unbalanced panels within the clustered and the difference-in-difference cases.


3.1    Homoskedastic Case

We first consider a simple example in which to compare sampling and randomization-based
inference methods using homoskedastic data with 40 observations. Based on results presented
in Table 2, the variance of 0.005 level type I critical values (-2.712 standard deviations) should
be comparable between sampling and randomization based methods. Further, it is of interest
how randomization-based methods perform in a scenario where conventional sampling based
methods are understood to have desirable statistical properties.
   Using Equation (7), we generate i for each of the five distributions detailed in Table 3.
We draw one million samples of 40 observations without replacement from the population
of 100,000 and compute
                                      Yi = 1 + 2 Xi + i ,                                     (8)




                                                9
for 1 = 2 = 0. Using this data, we estimate


                                     Yi = 1 + 2 Xi + i                                    (9)


using OLS. To compare type I error under sampling and randomization based inference
methods, we construct empirical distributions of the standardized  × 100 critical value
under a null hypothesis of 2 = 0. Under the null hypothesis and the asymptotic normality
of 2 , with a sample size of 40 observations,

                                           2
                                               t38
                                           s2


Sampling based methods project that under the null hypothesis, -percent of 2 are expected
to be strictly less than
                                          t38, · s2 ,                                    (10)

where
                                                1
                                                38
                                                          2
                                                          i
                                                     i
                                    s2 =              ¯ )2 .
                                                (Xi - X
                                            i

   To construct a randomization-based analog to Equation (10), we compute the appropriate
sample order statistic from a random draw of d observations from 2 standardized with the
sample mean and standard deviation from the entire sample of 1 million values computed.
If 200 draws are performed, the 0.005 sample quantile is the first order statistic. If d draws
are performed, the  sample quantile is estimated by the d order statistic.

                                                     s2
                                  ts = t38, ·             ,                              (11)
                                                     2
                                            2 - µ2
                                  tr =                              ,                    (12)
                                                 2
                                                              (d)




                                                10
ts and tr can be directly compared as the critical value measured in standard deviations
from mean at an  level of significance for sampling and randomization-based inference
respectively. They can also be compared to the theoretical critical value of t38, under the
asymptotic normality of 2 .
   Table 4 reports summary statistics of simulations based on 1 million replications of sample
size 40 drawn from a homoskedastic normal-like, light, medium, and heavy-tailed distribu-
tion. For the symmetric distributions of Table 4, we evaluate only the left tail. And for the
asymmetric exponential-like distribution, we evaluate right and left tails separately, which
are reported in Table 5.
   For each distribution, we present the mean of 1 million computations of ts and 100,000
computations of tr based on 200, 400, 1,000, and 5,000 draws without replacement from
the standardized 2 . For each set of draws, we compute the 0.005, 0.025, and 0.05 sample
quantile. Additionally, for the non-symmetric exponential-like distribution in Table 5, we
also compute the 0.95, 0.975, and 0.995 sample quantiles.
   Panel A contains information for the left-tail quantiles and Panel B for the ones in the
right tail. We report the sample means and standard deviations of sampling-based ts in
columns 1, 3, and 5, and the sample means and standard deviations of randomization-based
tr in columns 2, 4, and 6. At the bottom of each block, we report a p-value in square brackets,
representing the proportion of t statistics that are less than the respective theoretical critical
value as given in the column heading. For randomization-based columns (2, 4, and 6), these
are equal to the theoretical significance levels 0.05, 0.025, and 0.005 by construction.
   A-priori, we expect results from sampling-based methods to closely conform to theoretical
predictions in the homoskedastic cases. A sample size of 40 is sufficiently large so that 2 ,
being a weighted average of the supporting i , approaches a normal distribution by the
central limit theorem in these ideal cases. Because of this, ts and tr will be distributed
t38 . We report the mean and standard deviations of relevant order statistics in Table 1 for



                                               11
a standard normal distribution. In appendix table A.1, we report the mean and standard
deviation of relevant order statistics for draws from a t38 distribution. Due to the heavier
tails of a t38 versus a standard normal, both the reported bias and standard deviation are
larger relative to t38, , particularly for  = 0.005 and d = 200. The statistics we report in
Tables 4 and 5 are consistent with these expectations. The sampling-based inference average
ts is closer to the theoretical t38, than that obtained via randomization, albeit this difference
is approximately 2 percent. Notice that conventional inference tends to over-reject the null
hypothesis for the normal and light-tailed distributions. As expected, the performance of
randomization-based methods declines in the more extreme quantiles of 0.005, with the
exception of the medium- and heavy-tailed distributions. As a consequence of the variance
of tr being inversely proportional to the number of draws, d (see Equation (5)), the standard
deviation of tr declines uniformly for 400, 1,000, and 5,000 draws from 200 draws.
   In Figure 2, we present histograms of the empirical distributions of ts (dashed line) and
tr with 200 draws (solid line) at a 0.005 level of significance as shown in columns (5) and
(6) of Table 4 for each distribution of interest. The vertical bar in each panel of Figure
2 is t38,0.005 = -2.7116, the theoretically correct critical value under the assumption that
2 is asymptotically normal. Figure 3 contains results from the right and left tails of the
exponential-like distribution. In the first row of Figure 3 which presents results from the
left tail, the vertical line is t38,0.005 = -2.7116 as in Figure 2. The second row of Figure
3 presents results from the right tail, where the vertical line is t38,0.995 = 2.7116. Results
from Table 4 indicate that the mean of the sampling-based methods, ts , is closer to the
theoretically correct value of -2.7116 than that of the randomization-based methods, tr . In
contrast, the mode of tr is closer to the theoretically correct vertical line in each panel than
the mode of ts . This is particularly true in Figure 3 for both the left and right tails of the
exponential-like distribution. Computations presented in Table 2 indicate that the standard
deviations of ts and tr should be very close for 200 draws. The standard deviations reported



                                               12
in the first columns of Figures 2 and 3 largely conform to this expectation. For higher
number of draws, tr has a smaller dispersion than that of ts . As expected, the performance
of randomization-based methods is considerably better for the heavy-tailed distribution and
for the (asymmetric) exponential distribution.
   To evaluate statistical power, we generate Yi as specified in equation (8) with an alterna-
tive hypothesis of 2 = 0.1. By construction we are expecting the power of this test to be low
due to the small magnitude of 2 relative to the constructed variation of X . For the sampling-
based inference results, we compute a conventional t-statistic on a null hypothesis that 2 = 0
against an alternate that 2 = 0. The power level of these tests are reported in Table 6, in
columns (1), (3), and (5) labeled "sampling, " where we report the proportion of 1,000,000
t-statistics for which t < t38,/2 or t > t38,1-/2 . For the randomization-based methods, we
determine whether 2 estimated using data generated with 2 = 0.1 (alternate hypothesis)
is less than the /2 sample quantile or greater than the 1 - /2 sample quantile from 200,
400, 1,000, or 5,000 draws of counterfactual 2 constructed with 2 = 0. The power level of
these tests are reported in columns (2), (4), and (6) of Table 6. The randomization-based
test has higher power in all cases, even in the case of the extreme quantiles ( = 0.01). Such
a difference in performance is large for the light- and heavy-tailed distributions, though it is
small for the medium-tailed and exponential distributions. We can also see that the figures
indicate that the light-tailed and the heavy-tailed distributions are the extreme cases. Thus,
the next simulations will employ only these two distributions. Overall, the randomization-
based method performs as well as and in some cases better than conventional sampling-based
methods in conditions under which the latter methods are expected to perform particularly
well.




                                              13
3.2       Clustered Case

We consider two different numbers of clustered groups: 12 and 50. The first represents a
very small number of groups like Canadian provinces and territories, while the other case
corresponds to the number of American states. The findings from (Cameron, Gelbach, and
Miller, 2008) indicate that conventional-based inference will perform well in the case of
50 clusters and poorly in the case of 12 clusters. To generate clustered random variables,
from the previously defined 100,000 uniformly distributed p-values [0, 1], we set the scaling
parameter for each clustered group in the generalized lambda distribution (Equation (7)) to
be drawn g  U [0.5, 1, 5]. We also apply this scaling to the spurious explanatory variable
Xi , Xgi = g Xi . We randomly choose N = 40 observations from each clustered group of
both the dependent variable and the stochastic disturbance and compute


                                        Ygi = 1g + 2 Xgi + gi                           (13)


for 1g = 2 = 0.3 For each number of clustered groups, g = 1...12 and g = 1...50, we
repeat 1,000,000 times for gi chosen from the heavy-tailed and light-tailed distributions.
We estimate parameters using panel OLS with fixed effects with clustered standard errors.
Sampling-based and randomization-based statistics are implemented as in the homoskedastic
case.
      We present Type I error results in Table 7 for the case of 12 and 50 balanced clus-
ters. Panel A presents results when the stochastic disturbance is drawn from a light-tailed
distribution, and Panel B when the stochastic disturbance is drawn from a heavy-tailed dis-
tribution. For the 12-cluster case the randomization-based inference performs better for both
the light- and heavy­tailed distributions even for the most extreme quantile  = 0.005 with
only 200 draws. In the 50-cluster case, the performance of both methods is almost identical
with a small advantage for the randomization method. The sampling-based method tends
  3
      As in Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008).


                                                   14
to over-reject the null hypothesis, which is very pronounced in the 12-cluster case. In the
50-cluster case at the 0.005 level, tr exceeds the theoretical critical value t1949,0.005 for 200
draws in both the light and heavy-tailed cases. When computed with 400 and especially
1,000 draws, tr much more closely approximates its theoretical value.
   In Figures A.2 and A.3, we show the distributions of the sampling- and randomization-
based ts and tr for  = 0.005 for the heavy-tailed and light-tailed distribution (respectively),
and as the number of draws d increases (horizontal axis) and the number of cluster units G
grows (vertical axis). We note first that as the number of draws is increased (left to right
panels within line of Figures A.2 and A.3), the variance from randomization-based methods
decreases. This result is to be expected from (5). And as the number of cluster units G
increases from 12 to 50 (top to bottom panels within columns of Figures A.2 and A.3),
the variance of randomization-based methods is largely unaffected. With a small number
of clusters, critical values estimated by OLS with clustered standard errors are known to
be downward-biased. (Cameron and Miller, 2015) This can be observed in the first rows
of Figures A.2 and A.3 with G = 12. We note that randomization-based methods perform
considerably better in our simulations. For all distributions of dependent variables, we note
that the variance of randomization and sampling-based methods is roughly comparable for
G = 50 and d = 200, as seen in the bottom left panel (i) in each of Figures A.2 and A.3.
Based on the variations shown in Figures A.2 and A.3, the variation of 0.005 critical values
obtained by randomization-based methods is no more than that obtained by inference-based
methods if d  7G but not less than 200.
   To evaluate statistical power, we compute equation (13) for 2 = 0.025, which is the
alternate hypothesis. Sampling-based and randomization-based statistics are again devel-
oped as in the homoskedastic case. Analogous to Table 6, we report the proportion of the
1,000,000 t-statistics computed with clustered standard errors that reject the null hypothesis
of 2 = 0 in favor of a two-tailed alternate at the indicated level of significance in columns



                                               15
(1), (3), and (5) of Table 6. Results in columns (2), (4), and (6) of Table 8 are computed
exactly as in Table 6. These results indicate that the power of randomization-based infer-
ence is smaller for more extreme quantiles, as expected. Additionally, increasing the number
of draws improves the statistical power for the randomization-based method, though the
increase in power is larger for the extreme quantiles. Overall, the power is close to that
of sampling-based methods, and randomization-based methods do not exhibit a substantial
over-rejection of the null hypothesis as do sampling based methods, especially for the case
of a small number of clusters.


3.3    Difference-in-Differences case

Building in complexity off the previous clustered case, we consider a classic difference-in-
differences (DiD) model with a small number of treated states. This is another model in
which OLS is known to perform particularly poorly. (Conley and Taber, 2011) As in the
clustered case, we consider the number of groups (or states) to be either 12 or 50, and the
number of treated states 1, 5, or 10. Constructing Xgi and gi as before, we compute


                                 Ygi = 1g + 2 Xgi + 3 Tgi + gi                              (14)


for 1g = 0, 2 = 0.5, and 3 = 0. We choose the state(s) to receive treatment at random,
and for each treated state, a total of U [10, 30] units out of 40 receive treatment. We set
Tgi = 1 for a treated state and Tgi = 0 for an untreated state. Then, we estimate parameters
using panel OLS with fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the appropriate level.
   Type I errors for the treatment effect 3 are presented in Table 9 for the case of 12 clusters.
Here the type I errors estimated using randomization-based methods are considerably more
accurate than those for the sampling-based methods. In the case of one treated unit, the type
I error is dramatically large for the sampling-based methods--our simulations (erroneously)



                                              16
found effects significant at a 0.5-percent level in over 45 percent of replications for the
case of 1 treated state (square brackets of odd-numbered columns). This is a well-known
weakness of OLS DiD estimators. (Conley and Taber, 2011) The absolute deviation of tr
from its theoretical critical value declines as the number of draws increases for each variation
of number of treated states. The performance of sampling-based inference dramatically
improves as the number of treated states increases. Yet, even after such an improvement,
this method still over-rejects the null hypothesis at  = 0.05, 0.025, and 0.005. Overall, the
null hypothesis of no effect is incorrectly rejected much more frequently for sampling-based
methods (ts < t,d.f. ) than for randomization-based methods (tr < t,d.f. ).
   To evaluate statistical power as in the clustered case, we employ equation (14) with
3 = 0.1 as the alternate hypothesis. The results appear in Table 10. For the case of one
treated unit, we have an abnormally high statistical power of sampling-based inference tests
that we attribute to the same weaknesses that led to over-rejection of the null hypothesis
when true. This is corroborated by the fact that the power declines when the number of
treated states go from 1 to 5 and then it increases for ten treated units. The power statistics
for randomization-based inference tests follow the same pattern of Table 8. The power is
increasing in the number of draws, and is smaller for the more extreme quantiles. Consistent
with our previous results, power for the heavy-tailed distribution is greater than for the light-
tailed distribution. New to the DiD case is that as the number of treated units increases,
the power of randomized methods increases monotonically.
   The results for the Type I error for the case of panel difference-in-differences with 50
clusters are in Table 11. We observe similar patterns to that of Table 9 ­ in particular,
over-rejection of the null hypothesis in general for sampling-based methods, which becomes
dramatic when the number of treated states is small. Relative to Table 9, a larger number of
clusters improves the performance of the randomization-based inference marginally for the
case of one treated unit while the performance for five and ten treated units is similar to that



                                               17
observed in Table 9. The evaluation of these tests' statistical power when G = 50 is reported
in Table 12. We can see that the same patterns of Table 10 appear here too. As expected,
sampling-based inference performs very poorly in the case of few treated states, and the
randomization-based inference provided robust results even in the case of one treated state.
The analysis now turns to the case of unbalanced panels in the next subsection.


3.4       Unbalanced Panels

Finally, we consider our clustered and panel difference-in-differences specifications using
unbalanced panels. For the case of 12 clustered units, we weight observations per group
in proportion to the population of Canadian provinces as reported by the 2016 Census.
We assign the least populous group (Northwest Territories) five observations, and weight
in proportion up through the largest (Ontario) receiving 3,360 observations for a grand
total of 8,750 observations. Similarly, for the 50 clustered unit case, we weight according
to the population of U.S. States as given by the 2010 Census. We again assign the least
populous group (Wyoming) five observations. The number of observations increases through
the largest state (California), which receives 372 observations for a grand total of 3,057
observations.4 An important implication of the larger sample size used in the unbalanced
variations is that the standard errors of parameter estimates are substantially smaller than
those observed when using the smaller balanced data set for both the clustered and DiD
cases.5 In order to make power analysis statistics more comparable between balanced panel
and unbalanced cases, we reduce the magnitude of the treatment effect for the unbalanced
cases to maintain parity between the standard error of parameter estimates and the treatment
effect.
   4
     For the DiD specifications where treated states must have both treated and untreated observations,
observations less than 5 encounter issues of micronumerosity.
   5
     Even if the number of observations were equal in both the balanced and unbalanced cases, N G =
    Ng , the standard errors of the estimated parameters need not have a similar magnitude because of the
g G
heteroscedasticity across cluster groups.



                                                   18
   Table 13 reports type I error statistics for the unbalanced cluster case for the light-tailed
distribution in columns (1) through (6) and for the heavy-tailed distribution in columns (7)
through (12). Relative to the balanced panel results presented in Table 7, the over-rejection of
the null hypothesis by sampling-based methods becomes more pronounced using unbalanced
panels. This is expected since Conley and Taber (2011) also note this increased over-rejection
of the null in unbalanced panels. The type I error statistics for the randomization-based
method show a pattern similar to that presented in Table 7.
   In Panels A and B of Table 14, we can see the power analysis for the light-tailed and
heavy-tailed distributions respectively. The alternative hypothesis for the 12-cluster case
is 0.004 and for the 50-cluster case is 0.017. The results in Table 14 resemble those of the
clustered case in Table 8. As before, we observe a higher power in the case of the heavy-tailed
distribution, and the power falls for the more extreme quantiles. A larger number of draws
leads to a modest increase in power. The sampling-based inference is expected to perform
well when the number of clusters is 50, though in this case its power is slightly inferior to
that of the randomization-based method.
   Moving to the difference-in-difference specifications, Table 15 shows the results of the
Type I error for the case with 12 unbalanced clusters. Columns (1) through (6) are for
the light-tailed distribution and columns (7) through (12) for the heavy tailed distribution.
The patterns that emerge from this table are comparable to those observed with balanced
panels in Table 9, albeit a few features merit further discussion. Sampling-based methods
exhibit an even greater over-rejection of the null hypothesis for all cases. The results for the
randomization-based methods indicate that the accuracy of tr improves substantially as the
number of draws increases relative to those in Table 9. In summary, for randomization-based
inference, the accuracy of type I errors is largely unaffected by the additional complication
of an unbalanced panel, though the accuracy of type I errors using sampling-based methods
further deteriorates.



                                              19
   Regarding the power analysis of these iterations, the alternative hypothesis is a coefficient
value of 0.011 for the 12-cluster case. The power analysis figures in Table 16 show a similar
picture to that of Table 14. The power is higher for the heavy-tailed distribution (Panel B)
relative to that of the light-tailed distribution (Panel A). The power is smaller for the more
extreme quantiles. And the (small) improvement in power obtained by increasing the number
of draws is declining in the number of treated states and in the more extreme quantiles.
   Table 17 depicts the results of the Type I error for the case of DiD with 50 unbalanced
clusters. The sampling-based method shows greater over-rejection of the null relative to the
levels of Table 11 in practically all cases. The results for the randomization-based methods
exhibit a comparable performance to that of the balanced clusters in Table 11. And the tr
figures in Table 17 are similar and slightly closer to the theoretical critical value relative to
the figures in Table 15 for the unbalanced 12-cluster case. In particular, the accuracy of type
I errors also modestly improves as the number of draws increases from 200 to 5,000.
   Table 18 shows the results of the power analysis of the 50 clustered unit unbalanced
panel case. The alternative hypothesis for the 50-cluster case is a coefficient value of 0.1.
We can see that the power of sampling-based inference improves relative to that of the
balanced cluster case reported in Table 12. This is not unexpected given the increase in
type I error observed in Table 17. For the randomization-based methods, the results for the
light-tailed distribution indicate a lower power for the case of one treated stated relative
to those reported in Table 16. And this decline is larger for  = 0.01. Nonetheless, the
power is at least 80 percent larger for five and ten treated states. In contrast, the power for
the heavy-tailed distribution (Panel B) is always larger by at least fifty percent than that
reported in Table 16. As in Tables 12 and 16, the power increases with the number of treated
states and the number of draws. Note that the largest gains in power due to the increase in
the number of draws take place in the case of one treated state. Overall, both methods are
adversely affected by unbalanced panels, but the adverse effect is much more pronounced in



                                               20
the sampling-based methods.


3.5    Summary of Monte Carlo Results

We have conducted a series of Monte Carlo simulations to compare the precision and power of
sampling- and randomization-based methods both in the simple case where theoretical results
were tractable and for cases more frequently encountered by applied microeconomists that
are not mathematically tractable. Theoretical calculations indicate that for homoskedastic
data, the variance of a 1-percent critical value should be roughly equivalent if the number
of randomized draws, d, is 7 times as large as the sample size, n. We compare the variance
of a sampling-based 0.005 t-statistic in a sample of 40 observations with the variance of its
randomization-based analog, the first sample order statistic from 200 draws, which is the
minimum number of draws to implement a two-sided test at a 0.01 level of significance. For
all distributions considered, we find the variance of randomization-based critical values to
be comparable and all slightly smaller. These results are consistent with our suggested rule
for homoskedastic data sets that d  7n.
   For the more complex slope estimated using fixed effects with clustered standard errors,
we find randomization-based inference to outperform sampling-based inference with as few
as 200 draws and to perform even better as d is increased. The improvement in performance
is particularly dramatic when the number of clustered groups is small, where OLS with clus-
tered standard errors is known to perform poorly. For this type of inference, we recommend
d  7G, but no fewer than 200 draws.
   We also examine the properties of inference of the estimated treatment effect in a panel
difference-in-differences framework. In cases with one treated group, where OLS with clus-
tered standard errors is known to greatly overreport Type I error, randomization-based
inference performs very well by comparison with as few as 200 draws, further improving
with additional draws. We are confident of comparable accuracy when d  7G. By com-


                                             21
parison, OLS with clustered standard errors found a treated effect at a 0.005 level of sig-
nificance in around 50% of repetitions when by construction none existed. In these models,
randomization-based methods did exhibit reasonable statistical power.
    Finally, we consider both clustered and DiD specifications with unbalanced panels. The
contrast between the performance of OLS with clustered standard errors and randomization-
based methods grew. Most important, our simulations show that randomization-based in-
ference is robust to the cases in which sampling-based inference performs poorly, namely
unbalanced cluster size, small number of clusters, and few treated units. This highlights the
importance and usefulness of randomization-based inference.



4     An Application

To illustrate the use of randomization-based methods in a published study with available
data, we reconsider results from Karlan (2005). This paper links the results of two lab
experiments made with participants of a Peruvian microcredit program to the observed
savings and loan repayment behavior of the same participants. This paper has a well-designed
lab experiment that is in line with the best practice recommendations by Athey and Imbens
(2017). Its data is publicly available, and it has an easy to understand counterfactual
that can be computed in a straightforward manner. The data is clustered on 41 groups.
Using 400 draws, we expect to find largely similar results on the basis of our Monte Carlo
analysis. In sum, it is a comprehensive paper and a straightforward example of how to apply
randomization-based methods.
    We will focus on the estimates involving the two lab experiments' results that are reported
in Karlan's (2005) Table 3. The first experiment is the Trust Game (Barr, 2003). Participants
of this game are randomly paired. They are designated different roles (either A or B). There
is no communication among players. Type A players receive three coins. They then decide
to pass 0, 1, 2, or 3 coins to their assigned type B player. The administrator matches the

                                              22
amount passed by player A, so player B effectively receives two times the amount passed by
player A. Next, player B chooses to return to player A any number of the received coins.
The subgame perfect equilibrium of this finite game is to have B returning zero coins and A
passing zero coins.
   The counterfactual generated for this game is based upon random draws from a discrete
uniform distribution. It consists of randomly generating the amount of coins passed by player
A for columns 1, 3, and 4 of Karlan's (2005) Table 3. The counterfactual for the number
of coins returned by player B--columns 2 and 5--is also a random draw from a discrete
uniform distribution where the largest number of coins that can be returned is two times
the actual number of coins passed by player A. The randomized based inference are reported
in our Table 19 and it is conducted with 400 draws, which is the nearest 200 multiple of
seven times the number of clusters (41 in Karlan's paper). This table reports the original
significance levels indicated by  as well the randomization-based p-values in brackets and
significance levels indicated by +.
   Contrasting the original and the randomization-generated p-values in columns 1 through
5, we can see that the two methods agree on significance levels for eight estimated coeffi-
cients. Of those that change, thirteen estimated coefficients are deemed less significant by
the randomization methods, and only five more significant.
   The second experiment is the Public Goods Game in which the participants are the
same as in the Trust Game. They were divided into groups, and each subject received one
coin. The players secretly decide whether or not to return the coin to the administrator.
If the administrator gets at least 80 percent of the coins back, then all players will receive
two coins. The equilibrium of this game is that players contribute zero coins towards the
public good, and no public good is provided. The counterfactual is generated by an equal
probability random draw between zero and one coin to be passed to the administrator. These
estimates are reported in columns 6 and 7. For the Public Goods Game, the two methods



                                             23
agree on significance levels for only one estimated coefficient and disagree for eight. Of those,
randomization methods find more significant results in six cases, and less in two.
      This increase in the p-value of an estimated coefficient as the number of draws increase
is a phenomenon that may happen in the implementation of this method and merits further
discussion. To explain why this can happen, let's focus on the figures reported in Table 1,
which presents the expected value and standard deviation of relevant order statistics drawn
from a standard normal random variable. These figures imply that as the number of draws is
increased, two potentially offsetting effects occur. First, the bias (positive in absolute value)
is reduced. Secondly, the standard deviation of the order statistic is reduced. The first effect
will unambiguously decrease the randomized p-value, or increase the level of significance.
The second effect has the potential to either increase or decrease the level of significance.
Consider an estimated coefficient which is close to the 0.005 critical value. As a consequence
of the theoretical dispersion of the 0.005 critical value being reduced by a greater number
of draws, results formerly significant at the 0.005 level could now be no longer significant at
that level, or results could become more significant.6
      To evaluate the effect of more draws for the example based on Karlan (2005), we repeat
Table 19 with 5,000 counterfactual draws. Results are presented in Table A.2. We find
broadly similar patterns of agreement, greater, and less precision as in 400 draws. Lest these
findings depend upon a single iteration, we repeat this exercise 5,000 times for the coefficient
contained in the first row of Table 19, Column 7. The distributions of the order statistics
for the 400- and the 5000-draw cases are shown in Figure A.8.
      This application which applies the randomization-based method to Karlan (2005) is use-
ful to illustrate that increasing the number of randomized counterfactual draws does not
mechanically reduce the coefficients' p-values and increase the significance level of results.
As a further example, in Table A.3 we repeat Karlan's Table 3 (our Table 19) for an unusual
  6
      See Table A.1 for the descriptive statistics of the order statistics for a t38 distribution.




                                                         24
random number seed in which the coefficient from the first row and Column 7 is designated
significant at the 1-percent level. From the distribution shown in Figure A.8, we know this
to be a very unusual outcome when using 400 draws that did not once occur in repetitions
using 5,000 draws. Increasing the number of counterfactual draws in practice can either
increase or decrease the indicated level of significance. Regardless of the outcome, increased
precision remains desirable.



5     Conclusion

We compare the statistical properties of critical values computed using conventional sampling-
based methods with those computed by randomization-based methods. Where possible,
we compute the number of counterfactual draws that are necessary to obtain critical val-
ues with roughly the same precision as those obtained using conventional methods. Using
Monte Carlo methods, we compute empirical distributions of both critical t values and their
randomization-based equivalents. We compute type I error and statistical power under a
variety of distributions and statistical models, including the ubiquitous panel difference-in-
differences. Under a wide variety of variations, we find that inference based on randomized
methods compares favorably with inference based on conventional OLS with clustered stan-
dard errors with as few as 200 randomized draws. The differences in performance are par-
ticularly dramatic for more complex models, such as the treatment effect in an unbalanced
panel DiD with 12 clustered groups, one of which is treated.
    For practitioners wishing to implement randomized inference, we find that the variance
or precision of randomization-based methods is roughly comparable to that of conventional
inference-based methods when d  7n but not less than 200 for cases with homoskedastic
data. For heteroskedastic data with G cluster groups, we suggest d  7G but not less than
200. Since the variance of confidence intervals obtained by randomization-based methods is
inversely proportional to the number of randomized draws, d, greater precision can in general

                                             25
be obtained by increasing the number of draws. Our proposed number of draws should not
be interpreted as the appropriate number of draws to be used by empirical researchers, but
as a minimum level to achieve precision comparable to conventional statistical methods.




                                           26
References

Athey, S., and G. W. Imbens (2017): "The Econometrics of Randomized Experiments,"
  in Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, vol. 1, pp. 73­140. Elsevier.

Barr, A. (2003): "Trust and expected trustworthiness: experimental evidence from zim-
  babwean villages*," The Economic Journal, 113(489), 614­630.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2008): "Bootstrap-Based Im-
  provements for Inference with Clustered Errors," The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  90(3), 414­427.

Cameron, A. C., and D. L. Miller (2015): "A practitioner's guide to cluster-robust
  inference," Journal of Human Resources, 50(2), 317­372.

Carrell, S. E., M. Hoekstra, and J. E. West (2018): "The Impact of College Di-
  versity on Behavior Toward Minorities," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  Forthcoming.

Carrell, S. E., B. I. Sacerdote, and J. E. West (2013): "From natural variation
  to optimal policy? The importance of endogenous peer group formation," Econometrica,
  81(3), 855­882.

Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2009): "Salience and taxation: Theory and
  evidence," American Economic Review, 99(4), 1145­77.

Conley, T. G., and C. R. Taber (2011): "Inference with "difference in differences"
  with a small number of policy changes," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1),
  113­125.

Harrell, F. E., and C. Davis (1982): "A new distribution-free quantile estimator,"
  Biometrika, 69(3), 635­640.

                                           27
Karlan, D. S. (2005): "Using Experimental Economics to Measure Social Capital and
  Predict Financial Decisions," American Economic Review, 95(5), 1688­1699.

Kofoed, M. S., and E. McGovney (2017): "The effect of same-gender and same-race
  role models on occupation choice: Evidence from randomly assigned mentors at West
  Point," Journal of Human Resources, pp. 0416­7838r1.

Lim, J., and J. Meer (2017): "The impact of teacher-student gender matches: Random
  assignment evidence from South Korea," Journal of Human Resources, pp. 1215­7585R1.

Petzold, M. (2000): "A note on the first moment of extreme order statistics from the
  normal distribution," in rapport nr.: Seminar Papers, no. 2000.

Ramberg, J. S., E. J. Dudewicz, P. R. Tadikamalla, and E. F. Mykytka (1979):
  "A Probability Distribution and its Uses in Fitting Data," Technometrics, 21(2), 201­214.

Ruppert, D., and D. S. Matteson (2015): Statistics and Data Analysis for Financial
  Engineering: with R examples. Springer New York, New York, NY, 2nd 2015 edn.




                                            28
                          Figure 1: Distributions of Estimated Parameter and 0.01 Critical Value
            8         6
  Probability Density
           42
            0




                          -4                -2                 0                   2               4
                                                      Standard Deviations

                                                     f (2 )           f (t0.01 · s2 )

Notes: For illustrative purposes, assume 2  N (0, 1) with a null hypothesis of 2  0,
illustrated by the center vertical line. The 0.01 critical value is -2.33 illustrated by the
vertical line on the left. Given the hypothesized distribution of 2 , the estimated 0.01 one-
sided confidence interval bound t0.01,df · s2 has a standard deviation of 0.0565.




                                                              29
                                           Figure 2: Sampling-Based t0.005 vs Standardized Sample 0.5 Quantile: Symmetric Distributions




            6
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6




            5
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5




                 4
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4




           3
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




       Frequency
                                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                    Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Frequency




            2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2




            1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1




            0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                     -5    -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5    -4             -3              -2               -1            0                  -5    -4              -3              -2              -1             0                  -5    -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                 Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                  Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                          0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                          0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                           0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                           0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                          (sd = .45)                                    (sd = .44)                              (sd = .29)                                    (sd = .44)                               (sd = .17)                                     (sd = .44)                               (sd = .08)                                     (sd = .44)




           (a) Normal-like, d = 200                                                             (b) Normal-like, d = 400                                                            (c) Normal-like, d = 1000                                                               (d) Normal-like, d = 5000




            6
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6




            5
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5




                 4
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4




           3
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




       Frequency
                                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                    Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Frequency




            2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2




            1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1




            0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                     -5    -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5    -4             -3              -2               -1            0                  -5    -4              -3              -2              -1             0                  -5    -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                 Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                  Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                          0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                          0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                           0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                           0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                          (sd = .42)                                    (sd = .37)                              (sd = .27)                                    (sd = .37)                               (sd = .16)                                     (sd = .37)                               (sd = .07)                                     (sd = .37)




         (e) Light-Tailed, d = 200                                                              (f) Light-Tailed, d = 400                                                           (g) Light-Tailed, d = 1000                                                              (h) Light-Tailed, d = 5000




            6
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6




            5
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5




30
                 4
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4




           3
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




       Frequency
                                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                    Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Frequency




            2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2




            1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1




            0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                     -5    -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5    -4             -3              -2               -1            0                  -5    -4              -3              -2              -1             0                  -5    -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                 Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                  Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                          0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                          0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                           0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                           0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                          (sd = .49)                                    (sd = .5)                               (sd = .31)                                    (sd = .5)                                (sd = .18)                                     (sd = .5)                                (sd = .08)                                     (sd = .5)




       (i) Medium-Tailed, d = 200                                                            (j) Medium-Tailed, d = 400                                                            (k) Medium-Tailed, d = 1000                                                             (l) Medium-Tailed, d = 5000




            6
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6




            5
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5




                 4
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4




           3
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




       Frequency
                                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                    Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Frequency




            2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2




            1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1




            0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                     -5    -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5    -4             -3              -2               -1            0                  -5    -4              -3              -2              -1             0                  -5    -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                 Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                  Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                          0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                          0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                           0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                           0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                          (sd = .5600000000000001)                      (sd = .61)                              (sd = .35)                                    (sd = .61)                               (sd = .21)                                     (sd = .61)                               (sd = .09)                                     (sd = .61)




       (m) Heavy-Tailed, d = 200                                                             (n) Heavy-Tailed, d = 400                                                             (o) Heavy-Tailed, d = 1000                                                              (p) Heavy-Tailed, d = 5000
     Notes: The 0.005 lower one-sided confidence interval bound, illustrated by the vertical line, is t0.005,38 under the asymptotic
     normality of 2 . Dashed line represents the distribution of 1,000,000 iterations of t0.005,38 · s2 . Solid line represents the
     distribution of the 0.005 order statistic from the indicated number of draws of 2
                                                           Figure 3: Sampling-Based t0.005 and t0.995 vs Standardized Sample 0.5 and 99.5 Quantile




          6
                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6




          5
                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5




               4
                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4




         3
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3




     Frequency
                                                                                                 Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                          Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Frequency




          2
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2




          1
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1




          0
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                   -5       -4                -3              -2               -1            0                 -5       -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                 -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                     Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                     Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                           0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                      Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                           (sd = .67)                                       (sd = .66)                                 (sd = .4)                                     (sd = .66)                                 (sd = .23)                                     (sd = .66)                                 (sd = .1)                                      (sd = .66)




                        (a) Left Tail, d = 200                                                                      (b) Left Tail, d = 400                                                                   (c) Left Tail, d = 1000                                                                   (d) Left Tail, d = 5000




          6
                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6




          5
                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5




31
               4
                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4




         3
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3




     Frequency
                                                                                                 Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                          Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Frequency




          2
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2




          1
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1




          0
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                   0             2                     4                  6                  8                 0                  2                          4                        6                 0         1               2               3               4             5                 0         1               2               3               4             5
                                     Distribution of 0.995 Critical Value                                                     Distribution of 0.995 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.995 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.995 Critical Value

                           0.995 Quantile of 200 Draws                      Sampling-Based                             0.995 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.995 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.995 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                           (sd = .58)                                       (sd = .66)                                 (sd = .37)                                    (sd = .66)                                 (sd = .21)                                     (sd = .66)                                 (sd = .09)                                     (sd = .66)




                        (e) Right Tail, d = 200                                                                     (f) Right Tail, d = 400                                                              (g) Right Tail, d = 1000                                                                  (h) Right Tail, d = 5000
     Notes: In the first row, the vertical line represents the 0.005 lower one-sided confidence interval bound, t0.005,38 . In the
     second row, the vertical line represents the 0.995 upper one-sided confidence interval, t0.995,38 . Dashed line represents the
     distribution of 1,000,000 iterations of either t0.005,38 · s2 or t0.995,38 · s2 . Solid line represents the distribution of the 0.005 or
     0.995 order statistic from the indicated number of draws of 2
               Table 1: Distribution of Standard Normal Order Statistics


                           = 0.005            = 0.025            = 0.05
                        Order   mean       Order   mean       Order   mean
               Draws    Stat    (sd)       Stat    (sd)       Stat    (sd)

               200        1     -2.7460      5     -1.9978     10     -1.6658
                                (0.4009)           (0.1940)           (0.1512)
               400        2     -2.6576     10     -1.9787     20     -1.6553
                                (0.2641)           (0.1354)           (0.1063)
               600        3     -2.6295     15     -1.9724     30     -1.6518
                                (0.2101)           (0.1100)           (0.0866)
               800        4     -2.6157     20     -1.9693     40     -1.6501
                                (0.1796)           (0.0951)           (0.0749)
               1,000      5     -2.6076     25     -1.9674     50     -1.6490
                                (0.1593)           (0.0849)           (0.0670)
               2,000     10     -2.5915     50     -1.9637     100    -1.6469
                                (0.1109)           (0.0599)           (0.0473)
               3,000     15     -2.5862     75     -1.9624     150    -1.6462
                                (0.0900)           (0.0489)           (0.0386)
               4,000     20     -2.5836     100    -1.9618     200    -1.6459
                                (0.0778)           (0.0423)           (0.0334)
               5,000     25     -2.5821     125    -1.9615     250    -1.6457
                                (0.0694)           (0.0378)           (0.0299)
               10,000    50     -2.5789     250    -1.9607     500    -1.6453
                                (0.0489)           (0.0267)           (0.0211)


               -1 (·)           -2.5758            -1.9600            -1.6449


Notes: Expected value and standard deviation of the indicated order statistic computed
using Wolfram Mathematica. The final row contains the inverse of the standard normal
CDF.




                                            32
          Table 2: Minimum Number of Randomized Draws to Equate Variance


                                 = 0.005     = 0.025  = 0.05
                       Sample
                       Size       Draws         Draws    Draws
                       n            d             d        d

                       20          139             72      64
                       30          210            109       97
                       40          282            146      130
                       50          354            183      163
                       75          533            276      246
                       100         712            369      328
                       250        1,788           927      823
                       500        3,581         1,855    1,649
                       1,000      7,168          3,713    3,299
                       5,000      35,857        18,574   16,503
                       10,000     71,720        37,150   33,008

Notes: Each cell presents the minimum number of draws to equate the variance of
randomization-based quantile with the variance of the sampling-based estimated critical
value at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels of significance




                                           33
                                 Table 3: Summary Statistics


                                           (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
     VARIABLES           a        b         N      mean        sd     skewness   kurtosis

     p                                    100,000   0.500    0.289    0.00134     1.800




34
     Normal-Like      0.1349    0.1349    100,000 0.000192   0.198     0.0154     3.000
     Heavy Tail       -0.1359   -0.1359   100,000 -0.000836  0.320     -0.162     8.624
     Medium Tail      0.0251    0.0953    100,000   0.0627  0.0981     0.923      4.283
     Light Tail          1         1      100,000 6.59e-08   0.577    0.00134     1.800
     Exponential-Like    0      0.0004    100,000 0.000401 0.000402     2.046     9.415
         Table 4: Type I Error, Homoskedastic, Symmetric Distributions, N = 40


                                (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                                 ts          tr         ts           tr       ts           tr
     Distribution     Draws     (sd)       (sd)        (sd)         (sd)     (sd)         (sd)
     Panel A: Left Tail        t38,0.05 = -1.686      t38,0.025 = -2.0244   t38,0.005 = -2.7116
     Normal-Like        200   -1.6589 -1.6625         -1.9919 -2.0129       -2.6681 -2.8383
                              (0.2725)   (0.1562)     (0.3272)   (0.2083)   (0.4383)   (0.4587)
                      400                -1.6508                 -1.9905               -2.7313
                                         (0.1095)                (0.1451)              (0.2963)
                      1000               -1.6441                 -1.9776               -2.6736
                                         (0.069)                 (0.0907)              (0.177)
                     5,000                -1.64                  -1.9702               -2.6444
                                         (0.0308)                (0.0402)              (0.0776)
                              [0.0517]    [0.05]       [0.026]    [0.025]   [0.0053]    [0.005]
     Light-Tailed     200     -1.6663    -1.6644      -2.0008    -2.0039     -2.68     -2.7919
                              (0.2319)   (0.1536)     (0.2784)   (0.2001)   (0.373)    (0.4298)
                      400                -1.6533                 -1.9833               -2.6953
                                         (0.1083)                (0.139)               (0.2806)
                      1000               -1.6468                 -1.9716               -2.641
                                         (0.0681)                (0.0872)              (0.1673)
                     5,000               -1.643                  -1.9653               -2.6138
                                         (0.0303)                (0.0393)              (0.0724)
                              [0.0521]    [0.05]      [0.0263]    [0.025]   [0.0053]    [0.005]
     Medium-Tailed    200     -1.6543    -1.661       -1.9863    -2.0191    -2.6606    -2.8896
                              (0.3088)    (0.16)      (0.3708)   (0.213)    (0.4966)   (0.4982)
                      400                -1.649                  -1.9967               -2.7715
                                         (0.1125)                (0.1476)              (0.3171)
                      1000               -1.6415                 -1.9835               -2.7079
                                         (0.0705)                (0.0919)              (0.1866)
                     5,000               -1.6374                 -1.9767               -2.6757
                                         (0.0311)                (0.0406)              (0.0799)
                              [0.0508]    [0.05]      [0.0256]    [0.025]   [0.0052]    [0.005]
     Heavy-Tailed     200     -1.6348    -1.6562      -1.9629    -2.0282    -2.6293    -2.9827
                              (0.3804)   (0.1646)     (0.4568)   (0.2235)   (0.6118)   (0.5655)
                      400                -1.6432                 -2.0039               -2.8523
                                         (0.1159)                (0.1549)              (0.3595)
                      1000               -1.6353                  -1.99                -2.7796
                                         (0.0728)                (0.0965)              (0.2135)
                     5,000               -1.6313                 -1.9831               -2.745
                                         (0.0324)                (0.0427)              (0.0923)
                              [0.0496]    [0.05]      [0.0249]    [0.025]    [0.005]    [0.005]

Notes: ts represents the mean of 1,000,000 replications. With d randomized draws, tr rep-
resents the d order statistic of standardized coefficient estimates. Square brackets report
Type I Error.

                                                 35
Table 5: Type I Error, Homoskedastic, Exponential-Like (Asymmetric) Distribution, N = 40


                             (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
     Draws                   ts          tr              ts          tr        ts          tr
     Panel A: Left Tail     t38,0.05 = -1.686         t38,0.025 = -2.0244   t38,0.005 = -2.7116
     200                   -1.6326 -1.6534            -1.9604 -2.0419       -2.6258 -3.0987
                            (0.41)    (0.1704)        (0.4924)   (0.2366)   (0.6595)   (0.676)
     400                              -1.6398                    -2.0166               -2.9307
                                      (0.1196)                   (0.1643)              (0.409)
     1000                             -1.6314                    -2.0012               -2.8442
                                      (0.0753)                   (0.1027)              (0.2364)
     5,000                            -1.6268                    -1.9928               -2.8002
                                      (0.0331)                   (0.0462)              (0.1003)
                           [0.0501]    [0.05]          [0.025]    [0.025]    [0.005]    [0.005]
     Panel B: Right Tail    t38,0.950 = 1.686         t38,0.975 = 2.0244    t38,0.995 = 2.7116
     200                   1.6326      1.6317         1.9604      2.0417    2.6258      3.0401
                            (0.41)    (0.0783)        (0.4924)   (0.2156)   (0.6595)   (0.5838)
     400                              1.6317                     2.0173                2.9005
                                      (0.0602)                   (0.1485)              (0.3697)
     1000                             1.6319                     2.0025                2.8205
                                      (0.0461)                   (0.0927)              (0.2149)
     5,000                            1.6318                     1.9954                2.7843
                                      (0.029)                    (0.0412)              (0.0924)
                           [0.9498]   [0.950]         [0.9749]    [0.975]   [0.9949]    [0.995]

Notes: ts represents the mean of 1,000,000 replications. With d randomized draws, tr rep-
resents the d order statistic of standardized coefficient estimates. Square brackets report
Type I Error.




                                                 36
                     Table 6: Power Table, Homoskedastic, N = 40


                           (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)     (5)          (6)
                                  = 0.10                  = 0.05               = 0.01
                         sampling randomized sampling randomized      sampling randomized
Distribution     Draws    p-value   p-value   p-value   p-value        p-value   p-value
Normal-Like       200      .9124     .9214     .8503     .8551          .6563     .5893
                  400                .9237               .8629                    .6295
                 1,000               .9256               .8668                    .6533
                 5,000               .9256               .8689                    .6679
Light-Tailed      200      .2742      .276     .1771     .1758          .0592     .0531
                  400                .2782               .1784                     .056
                 1,000               .2798               .1793                    .0576
                 5,000               .2798               .1803                    .0583
Medium-Tailed     200      .9998        1      .9995       1             .997     .9971
                  400                   1                  1                       .999
                 1,000                  1                .9999                    .9993
                 5,000                  1                  1                      .9994
Heavy-Tailed      200      .6244     .6001     .5031     .4443          .2735     .1544
                  400                .6073               .4553                    .1675
                 1,000               .6108               .4606                    .1772
                 5,000               .6108               .4625                     .183
Exponential-Like  200        1          1        1         1               1         1
                  400                   1                  1                         1
                 1,000                  1                  1                         1
                 5,000                  1                  1                         1

Notes: Odd numbered columns report the proportion of ts computed under the alternate
hypothesis where ts < t/2 or t1-/2 > ts . Even numbered columns report the proportion of
2 computed under the alternate hypothesis where 2 < 2(d) or 2(d-d+1)




                                              37
                                                              Table 7: Type I Error, Clustered, N = 40


                           (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)             (6)        (7)         (8)          (9)       (10)        (11)           (12)
                                                Light-Tailed Distribution                                                 Heavy-Tailed Distribution
                                  = 0.05                   = 0.025                  = 0.005                 = 0.05                    = 0.025                 = 0.005
                            ts             tr        ts            tr         ts           tr         ts             tr         ts           tr         ts           tr
     Clusters   Draws      (sd)        (sd)         (sd)          (sd)       (sd)         (sd)       (sd)        (sd)          (sd)         (sd)       (sd)         (sd)
     12                  t467,0.05 = -1.6481      t467,0.025 = -1.9651     t467,0.005 = -2.5864    t467,0.05 = -1.6481       t467,0.025 = -1.9651    t467,0.005 = -2.5864

                 200     -1.5558     -1.6656       -1.855       -1.9979    -2.4416      -2.7458    -1.547      -1.6583       -1.8446      -1.9931    -2.4279      -2.7488
                         (0.4404)     (0.133)     (0.5251)      (0.1815)   (0.6912)     (0.3886)   (0.4752)    (0.1353)      (0.5665)     (0.182)    (0.7457)     (0.399)
                 400                 -1.6549                     -1.978                 -2.6597                -1.6476                    -1.974                  -2.6608
                                     (0.0932)                   (0.1265)                (0.2558)               (0.0952)                   (0.1266)                (0.2624)
                1,0000               -1.6487                    -1.9669                 -2.6118                -1.6413                    -1.9631                 -2.609
                                     (0.0585)                   (0.0792)                (0.1551)               (0.0602)                   (0.0797)                (0.157)
                5,000                -1.6454                    -1.9606                 -2.5863                -1.6377                    -1.9566                 -2.5842
                                     (0.0258)                   (0.0348)                (0.0686)               (0.0267)                   (0.0357)                (0.0667)




38
                          [0.085]     [0.05]       [0.0547]      [0.025]   [0.0223]      [0.005]   [0.0678]     [0.05]       [0.0423]      [0.025]   [0.0166]      [0.005]

     50                  t1949,0.05 = -1.6456 t1949,0.025 = -1.9612 t1949,0.005 = -2.5784 t1949,0.05 = -1.6456 t1949,0.025 = -1.9612 t1949,0.005 = -2.5784

                 200     -1.6545      -1.666      -1.9718       -1.9988    -2.5923      -2.7493    -1.6504      -1.661       -1.9668      -1.9929    -2.5858      -2.7453
                         (0.2135)    (0.1339)     (0.2545)      (0.1812)   (0.3345)     (0.3936)   (0.2383)    (0.1333)      (0.284)      (0.1804)   (0.3733)     (0.3981)
                 400                 -1.6553                    -1.9799                 -2.6621                -1.6502                    -1.9729                 -2.6554
                                     (0.0939)                   (0.1264)                (0.2593)               (0.0935)                   (0.126)                 (0.2614)
                1,0000               -1.6484                    -1.9681                 -2.6129                -1.6443                    -1.9618                 -2.6063
                                     (0.0588)                    (0.079)                (0.1557)                (0.059)                   (0.079)                 (0.1584)
                5,000                 -1.645                    -1.9623                 -2.5877                -1.6411                    -1.9555                 -2.5809
                                     (0.0263)                   (0.0355)                (0.0688)               (0.0264)                   (0.035)                 (0.0696)
                         [0.0613]     [0.05]       [0.0327]      [0.025]   [0.0083]      [0.005]   [0.0505]     [0.05]       [0.0262]     [0.025]    [0.0061]      [0.005]



     Notes: ts represents the mean of 1,000,000 replications. With d randomized draws, tr represents the d order statistic of
     standardized coefficient estimates. Square brackets report Type I Error.
                        Table 8: Power Table - Clustered, N = 40


                      (1)           (2)     (3)           (4)       (5)           (6)
                              = 0.10                = 0.05                  = 0.01
                    sampling randomized sampling randomized sampling          randomized
 Clusters Draws p-value          p-value p-value   p-value   p-value            p-value
 Panel A: Light-Tailed Distribution

 12         200      .2475       .2113      .173         .1293     .0826         .0383
            400                  .2129                   .1305                   .0394
           1,000                 .2131                   .1315                   .0406
           5,000                 .2131                   .1317                   .0412
 50         200      .5133       .5362     .3912         .4094     .1942         .1795
            400                   .541                   .4152                   .1919
           1,000                 .5436                   .4191                   .1996
           5,000                 .5436                   .4213                   .2057
 Panel B: Heavy-Tailed Distribution

 12         200      .5039         .4141   .3996         .2899     .2344         .1017
            400                    .4173                 .2951                   .1079
           1,000                   .4203                 .2977                   .1127
           5,000                   .4203                 .2996                   .1149
 50         200      .9291         .9296   .8758         .8704     .7097         .6405
            400                    .9319                 .8768                   .6755
           1,000                   .9336                 .8802                   .6954
           5,000                   .9336                  .882                   .7069

Notes: Odd numbered columns report the proportion of ts computed under the alternate
hypothesis where ts < t/2 or t1-/2 > ts . Even numbered columns report the proportion of
2 computed under the alternate hypothesis where 2 < 2(d) or 2(d-d+1)




                                           39
                                               Table 9: Type I Error, Diff-in-Diff, G = 12, N = 40


                        (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)          (9)       (10)        (11)      (12)
                                           Light-Tailed Distribution                                             Heavy-Tailed Distribution
                      t456,0.05 = -1.6482     t456,0.025 = -1.9652 t456,0.005 = -2.5867      t456,0.05 = -1.6482    t456,0.025 = -1.9652 t456,0.005 = -2.5867
     Treated             ts         tr           ts         tr           ts          tr         ts         tr           ts         tr         ts         tr
     States  Draws      (sd)       (sd)         (sd)       (sd)         (sd)        (sd)       (sd)       (sd)         (sd)       (sd)       (sd)       (sd)
     1
              200     -0.0632    -1.6637      -0.0754    -1.9951    -0.0992       -2.7472    -0.063     -1.6615     -0.0751     -2.015     -0.0988     -2.89
                      (0.0585)   (0.132)      (0.0697)   (0.1772)   (0.0918)      (0.3919)   (0.059)    (0.1396)     (0.0704)   (0.1979)   (0.0926)   (0.5167)
               400               -1.6548                 -1.978                   -2.6601               -1.649                  -1.9922               -2.7745
                                 (0.0922)                (0.1236)                 (0.2576)              (0.098)                 (0.1382)              (0.3364)
              1,000              -1.6485                 -1.9662                  -2.6082               -1.6417                 -1.9794               -2.707
                                 (0.0562)                 (0.076)                 (0.155)               (0.0609)                (0.0872)              (0.2118)
              5,000              -1.6456                 -1.9612                  -2.5827               -1.6382                 -1.9728               -2.6716
                                 (0.0206)                 (0.029)                 (0.0645)              (0.0261)                (0.0406)              (0.1207)
                      [0.4751]    [0.05]      [0.4713]    [0.025]      [0.4621]    [0.005]    [0.472]    [0.05]      [0.4677]    [0.025]   [0.4595]    [0.005]
     5
               200    -1.4482    -1.6681      -1.7267    -1.998     -2.2727       -2.7484    -1.4389    -1.667      -1.7157     -2.0056    -2.2581    -2.7857




40
                      (0.589)    (0.1319)     (0.7023)   (0.1771)   (0.9243)      (0.3871)   (0.6069)   (0.1355)     (0.7236)   (0.1842)   (0.9524)   (0.4219)
               400               -1.6567                 -1.9789                  -2.6605               -1.6558                 -1.9845               -2.6911
                                 (0.0929)                (0.1226)                 (0.2589)              (0.0926)                (0.1271)              (0.2742)
              1,000              -1.6497                 -1.9673                  -2.609                -1.648                  -1.9728               -2.6349
                                 (0.0567)                (0.0763)                 (0.1548)              (0.0567)                (0.0786)              (0.1644)
              5,000              -1.6458                 -1.9615                  -2.582                -1.6442                 -1.9656               -2.6061
                                 (0.0203)                (0.0287)                 (0.0637)              (0.0216)                (0.0312)              (0.0692)
                      [0.0934]    [0.05]      [0.0631]    [0.025]      [0.027]     [0.005]   [0.0992]    [0.05]      [0.0666]    [0.025]   [0.0309]    [0.005]
     10
               200    -1.6034    -1.6652      -1.9118    -1.9973    -2.5163       -2.7388    -1.5935    -1.6634       -1.9      -2.0009    -2.5007    -2.769
                      (0.4327)   (0.1329)     (0.5159)   (0.1798)      (0.679)    (0.3901)   (0.4533)   (0.1319)     (0.5404)   (0.1815)   (0.7113)   (0.4064)
               400               -1.6563                 -1.9786                  -2.658                -1.6542                 -1.9811               -2.6743
                                 (0.0923)                (0.1254)                 (0.2571)              (0.0925)                (0.1251)              (0.2658)
              1,000              -1.6504                 -1.9682                  -2.6084               -1.6493                 -1.9702               -2.6236
                                 (0.0563)                (0.0754)                 (0.1531)              (0.057)                 (0.077)               (0.1585)
              5,000              -1.6457                 -1.9611                  -2.5804               -1.6455                 -1.964                -2.5947
                                 (0.0204)                 (0.029)                 (0.0621)              (0.0208)                (0.0299)              (0.064)
                      [0.0663]    [0.05]      [0.0396]    [0.025]      [0.0129]    [0.005]   [0.0663]    [0.05]      [0.0366]    [0.025]   [0.0119]   [0.005]


     Notes: ts represents the mean of 1,000,000 replications. With d randomized draws, tr represents the d order statistic of
     standardized coefficient estimates. Square brackets report Type I Error.
                    Table 10: Power Table, Diff-in-Diff, G = 12, N = 40


                                  = 0.10                      = 0.05                   = 0.01
 Treated                sampling randomized      sampling       randomized   sampling    randomized
 States         Draws p-value       p-value       p-value         p-value     p-value      p-value
 Panel A: Light-Tailed Distribution

 1              200      .9555         .1635         .9472         .0931      .9303         .0246
                400                    .1634                       .0952                    .0257
               1,000                   .1665                       .0959                    .0283
               5,000                   .1673                       .0949                    .0276
 5              200      .4139         .3023         .328          .2013      .2017         .0693
                400                    .3031                       .2069                    .0711
               1,000                   .3035                       .2058                    .0755
               5,000                   .3062                       .2058                    .0765
 10             200      .5013         .4618         .3928         .3395      .2178         .1404
                400                    .4667                       .3439                    .1503
               1,000                   .4699                       .3493                    .1543
               5,000                   .4718                       .3508                    .1566
 Panel B: Heavy-Tailed Distribution

 1               200     .9716         .2979         .9655         .1961      .9533         .0625
                 400                   .2991                       .1981                    .0664
                1,000                   .302                       .1999                    .0684
                5,000                  .3016                       .2003                    .0701
 5               200     .6979         .6295         .6085         .4937       .445         .2408
                 400                   .6318                        .504                     .259
                1,000                  .6347                       .5093                    .2696
                5,000                  .6368                       .5129                    .2762
 10              200     .8613         .8645         .7863         .7802      .6032         .5188
                 400                   .8702                       .7867                    .5504
                1,000                  .8718                       .7911                    .5699
                5,000                  .8722                       .7909                    .5772

 Observations           1,000,000     100,000   1,000,000         100,000    1,000,000     100,000

Notes: Odd numbered columns report the proportion of ts computed under the alternate
hypothesis where ts < t/2 or t1-/2 > ts . Even numbered columns report the proportion of
2 computed under the alternate hypothesis where 2 < 2(d) or 2(d-d+1)




                                                41
                                                 Table 11: Type I Error, Diff-in-Diff, G = 50, N = 40


                         (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)           (9)       (10)         (11)     (12)
                                             Light-Tailed Distribution                                               Heavy-Tailed Distribution
     Treated           t1900,0.05 = -1.6457 t1900,0.025 = -1.9612 t1900,0.005 = -2.5784 t1900,0.05 = -1.6457 t1900,0.025 = -1.9612 t1900,0.005 = -2.5784
     States    Draws      ts         tr           ts          tr           ts          tr         ts         tr            ts         tr          ts        tr
     1
                200    -0.0315    -1.6648      -0.0375     -1.9965    -0.0494       -2.7474    -0.0316    -1.6626       -0.0377    -2.0153    -0.0496    -2.8396
                       (0.0267)   (0.1329)     (0.0318)    (0.1788)   (0.0418)      (0.3996)   (0.0269)   (0.1409)      (0.0321)   (0.2022)   (0.0422)   (0.4873)
                400               -1.6537                  -1.9781                  -2.6622               -1.6506                  -1.9926               -2.7422
                                  (0.0912)                 (0.1238)                 (0.2609)              (0.1004)                 (0.1446)              (0.3267)
               1,000              -1.6485                  -1.9662                  -2.6065               -1.6443                  -1.9806               -2.6819
                                  (0.0563)                 (0.0761)                 (0.1544)              (0.0659)                 (0.099)               (0.2158)
               5,000              -1.6453                  -1.9607                  -2.5809               -1.641                   -1.9732               -2.6513
                                  (0.0207)                 (0.0298)                 (0.0649)              (0.0354)                 (0.0621)              (0.1445)
                       [0.4845]    [0.05]       [0.482]     [0.025]      [0.4778]    [0.005]   [0.4915]    [0.05]       [0.4886]    [0.025]   [0.4836]    [0.005]
     5
                200    -1.4024    -1.6671      -1.6713     -1.9982    -2.1973       -2.7459    -1.3997    -1.666        -1.6681    -2.0036    -2.193     -2.7715
                       (0.5579)   (0.1329)     (0.6648)    (0.1798)   (0.8741)      (0.391)    (0.5657)   (0.1353)      (0.6742)   (0.1839)   (0.8864)   (0.4081)




42
                400               -1.6554                  -1.9786                  -2.658                -1.6551                  -1.9848               -2.6763
                                  (0.0919)                 (0.1248)                 (0.2578)              (0.094)                  (0.1291)              (0.2659)
               1,000              -1.6491                  -1.9674                  -2.6082               -1.6486                  -1.9716               -2.6226
                                  (0.0564)                 (0.0758)                 (0.1549)              (0.0585)                 (0.0805)              (0.161)
               5,000              -1.6461                  -1.9616                  -2.5812               -1.6451                  -1.9648               -2.5977
                                  (0.0205)                 (0.0286)                 (0.0622)              (0.0221)                 (0.0323)              (0.0696)
                       [0.1056]    [0.05]       [0.0739]    [0.025]      [0.0366]    [0.005]   [0.0993]    [0.05]       [0.0691]    [0.025]   [0.0349]    [0.005]
     10
                200    -1.5494    -1.6672      -1.8465     -2.0004    -2.4276       -2.7465    -1.5438    -1.6663       -1.8398    -2.0005    -2.4188    -2.759
                       (0.4186)   (0.134)      (0.4988)    (0.1801)   (0.6558)      (0.3975)   (0.4248)   (0.1335)      (0.5063)   (0.1812)   (0.6656)   (0.3987)
                400               -1.6565                  -1.9812                  -2.6592               -1.6566                  -1.9814               -2.6695
                                  (0.0928)                 (0.1246)                 (0.2619)              (0.0921)                 (0.1246)              (0.2632)
               1,000              -1.6498                  -1.9686                  -2.6057                -1.65                   -1.9686               -2.6155
                                  (0.0564)                 (0.0759)                 (0.1536)              (0.0574)                 (0.0772)              (0.1582)
               5,000              -1.6455                  -1.9614                  -2.5808               -1.6457                  -1.963                -2.5895
                                  (0.0207)                 (0.0292)                 (0.0622)              (0.0213)                 (0.0304)              (0.0655)
                        [0.071]    [0.05]       [0.0429]    [0.025]      [0.017]     [0.005]   [0.0689]    [0.05]       [0.0411]    [0.025]   [0.0146]    [0.005]


     Notes: ts represents the mean of 1,000,000 replications. With d randomized draws, tr represents the d order statistic of
     standardized coefficient estimates. Square brackets report Type I Error.
                    Table 12: Power Table, Diff-in-Diff, G = 50, N = 40


                                  = 0.10                      = 0.05                   = 0.01
 Treated                sampling randomized      sampling       randomized   sampling    randomized
 States         Draws p-value       p-value       p-value         p-value     p-value      p-value
 Panel A: Light-Tailed Distribution

 1              200      .9775         .1454         .9729         .0792      .9651         .0191
                400                    .1498                       .0821                    .0199
               1,000                   .1509                        .084                     .021
               5,000                   .1496                        .086                    .0214
 5              200      .4027         .2904         .3179         .1962      .1964         .0649
                400                    .2935                       .1959                    .0703
               1,000                   .2954                       .1972                    .0732
               5,000                   .2974                       .2004                    .0731
 10             200      .4843         .4468         .3795         .3262      .2186         .1251
                400                    .4533                       .3274                     .139
               1,000                   .4578                       .3323                    .1447
               5,000                   .4612                       .3335                    .1463
 Panel B: Heavy-Tailed Distribution

 1               200     .9846         .2589         .9824         .1651      .9772         .0516
                 400                   .2609                       .1691                    .0527
                1,000                  .2612                       .1702                    .0557
                5,000                  .2621                        .172                     .058
 5               200     .6835         .6164         .5981         .4881       .438         .2374
                 400                   .6195                       .4949                    .2559
                1,000                  .6209                       .4988                    .2669
                5,000                   .623                       .4999                    .2715
 10              200     .8529           .86         .7784         .7731       .602         .5071
                 400                    .862                       .7804                    .5397
                1,000                  .8641                       .7824                    .5583
                5,000                  .8652                       .7862                    .5699

 Observations           1,000,000     100,000   1,000,000         100,000    1,000,000     100,000

Notes: Odd numbered columns report the proportion of ts computed under the alternate
hypothesis where ts < t/2 or t1-/2 > ts . Even numbered columns report the proportion of
2 computed under the alternate hypothesis where 2 < 2(d) or 2(d-d+1)




                                                43
                                                       Table 13: Type I Error, Clustered, Unbalanced


                        (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)            (6)        (7)         (8)          (9)       (10)        (11)           (12)
                                             Light-Tailed Distribution                                                Heavy-Tailed Distribution
                               = 0.05                   = 0.025                 = 0.005                 = 0.05                    = 0.025                 = 0.005
                         ts             tr        ts           tr         ts           tr         ts             tr         ts           tr         ts           tr
     Clusters Draws     (sd)        (sd)         (sd)         (sd)       (sd)         (sd)       (sd)        (sd)          (sd)         (sd)       (sd)         (sd)
     12               t8737,0.05 = -1.645      t8737,0.025 = -1.9602 t8737,0.005 = -2.5764     t8737,0.05 = -1.645      t8737,0.025 = -1.9602 t8737,0.005 = -2.5764

               200    -1.4111     -1.6677      -1.6815      -1.9989     -2.21       -2.743     -1.4305     -1.6654       -1.7046      -1.9976    -2.2404      -2.7551
                      (0.5536)    (0.1333)     (0.6597)     (0.1797)   (0.867)      (0.3885)   (0.5628)    (0.1341)      (0.6706)     (0.1806)   (0.8814)     (0.4074)
               400                 -1.657                   -1.9795                 -2.6559                -1.6548                    -1.9783                 -2.6629
                                  (0.0936)                  (0.1256)                (0.2596)               (0.0941)                   (0.1253)                (0.267)
              1,000               -1.6511                   -1.9682                 -2.6041                -1.6487                    -1.9672                  -2.61
                                  (0.0586)                  (0.0786)                (0.1561)               (0.0592)                   (0.0785)                (0.1601)
              5,000               -1.6476                   -1.9626                 -2.5789                -1.6453                    -1.961                  -2.5817
                                  (0.0261)                  (0.035)                 (0.0669)               (0.0264)                   (0.0351)                (0.0691)




44
                      [0.1916]     [0.05]       [0.1438]    [0.025]    [0.0816]      [0.005]   [0.0174]     [0.05]       [0.0113]      [0.025]   [0.0053]      [0.005]

     50               t3006,0.05 = -1.6454 t3006,0.025 = -1.9608 t3006,0.005 = -2.5775 t3006,0.05 = -1.6454 t3006,0.025 = -1.9608 t3006,0.005 = -2.5775

               200    -1.6248     -1.6648      -1.9363      -1.9997    -2.5453      -2.7593    -1.6335     -1.6653       -1.9466      -1.999     -2.5589      -2.7469
                      (0.2762)    (0.1343)     (0.3292)     (0.1813)   (0.4327)     (0.3997)   (0.2957)    (0.1339)      (0.3523)     (0.1816)   (0.4632)     (0.3974)
               400                -1.6537                   -1.9801                  -2.67                 -1.6544                    -1.9788                 -2.6567
                                  (0.0942)                  (0.1262)                (0.2648)               (0.0938)                   (0.1262)                (0.2557)
              1,000               -1.6472                   -1.9687                 -2.6184                -1.6482                    -1.9677                 -2.6066
                                  (0.0595)                  (0.0794)                (0.1584)               (0.0589)                   (0.079)                 (0.1531)
              5,000               -1.6438                   -1.9634                 -2.5917                -1.6449                    -1.9618                 -2.5808
                                  (0.0267)                  (0.0349)                (0.0697)               (0.0261)                   (0.0352)                (0.0665)
                      [0.0772]     [0.05]       [0.0439]     [0.025]   [0.0129]      [0.005]   [0.0534]     [0.05]       [0.0292]      [0.025]   [0.008]       [0.005]



     Notes: ts represents the mean of 1,000,000 replications. With d randomized draws, tr represents the d order statistic of
     standardized coefficient estimates. Square brackets report Type I Error.
                     Table 14: Power Table - Clustered, Unbalanced


                              = 0.10                = 0.05                    = 0.01
                    sampling randomized sampling randomized sampling            randomized
 Clusters Draws p-value          p-value p-value   p-value   p-value              p-value
 Panel A: Light-Tailed Distribution

 12         200      .2314       .1899     .1677        .1129        .0902        .0299
            400                  .1922                  .1142                     .0311
           1,000                 .1928                   .115                     .0323
           5,000                 .1928                  .1152                     .0333
 50         200      .4161       .4557     .3059        .3308        .1453        .1345
            400                   .459                  .3348                     .1428
           1,000                  .462                   .338                     .1493
           5,000                  .462                  .3407                     .1521
 Panel B: Heavy-Tailed Distribution

 12         200      .7458        .3679    .6627        .2524        .5023        .0928
            400                   .3708                 .2569                     .0979
           1,000                  .3724                 .2592                     .1013
           5,000                  .3724                 .2605                     .1034
 50         200      .8684        .8568    .7902        .7666        .5886         .496
            400                   .8608                 .7749                     .5299
           1,000                  .8623                 .7794                     .5494
           5,000                  .8623                 .7817                     .5606


Notes: Odd numbered columns report the proportion of ts computed under the alternate
hypothesis where ts < t/2 or t1-/2 > ts . Even numbered columns report the proportion of
2 computed under the alternate hypothesis where 2 < 2(d) or 2(d-d+1)




                                          45
                                              Table 15: Type I Error, Diff-in-Diff, G = 12, Unbalanced


                         (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)           (9)       (10)          (11)       (12)
                                             Light-Tailed Distribution                                               Heavy-Tailed Distribution
     Treated           t8736,0.05 = -1.645     t8736,0.025 = -1.9602 t8736,0.005 = -2.5764     t8736,0.05 = -1.645     t8736,0.025 = -1.9602   t8736,0.005 = -2.5764
     States    Draws      ts         tr           ts          tr           ts          tr         ts         tr            ts         tr           ts          tr
     1
                200    -0.0063    -1.6703      -0.0075     -1.9977    -0.0099       -2.7211    -0.0063    -1.6611       -0.0076    -2.0141      -0.0099      -2.88
                       (0.0133)   (0.1291)     (0.0158)    (0.176)    (0.0208)      (0.3849)   (0.0131)   (0.1389)      (0.0156)   (0.2006)     (0.0205)    (0.6074)
                400               -1.6592                  -1.9766                  -2.6352               -1.6483                  -1.9893                  -2.7591
                                  (0.0914)                 (0.122)                  (0.2553)              (0.0983)                 (0.1385)                 (0.3938)
               1,000              -1.6532                  -1.9665                  -2.5901               -1.6409                  -1.9756                  -2.6929
                                  (0.0571)                 (0.0749)                 (0.1552)              (0.0619)                 (0.0871)                 (0.2619)
               5,000              -1.6501                  -1.9621                  -2.5656               -1.6378                  -1.9689                  -2.6606
                                  (0.0231)                 (0.0291)                 (0.0724)              (0.0293)                 (0.0408)                 (0.1828)
                       [0.4973]    [0.05]       [0.4964]    [0.025]      [0.4946]    [0.005]   [0.496]     [0.05]       [0.4951]    [0.025]      [0.4933]    [0.005]
     5
                200    -0.9583    -1.6662      -1.1419     -1.9978    -1.5009       -2.7476    -0.9602    -1.6635       -1.1442    -1.9923      -1.5039     -2.745
                       (0.6325)   (0.1338)     (0.7537)    (0.1801)   (0.9906)      (0.3866)   (0.648)    (0.1315)      (0.7722)   (0.1772)    (01.0149)    (0.3927)




46
                400               -1.6548                  -1.9795                   -2.66                -1.6537                  -1.9771                  -2.658
                                  (0.0914)                 (0.1237)                 (0.2576)              (0.0917)                 (0.1243)                 (0.259)
               1,000              -1.6494                  -1.9679                  -2.6084               -1.6485                  -1.9667                  -2.6071
                                  (0.0567)                 (0.0754)                 (0.1546)              (0.0573)                 (0.077)                  (0.1541)
               5,000              -1.6458                  -1.9611                  -2.5823               -1.6458                  -1.9612                  -2.5819
                                  (0.0204)                 (0.029)                  (0.0625)              (0.0208)                 (0.0295)                 (0.0641)
                       [0.1989]    [0.05]       [0.164]    [0.025]       [0.1159]    [0.005]   [0.1965]    [0.05]       [0.1597]    [0.025]      [0.1124]    [0.005]
     10
                200     -1.29     -1.6662      -1.5372     -1.9955    -2.0204       -2.746     -1.291     -1.6666       -1.5383    -1.9959      -2.0219     -2.7425
                       (0.5549)   (0.1322)     (0.6613)    (0.1787)   (0.8691)      (0.3952)   (0.5507)   (0.1315)      (0.6562)   (0.1784)     (0.8625)    (0.3956)
                400               -1.6565                  -1.978                   -2.6568               -1.6553                  -1.9782                  -2.6563
                                  (0.0922)                 (0.1239)                 (0.2577)              (0.0917)                 (0.1243)                 (0.2563)
               1,000              -1.6492                  -1.9666                  -2.6049               -1.6482                  -1.9666                  -2.6058
                                  (0.0566)                 (0.0758)                 (0.1529)              (0.0567)                 (0.0762)                 (0.1533)
               5,000              -1.6457                  -1.9614                  -2.5813               -1.6454                  -1.9613                  -2.582
                                  (0.0206)                 (0.0294)                 (0.0629)              (0.0207)                 (0.0295)                 (0.0629)
                       [0.1311]    [0.05]       [0.0994]    [0.025]      [0.0556]    [0.005]   [0.1206]    [0.05]       [0.0888]    [0.025]      [0.0469]    [0.005]


     Notes: ts represents the mean of 1,000,000 replications. With d randomized draws, tr represents the d order statistic of
     standardized coefficient estimates. Square brackets report Type I Error.
                   Table 16: Power Table, Diff-in-Diff, G = 12, Unbalanced


                               = 0.10                 = 0.05                   = 0.01
 Treated           sampling randomized      sampling    randomized   sampling    randomized
 States   Draws p-value          p-value     p-value      p-value     p-value      p-value
 Panel A: Light-Tailed Distribution

 1          200     .9927        .1765       .9918        .1299       .9882        .0922
            400                  .1788                    .1322                    .0927
           1,000                 .1792                    .1336                    .0935
           5,000                 .1807                    .1351                    .0957
 5          200     .4265        .2425       .3599        .1599        .261         .056
            400                  .2445                    .1632                    .0577
           1,000                 .2447                     .164                    .0598
           5,000                 .2468                    .1647                    .0612
 10         200     .3255        .3039       .2547        .1976       .1564          .07
            400                  .3039                    .2003                    .0742
           1,000                 .3056                    .2011                    .0752
           5,000                  .306                    .2031                    .0752
 Panel B: Heavy-Tailed Distribution

 1          200       .9927        .1988     .9913        .1434       .9877        .0928
            400                    .2008                  .1466                    .0943
           1,000                   .2029                  .1464                    .0955
           5,000                    .201                   .146                    .0964
 5          200       .4978        .4498     .4363        .3528       .3328        .1908
            400                    .4515                  .3581                    .2018
           1,000                   .4526                  .3617                    .2072
           5,000                   .4532                  .3642                    .2105
 10         200       .4719        .6327     .3879        .5078       .2655        .2548
            400                    .6354                  .5135                    .2743
           1,000                   .6358                  .5174                    .2852
           5,000                    .638                    .52                    .2924

Notes: Odd numbered columns report the proportion of ts computed under the alternate
hypothesis where ts < t/2 or t1-/2 > ts . Even numbered columns report the proportion of
2 computed under the alternate hypothesis where 2 < 2(d) or 2(d-d+1)




                                             47
                                              Table 17: Type I Error, Diff-in-Diff, G = 50, Unbalanced


                         (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)           (9)       (10)         (11)     (12)
                                             Light-Tailed Distribution                                               Heavy-Tailed Distribution
     Treated           t3005,0.05 = -1.6454 t3005,0.025 = -1.9608     t3005,0.005 = -2.5775    t3005,0.05 = -1.6454 t3005,0.025 = -1.9608 t3005,0.005 = -2.5775
     States    Draws      ts         tr           ts          tr            ts         tr         ts         tr            ts         tr          ts        tr
     1
                200    -0.0207    -1.6706      -0.0247     -1.998        -0.0324    -2.7161    -0.0211    -1.6559       -0.0251    -2.0168    -0.033     -2.9444
                       (0.0241)   (0.1316)     (0.0287)    (0.1747)      (0.0378)   (0.3776)   (0.0249)   (0.1419)      (0.0297)   (0.2087)   (0.039)    (0.6856)
                400               -1.6592                  -1.9778                  -2.6308               -1.6438                  -1.9922               -2.8021
                                  (0.0921)                 (0.1214)                 (0.2471)              (0.1012)                 (0.1437)              (0.4374)
               1,000              -1.6533                  -1.9668                  -2.5842               -1.6367                  -1.9791               -2.732
                                  (0.0574)                 (0.0752)                 (0.154)               (0.0675)                 (0.0967)              (0.2964)
               5,000              -1.6497                  -1.9611                  -2.5616               -1.6335                  -1.9733               -2.6971
                                  (0.0229)                  (0.03)                  (0.0723)              (0.0387)                 (0.0562)              (0.2132)
                        [0.485]    [0.05]       [0.4836]   [0.025]       [0.4802]    [0.005]   [0.4906]    [0.05]       [0.4886]    [0.025]   [0.4851]    [0.005]
     5
                200    -1.2022    -1.6664      -1.4327     -1.9974       -1.8833    -2.7455    -1.1918    -1.6648       -1.4203    -1.9995    -1.867     -2.759
                       (0.6502)   (0.1296)     (0.7749)    (0.1763)   (01.0186)     (0.3933)   (0.6524)   (0.1339)      (0.7774)   (0.1821)   (01.022)   (0.3958)




48
                400               -1.6562                  -1.9781                  -2.651                -1.6545                  -1.9786               -2.6678
                                  (0.0911)                 (0.124)                  (0.2569)              (0.0933)                 (0.126)               (0.2608)
               1,000              -1.6495                  -1.9668                  -2.6053               -1.6492                  -1.9685               -2.6165
                                  (0.0566)                 (0.0761)                 (0.1521)              (0.0581)                 (0.0779)              (0.1594)
               5,000              -1.6462                  -1.9613                  -2.5802               -1.6453                  -1.9624               -2.5897
                                  (0.0206)                 (0.029)                  (0.0624)              (0.0217)                 (0.0313)              (0.0667)
                       [0.1362]    [0.05]       [0.1055]   [0.025]       [0.0627]    [0.005]   [0.1398]    [0.05]       [0.1038]    [0.025]   [0.0599]    [0.005]
     10
                200    -1.4105    -1.6663      -1.6809     -1.9963       -2.2095    -2.7456    -1.4057    -1.6657       -1.6752    -1.9988    -2.202     -2.7532
                       (0.5349)   (0.1336)     (0.6374)    (0.1796)      (0.8379)   (0.3921)   (0.5406)   (0.134)       (0.6442)   (0.1792)   (0.8468)   (0.3926)
                400                -1.657                  -1.9777                  -2.6552               -1.6546                  -1.9803               -2.6639
                                  (0.0936)                 (0.1249)                 (0.2613)              (0.0927)                 (0.1248)              (0.2616)
               1,000              -1.6493                  -1.9663                  -2.605                -1.6489                  -1.9689               -2.6108
                                   (0.056)                 (0.0766)                 (0.156)               (0.0562)                 (0.0771)              (0.1556)
               5,000              -1.6456                  -1.9611                  -2.5822               -1.6453                  -1.962                -2.5848
                                  (0.0203)                 (0.029)                  (0.0625)              (0.0207)                 (0.0294)              (0.064)
                       [0.0946]    [0.05]       [0.0638]   [0.025]       [0.0272]    [0.005]   [0.0929]    [0.05]       [0.0606]    [0.025]   [0.0271]   [0.005]


     Notes: ts represents the mean of 1,000,000 replications. With d randomized draws, tr represents the d order statistic of
     standardized coefficient estimates. Square brackets report Type I Error.
                  Table 18: Power Table, Diff-in-Diff, G = 50, Unbalanced


                                  = 0.10                     = 0.05                   = 0.01
 Treated                sampling randomized     sampling       randomized   sampling    randomized
 States         Draws p-value       p-value      p-value         p-value     p-value      p-value
 Panel A: Light-Tailed Distribution

 1              200      .9839        .1847         .9805        .1167       .9742        .0373
                400                    .187                      .1161                    .0402
               1,000                  .1892                      .1186                    .0416
               5,000                  .1901                       .119                    .0408
 5              200      .5432        .4132         .4661        .3067       .3391        .1345
                400                   .4159                       .314                    .1455
               1,000                  .4155                      .3157                    .1542
               5,000                  .4179                      .3173                    .1548
 10             200      .6532        .6315         .5626        .5142        .396         .274
                400                    .636                      .5205                    .2922
               1,000                  .6357                       .524                    .3039
               5,000                  .6381                       .525                      .31
 Panel B: Heavy-Tailed Distribution

 1               200     .9878        .3114         .9857        .2205       .9819        .1011
                 400                  .3132                      .2242                    .1049
                1,000                 .3129                       .227                    .1084
                5,000                 .3144                      .2279                    .1105
 5               200     .8093        .7539          .746        .6578       .6268        .4289
                 400                  .7566                      .6646                    .4511
                1,000                 .7594                      .6661                    .4675
                5,000                 .7596                      .6687                    .4759
 10              200     .9385        .9449          .901        .9024       .7935        .7458
                 400                   .946                      .9069                    .7746
                1,000                  .946                      .9084                    .7873
                5,000                 .9458                      .9104                    .7937

 Observations            10,000       10,000        10,000       10,000      10,000       10,000

Notes: Odd numbered columns report the proportion of ts computed under the alternate
hypothesis where ts < t/2 or t1-/2 > ts . Even numbered columns report the proportion of
2 computed under the alternate hypothesis where 2 < 2(d) or 2(d-d+1)




                                               49
        Table 19: Randomized vs Sampling Inference using Karlan (2005) Table 3

                                                                                              Trust Game                                      Public Goods Game
        Independent variables:                                      Player characteristics              Partner Characteristics               Player characteristics
                                                                   Proportion    Proportion Proportion            Proportion              Binary = 1 if   Proportion of
                                                                     passed       returned    passed   Passed > 0  returned                 individual     group that
                                                                   (Player A)    (Player B) (Player A) (Player A) (Player B)               contributed     contributed
                                                                       (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)             (7)

        Attitudinal/behavioral measures
          Proportion passed in the Trust Game                                                                                               0.1159**         0.1938
                                                                                                                                             [0.973+ ]      [0.983++ ]
          Amount received from Player A                                           -0.0056
                                                                                   [0.935]
          Sum of 3 GSS Questions, relative to group                 -0.0103       0.0221        -0.0052        -0.0136       0.0049          0.0183
                                                                     [0.305]       [0.877]       [0.350]        [0.300]       [0.532]         [0.855]
          Sum of 3 GSS Questions, relative to society               -0.0006       0.0383*       -0.0206        -0.0237       0.0009          -0.0142
                                                                     [0.532]       [0.922]       [0.223]        [0.223]       [0.522]         [0.260]
          Sum of 6 GSS Questions for Entire Group                                                                                                           0.1210**
                                                                                                                                                            [1.000+++ ]
        Did not maximize available debt (savings > borrowing)      -0.0953***     0.0184        0.0928*         0.0383       0.0479          -0.0765         -0.0026
                                                                    [0.022++ ]     [0.657]      [0.970+ ]       [0.782]       [0.800]         [0.070]         [0.545]
        Connectedness to group
          Proportion of group of similar culture                     0.0989       -0.2120       0.2799*        0.4058*       0.1765          0.0914          0.0684
                                                                     [0.735]       [0.077]      [0.973+ ]      [0.985++ ]     [0.890]         [0.810]         [0.610]
          Distance to others in group                                0.1163      -0.1478**      -0.0344         0.0456      0.4130***       -0.1896*         0.0783
                                                                     [0.708]      [0.043+ ]      [0.380]        [0.630]     [1.000+++ ]     [0.003+++ ]       [0.710]
          Proportion of others who live within 10-minute walk       -0.0881       0.0588        -0.1149        -0.0102       0.1434          -0.0613
                                                                     [0.200]       [0.725]       [0.170]        [0.475]       [0.902]         [0.177]
          Instances borrowing from group member in side-contract    -0.0412*     0.0170**        0.003         0.0143*       -0.0074         0.0088*
                                                                     [0.080]      [0.953+ ]      [0.588]        [0.840]       [0.355]         [0.752]
          Number of other members able to name form memory           0.0006       -0.0016       -0.0016        -0.0075       -0.0034         0.0017
                                                                     [0.540]       [0.343]       [0.372]        [0.058]       [0.182]         [0.662]
        Connectedness to partner
          Partner in same lending/saving group                      -0.0443       0.0763
                                                                     [0.182]       [0.943]
          Both partners indigenous                                 0.2439***      0.0406
                                                                    [0.993++ ]     [0.660]
          Both players western                                       0.0522       -0.0121
                                                                     [0.767]       [0.398]
          Player Western; partner indigenous                         -0.055      0.1766***
                                                                     [0.305]      [0.973+ ]
          Player indigenous; partner Western                         0.1241       -0.0200
                                                                     [0.863]       [0.440]
          Partner lives within 10-minute walk                       0.0901**      0.0555
                                                                             +
                                                                    [0.960 ]       [0.912]
          Attends same small church as partner                      0.1993**      0.0450
                                                                             +
                                                                    [0.965 ]       [0.662]
          Knew partner and her name                                  0.0444       -0.0049
                                                                     [0.920]       [0.440]
          Attended/Invited partner to party                          0.0636       -0.0273
                                                                     [0.665]       [0.425]
          Absolute value of age difference                           0.0009       0.0004
                                                                     [0.667]       [0.608]
        Demographic information
          Completed high school                                     0.1221**      0.0521        0.0408          0.0802       0.0759          -0.0339
                                                                    [0.985++ ]     [0.875]       [0.777]        [0.892]      [0.968+ ]        [0.068]
          ln(age)                                                   0.1055**      0.0782        -0.0404        -0.0262       0.0549*         -0.0615
                                                                    [0.985++ ]    [0.963+ ]      [0.200]        [0.340]       [0.910]        [0.043+ ]
          Indigenous                                                -0.0741       0.0292        0.0869*         0.0824       0.0912*         -0.0031
                                                                     [0.170]       [0.675]       [0.940]        [0.887]      [0.955+ ]        [0.438]
          Western                                                   -0.0017       0.0789        -0.0615        -0.0997*      -0.0193       -0.1204***
                                                                     [0.505]       [0.930]       [0.113]       [0.022++ ]     [0.275]       [0.000+++ ]
          Months since last attended church                          0.0003       -0.0056       0.0134          0.0142      0.0677**        -0.0454*
                                                                     [0.490]       [0.367]       [0.685]        [0.618]       [0.945]       [0.000+++ ]
          Does not attend church                                     0.0503       -0.0504      0.2437**         0.1069       0.0271          -0.0269
                                                                     [0.635]       [0.260]     [0.995+++ ]      [0.840]       [0.655]         [0.393]
          Attend largest church                                     -0.0782*      -0.0051      -0.0781*        -0.0333       -0.0296         0.0555
                                                                             +                          +
                                                                    [0.035 ]       [0.435]      [0.040 ]        [0.295]       [0.163]        [0.953+ ]


        Observations                                                  397           307           397            397              307          864              41



Notes: Significance levels based on sampling-based inference with clustered standard errors
indicated by *, **, and *** for 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Randomization-based
p-value using 400 draws appears in square brackets beneath. + : p < 0.05 or p > 0.95, ++ :
p < 0.025 or p > 0.975, and +++ : p < 0.005 or p > 0.995.

                                                                                  50
                              Figure A.1: Histograms of Sample Distributions
       1




                                                                .5
       .8




                                                                .4
       .6




                                                               .3
 Density




                                                          Density
       .4




                                                                .2
       .2




                                                                .1
       0




                                                                0
             -1   -.5            0         .5    1                        -1   -.5                  0                 .5    1
                              p-value                                                         Light-Tailed



                        (a) p-value                                             (b) Light-Tailed
       5




                                                                2
       4




                                                                1.5
       3
 Density




                                                          Density
                                                            1
       2




                                                                .5
       1
       0




                                                                0




             -1   -.5           0          .5    1                        -1   -.5                0                   .5    1
                           Medium-Tailed                                                     Heavy-Tailed



                  (c) Medium-Tailed                                            (d) Heavy-Tailed
                                                                2500
       2




                                                                2000
       1.5




                                                                   1500
 Density




                                                              Density
  1




                                                          1000
       .5




                                                                500
       0




                                                                0




             -1   -.5           0          .5    1                        0          .001                      .002        .003
                            Normal-Like                                                     Exponential-Like



                   (e) Normal-Like                                              (f) Exponential
Notes: Panels (a) and (b) contain only a histogram. Panels (c) ­ (f) contain a kernel density
estimate superimposed over the histogram.


                                                     51
                                   Figure A.2: Light-Tailed Distribution, Clustered, N = 40, Various Group Size and Draws, 0.005 Level




         6
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6




         5
                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5




               4
                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4




         3
                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3




     Frequency
                                                                                               Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                         Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Frequency




         2
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2




         1
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1




         0
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                   -5       -4             -3              -2                -1            0                 -5       -4             -3              -2                -1            0                 -5        -4             -3              -2               -1             0                 -5        -4             -3              -2               -1             0
                                  Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                       Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                       Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                        0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws             Sampling-Based                                    0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws             Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws            Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws            Sampling-Based
                        (sd = .39)                              (sd = .6900000000000001)                          (sd = .26)                              (sd = .6900000000000001)                           (sd = .16)                              (sd = .6900000000000001)                           (sd = .07)                              (sd = .6900000000000001)




                        (a) G = 12, d = 200                                                                       (b) G = 12, d = 400                                                                       (c) G = 12, d = 1, 000                                                                     (d) G = 12, d = 5, 000




          6
                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6




52
          5
                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5




               4
                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4




         3
                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3




     Frequency
                                                                                               Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                         Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Frequency




          2
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2




          1
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1




          0
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                   -5       -4              -3              -2               -1            0                 -5       -4              -3              -2               -1            0                 -5        -4              -3              -2              -1             0                 -5        -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                   Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                       Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                       Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                           0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                    Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                    Sampling-Based                              0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                              0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                           (sd = .39)                                     (sd = .33)                                 (sd = .26)                                     (sd = .33)                                  (sd = .16)                                     (sd = .33)                                  (sd = .07)                                     (sd = .33)




                        (e) G = 50, d = 200                                                                       (f) G = 50, d = 400                                                                       (g) G = 50, d = 1, 000                                                                     (h) G = 50, d = 5, 000
     Notes: The 0.005 lower one-sided confidence interval bound, illustrated by the vertical line, is t0.005,39g-1 under the
     asymptotic normality of 2 . Dashed line represents the distribution of 1,000,000 iterations of t0.005,39g-1 · s2 . Solid line
     represents the distribution of the 0.005 order statistic from various numbers of draws of 2 .
                                Figure A.3: Heavy-Tailed Distribution, Clustered, N = 40, Various Group Size and Draws, 0.005 Level




          6
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6




          5
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5




               4
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4




         3
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3




     Frequency
                                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Frequency




          2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2




          1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




          0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0

                   -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                 -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                 Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                          0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                            0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                          (sd = .4)                                     (sd = .75)                                (sd = .26)                                    (sd = .75)                                 (sd = .16)                                     (sd = .75)                                 (sd = .07)                                     (sd = .75)




                        (a) G = 12, d = 200                                                                     (b) G = 12, d = 400                                                                     (c) G = 12, d = 1, 000                                                                    (d) G = 12, d = 5, 000




          6
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6




53
          5
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5




               4
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4




         3
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3




     Frequency
                                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Frequency




          2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2




          1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




          0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                   -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                 -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                 Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                          0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                            0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                          (sd = .4)                                     (sd = .37)                                (sd = .26)                                    (sd = .37)                                 (sd = .16)                                     (sd = .37)                                 (sd = .07)                                     (sd = .37)




                        (e) G = 50, d = 200                                                                     (f) G = 50, d = 400                                                                     (g) G = 50, d = 1, 000                                                                    (h) G = 50, d = 5, 000
     Notes: The 0.005 lower one-sided confidence interval bound, illustrated by the vertical line, is t0.005,39g-1 under the
     asymptotic normality of 2 . Dashed line represents the distribution of 1,000,000 iterations of t0.005,39g-1 · s2 . Solid line
     represents the distribution of the 0.005 order statistic from various numbers of draws of 2 .
                                                         Figure A.4: Light-Tailed Distribution, DiD, G = 12, Various States Treated and Draws




          6
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6




          5
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5




           4
                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4




      3
                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




     Frequency
                                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Frequency




          2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2




          1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1




          0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                   -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                 Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                     Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                          0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                            0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                            0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                          (sd = .39)                                    (sd = .09)                                (sd = .26)                                    (sd = .09)                                 (sd = .16)                                     (sd = .09)                                (sd = .06)                                     (sd = .09)




                        (a) T S = 1, d = 200                                                                    (b) T S = 1, d = 400                                                                    (c) T S = 1, d = 1, 000                                                                  (d) T S = 1, d = 5, 000




          6
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6




          5
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5




               4
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4




         3
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3




     Frequency
                                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Frequency




          2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2




          1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1




          0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                   -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                 Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                     Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value




54
                          0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                            0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                            0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                          (sd = .39)                                    (sd = .92)                                (sd = .26)                                    (sd = .92)                                 (sd = .15)                                     (sd = .92)                                (sd = .06)                                     (sd = .92)




                        (e) T S = 5, d = 200                                                                    (f) T S = 5, d = 400                                                                    (g) T S = 5, d = 1, 000                                                                  (h) T S = 5, d = 5, 000




          6
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6




          5
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5




               4
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4




         3
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3




     Frequency
                                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Frequency




          2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2




          1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1




          0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                   -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                 -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                 Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                      Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                     Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                          0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                            0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                             0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                            0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                          (sd = .39)                                    (sd = .68)                                (sd = .26)                                    (sd = .68)                                 (sd = .15)                                     (sd = .68)                                (sd = .06)                                     (sd = .68)




                        (i) T S = 10, d = 200                                                                   (j) T S = 10, d = 400                                                                   (k) T S = 10, d = 1, 000                                                                 (l) T S = 10, d = 5, 000
     Notes: The 0.005 lower one-sided confidence interval bound, illustrated by the vertical line, is t0.005,466 under the asymptotic
     normality of  . Dashed line represents the distribution of 1,000,000 iterations of t0.005,1350 · s . Solid line represents the
     distribution of the 0.005 order statistic from the indicated number of draws of  , or 0.005,d . N = 40 for each state in all
     simulations.
                                                           Figure A.5: Heavy-Tailed Distribution, DiD, G = 12, Various States Treated and Draws




          6
                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6




          5
                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5




           4
                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4




      3
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3




     Frequency
                                                                                                Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frequency




          2
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2




          1
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1




          0
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                   -5        -4              -3              -2               -1            0                 -5        -4              -3              -2               -1            0                 -5         -4              -3              -2              -1             0                 -5         -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                       Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                        Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                        Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                            0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                    Sampling-Based                              0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                    Sampling-Based                               0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                               0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                            (sd = .52)                                     (sd = .09)                                  (sd = .34)                                     (sd = .09)                                   (sd = .21)                                     (sd = .09)                                   (sd = .12)                                     (sd = .09)




                        (a) T S = 1, d = 200                                                                       (b) T S = 1, d = 400                                                                       (c) T S = 1, d = 1, 000                                                                     (d) T S = 1, d = 5, 000




         6
                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6




         5
                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5




               4
                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4




         3
                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




     Frequency
                                                                                                Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frequency




         2
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2




         1
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




         0
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                   -5        -4             -3              -2                -1            0                 -5        -4             -3              -2                -1            0                 -5         -4             -3              -2               -1             0                 -5         -4             -3              -2               -1             0
                                   Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                       Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                        Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                        Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value




55
                         0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws             Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws             Sampling-Based                                      0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws            Sampling-Based                                      0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws            Sampling-Based
                         (sd = .42)                              (sd = .9500000000000001)                           (sd = .27)                              (sd = .9500000000000001)                            (sd = .16)                              (sd = .9500000000000001)                            (sd = .07)                              (sd = .9500000000000001)




                        (e) T S = 5, d = 200                                                                       (f) T S = 5, d = 400                                                                       (g) T S = 5, d = 1, 000                                                                     (h) T S = 5, d = 5, 000




          6
                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6




          5
                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5




               4
                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4




         3
                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




     Frequency
                                                                                                Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frequency




          2
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2




          1
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1




          0
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                   -5        -4              -3              -2               -1            0                 -5        -4              -3              -2               -1            0                 -5         -4              -3              -2              -1             0                 -5         -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                    Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                       Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                        Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                        Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                            0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                    Sampling-Based                              0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                    Sampling-Based                               0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                               0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                            (sd = .41)                                     (sd = .71)                                  (sd = .27)                                     (sd = .71)                                   (sd = .16)                                     (sd = .71)                                   (sd = .06)                                     (sd = .71)




                        (i) T S = 10, d = 200                                                                      (j) T S = 10, d = 400                                                                      (k) T S = 10, d = 1, 000                                                                    (l) T S = 10, d = 5, 000
     Notes: The 0.005 lower one-sided confidence interval bound, illustrated by the vertical line, is t0.005,466 under the asymptotic
     normality of  . Dashed line represents the distribution of 1,000,000 iterations of t0.005,1350 · s . Solid line represents the
     distribution of the 0.005 order statistic from the indicated number of draws of  , or 0.005,d . N = 40 for each state in all
     simulations.
                                                                 Figure A.6: Light-Tailed Distribution, DiD, G = 50, Various States Treated and Draws




               Frequency
                                                                                                               Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Frequency




     0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                                                                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                           -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                         Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                            Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                                  0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                    0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                                  (sd = .4)                                     (sd = .04)                                        (sd = .26)                                    (sd = .04)                                         (sd = .15)                                     (sd = .04)                                         (sd = .06)                                     (sd = .04)




                                (a) T S = 1, d = 200                                                                            (b) T S = 1, d = 400                                                                            (c) T S = 1, d = 1, 000                                                                           (d) T S = 1, d = 5, 000




              6
                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6




              5
                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5




               4
                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4




         3
                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3




     Frequency
                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frequency




              2
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2




              1
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1




              0
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                           -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                         Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                            Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value




56
                                  0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                    0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                                  (sd = .39)                                    (sd = .87)                                        (sd = .26)                                    (sd = .87)                                         (sd = .15)                                     (sd = .87)                                         (sd = .06)                                     (sd = .87)




                                (e) T S = 5, d = 200                                                                            (f) T S = 5, d = 400                                                                            (g) T S = 5, d = 1, 000                                                                           (h) T S = 5, d = 5, 000




              6
                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6




              5
                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5




               4
                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4




         3
                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3




     Frequency
                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frequency




              2
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2




              1
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1




              0
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                           -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                         Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                            Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                                  0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                    0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                                  (sd = .4)                                     (sd = .66)                                        (sd = .26)                                    (sd = .66)                                         (sd = .15)                                     (sd = .66)                                         (sd = .06)                                     (sd = .66)




                                (i) T S = 10, d = 200                                                                           (j) T S = 10, d = 400                                                                           (k) T S = 10, d = 1, 000                                                                          (l) T S = 10, d = 5, 000
     Notes: The 0.005 lower one-sided confidence interval bound, illustrated by the vertical line, is t0.005,1900 under the asymptotic
     normality of  . Dashed line represents the distribution of 1,000,000 iterations of t0.005,1948 · s . Solid line represents the
     distribution of the 0.005 order statistic from the indicated number of draws of  , or 0.005,d . N = 40 for each state in all
     simulations.
                                                                Figure A.7: Heavy-Tailed Distribution, DiD, G = 50, Various States Treated and Draws




               Frequency
                                                                                                               Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Frequency




     0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                                                                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                           -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                         Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                            Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                                  0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                    0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                                  (sd = .49)                                    (sd = .04)                                        (sd = .33)                                    (sd = .04)                                         (sd = .22)                                     (sd = .04)                                         (sd = .14)                                     (sd = .04)




                                (a) T S = 1, d = 200                                                                            (b) T S = 1, d = 400                                                                            (c) T S = 1, d = 1, 000                                                                           (d) T S = 1, d = 5, 000




              6
                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6




              5
                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5




               4
                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4




         3
                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




     Frequency
                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frequency




              2
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2




              1
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1




              0
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                           -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                         Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                            Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value




57
                                  0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                    0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                                  (sd = .41)                                    (sd = .89)                                        (sd = .27)                                    (sd = .89)                                         (sd = .16)                                     (sd = .89)                                         (sd = .07)                                     (sd = .89)




                                (e) T S = 5, d = 200                                                                            (f) T S = 5, d = 400                                                                            (g) T S = 5, d = 1, 000                                                                           (h) T S = 5, d = 5, 000




              6
                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6




              5
                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5




               4
                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4




         3
                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




     Frequency
                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frequency




              2
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2




              1
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1




              0
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                           -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5      -4             -3              -2               -1            0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0                         -5       -4              -3              -2              -1             0
                                         Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                            Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value                                                              Distribution of 0.005 Critical Value

                                  0.005 Quantile of 200 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                    0.005 Quantile of 400 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 1000 Draws                   Sampling-Based                                     0.005 Quantile of 5000 Draws                   Sampling-Based
                                  (sd = .4)                                     (sd = .67)                                        (sd = .26)                                    (sd = .67)                                         (sd = .16)                                     (sd = .67)                                         (sd = .07)                                     (sd = .67)




                                (i) T S = 10, d = 200                                                                           (j) T S = 10, d = 400                                                                           (k) T S = 10, d = 1, 000                                                                          (l) T S = 10, d = 5, 000
     Notes: The 0.005 lower one-sided confidence interval bound, illustrated by the vertical line, is t0.005,1900 under the asymptotic
     normality of  . Dashed line represents the distribution of 1,000,000 iterations of t0.005,1948 · s . Solid line represents the
     distribution of the 0.005 order statistic from the indicated number of draws of  , or 0.005,d . N = 40 for each state in all
     simulations.
         Figure A.8: Distribution of Estimates from Karlan (2005): 400 vs 5,000 Draws
      60  40
  Frequency
      20
      0




               .15            .2                 .25                  .3                .35
                                   Distribution of Order Statistics

                      0.995 Order, 400 Draws                  0.995 Order, 5,000 Draws


Notes: Distribution of estimated coefficient from line 1, column 7 using 400 and 5,000 random
counterfactual draws. The vertical line represents the estimated parameter using Karlan's
experimental subjects.




                                              58
                         Table A.1: Distribution of t38 Order Statistics


                              = 0.005            = 0.025            = 0.05
                           Order    mean      Order   mean       Order     mean
               Draws       Stat     (sd)      Stat    (sd)       Stat      (sd)

               200           1     -2.9194      5     -2.0072     10     -1.7091
                                   (0.4788)           (0.2120)           (0.1610)
               400           2     -2.8102     10     -2.0456     20     -1.6975
                                   (0.3087)           (0.1475)           (0.1130)
               600           3     -2.7760     15     -2.0385     30     -1.6936
                                   (0.2440)           (0.1198)           (0.0921)
               800           4     -2.7594     20     -2.0349     40     -1.6907
                                   (0.2079)           (0.1034)           (0.0796)
               1,000         5     -2.7496     25     -2.0328     50     -1.6905
                                   (0.1841)           (0.0924)           (0.0712)
               2,000        10     -2.7303     50     -2.0286     100    -1.6882
                                   (0.1277)           (0.0651)           (0.0503)
               3,000        15     -2.7240     75     -2.0272     150    -1.6875
                                   (0.1036)           (0.0531)           (0.0410)
               4,000        20     -2.7209     100    -2.0265     200    -1.6871
                                   (0.0894)           (0.0460)           (0.0355)
               5,000        25     -2.7190     125    -2.0261     250    -1.6869
                                   (0.0798)           (0.0411)           (0.0318)
               10,000       50     -2.7153     250    -2.0252     500    -1.6864
                                   (0.0562)           (0.0290)           (0.0225)


               t- 1
                38 (·)             -2.7116            -2.0244            -1.6860


Notes: Expected value and standard deviation of the indicated order statistic computed
using Wolfram Mathematica. The final row contains the inverse of the t38 CDF.




                                               59
        Table A.2: Randomized vs Sampling Inference using Karlan (2005) Table 3

                                                                                               Trust Game                                      Public Goods Game
        Independent variables:                                      Player characteristics               Partner Characteristics               Player characteristics
                                                                   Proportion    Proportion Proportion            Proportion               Binary = 1 if   Proportion of
                                                                     passed       returned    passed   Passed > 0  returned                  individual     group that
                                                                   (Player A)    (Player B) (Player A) (Player A) (Player B)                contributed     contributed
                                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)             (7)

        Attitudinal/behavioral measures
          Proportion passed in the Trust Game                                                                                                0.1159**         0.1938
                                                                                                                                             [0.975++ ]      [0.984++ ]
          Amount received from Player A                                           -0.0056
                                                                                   [0.944]
          Sum of 3 GSS Questions, relative to group                 -0.0103        0.0221       -0.0052         -0.0136       0.0049          0.0183
                                                                     [0.321]       [0.870]       [0.405]         [0.305]       [0.541]         [0.873]
          Sum of 3 GSS Questions, relative to society               -0.0006       0.0383*       -0.0206         -0.0237       0.0009          -0.0142
                                                                     [0.499]       [0.920]       [0.244]         [0.248]       [0.539]         [0.251]
          Sum of 6 GSS Questions for Entire Group                                                                                                            0.1210**
                                                                                                                                                             [1.000+++ ]
        Did not maximize available debt (savings > borrowing)      -0.0953***      0.0184       0.0928*          0.0383       0.0479          -0.0765         -0.0026
                                                                    [0.030+ ]      [0.652]       [0.962+ ]       [0.723]       [0.825]         [0.055]         [0.501]
        Connectedness to group
          Proportion of group of similar culture                     0.0989       -0.2120       0.2799*         0.4058*       0.1765          0.0914          0.0684
                                                                     [0.715]       [0.080]       [0.958+ ]      [0.984++ ]     [0.893]         [0.836]         [0.643]
          Distance to others in group                                0.1163      -0.1478**      -0.0344          0.0456      0.4130***       -0.1896*         0.0783
                                                                     [0.721]       [0.065]       [0.369]         [0.612]     [0.997+++ ]     [0.005+++ ]       [0.709]
          Proportion of others who live within 10-minute walk       -0.0881        0.0588       -0.1149         -0.0102       0.1434          -0.0613
                                                                     [0.244]       [0.720]       [0.160]         [0.457]       [0.895]         [0.157]
          Instances borrowing from group member in side-contract    -0.0412*     0.0170**         0.003         0.0143*       -0.0074         0.0088*
                                                                     [0.074]       [0.944]       [0.579]         [0.831]       [0.349]         [0.757]
          Number of other members able to name form memory           0.0006       -0.0016       -0.0016         -0.0075       -0.0034         0.0017
                                                                     [0.546]       [0.334]       [0.372]         [0.086]       [0.164]         [0.660]
        Connectedness to partner
          Partner in same lending/saving group                      -0.0443        0.0763
                                                                     [0.193]       [0.945]
          Both partners indigenous                                 0.2439***       0.0406
                                                                    [0.989++ ]     [0.679]
          Both players western                                       0.0522       -0.0121
                                                                     [0.782]       [0.425]
          Player Western; partner indigenous                         -0.055      0.1766***
                                                                     [0.278]      [0.987++ ]
          Player indigenous; partner Western                         0.1241       -0.0200
                                                                     [0.875]       [0.432]
          Partner lives within 10-minute walk                       0.0901**       0.0555
                                                                             +
                                                                    [0.961 ]       [0.899]
          Attends same small church as partner                      0.1993**       0.0450
                                                                             +
                                                                    [0.961 ]       [0.684]
          Knew partner and her name                                  0.0444       -0.0049
                                                                     [0.929]       [0.448]
          Attended/Invited partner to party                          0.0636       -0.0273
                                                                     [0.680]       [0.418]
          Absolute value of age difference                           0.0009        0.0004
                                                                     [0.677]       [0.589]
        Demographic information
          Completed high school                                     0.1221**       0.0521        0.0408          0.0802       0.0759          -0.0339
                                                                    [0.983++ ]     [0.875]       [0.764]         [0.898]      [0.967+ ]        [0.080]
          ln(age)                                                   0.1055**       0.0782       -0.0404         -0.0262       0.0549*         -0.0615
                                                                    [0.989++ ]    [0.979++ ]     [0.193]         [0.326]       [0.917]        [0.040+ ]
          Indigenous                                                -0.0741        0.0292       0.0869*          0.0824       0.0912*         -0.0031
                                                                     [0.180]       [0.664]       [0.931]         [0.890]      [0.964+ ]        [0.465]
          Western                                                   -0.0017        0.0789       -0.0615         -0.0997*      -0.0193       -0.1204***
                                                                     [0.491]       [0.913]       [0.101]         [0.038+ ]     [0.300]       [0.000+++ ]
          Months since last attended church                          0.0003       -0.0056        0.0134          0.0142      0.0677**        -0.0454*
                                                                     [0.503]       [0.389]       [0.734]         [0.666]       [0.926]       [0.000+++ ]
          Does not attend church                                     0.0503       -0.0504       0.2437**         0.1069       0.0271          -0.0269
                                                                     [0.673]       [0.270]      [0.994++ ]       [0.826]       [0.670]         [0.366]
          Attend largest church                                     -0.0782*      -0.0051       -0.0781*        -0.0333       -0.0296         0.0555
                                                                             +                           +
                                                                    [0.045 ]       [0.463]       [0.035 ]        [0.250]       [0.171]        [0.953+ ]


        Observations                                                  397           307            397             397             307          864              41



Notes: Significance levels based on sampling-based inference with clustered standard errors
indicated by *, **, and *** for 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Randomization-based
p-value using 5000 draws appears in square brackets beneath. + : p < 0.05 or p > 0.95, ++ :
p < 0.025 or p > 0.975, and +++ : p < 0.005 or p > 0.995.

                                                                                  60
       Table A.3: Randomized vs Sampling Inference using Karlan (2005) Table 3

                                                                                             Trust Game                                     Public Goods Game
        Independent variables:                                      Player characteristics             Partner Characteristics              Player characteristics
                                                                   Proportion   Proportion Proportion            Proportion             Binary = 1 if   Proportion of
                                                                     passed      returned    passed   Passed > 0  returned                individual     group that
                                                                   (Player A)   (Player B) (Player A) (Player A) (Player B)              contributed     contributed
                                                                      (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)

        Attitudinal/behavioral measures
          Proportion passed in the Trust Game                                                                                             0.1159**         0.1938
                                                                                                                                           [0.970]+       [0.995]+++
          Amount received from Player A                                           -0.0056
                                                                                  [0.938]
          Sum of 3 GSS Questions, relative to group                 -0.0103       0.0221       -0.0052        -0.0136       0.0049         0.0183
                                                                     [0.375]      [0.858]       [0.400]        [0.292]       [0.517]        [0.895]
          Sum of 3 GSS Questions, relative to society               -0.0006      0.0383*       -0.0206        -0.0237       0.0009         -0.0142
                                                                     [0.500]      [0.925]       [0.217]        [0.225]       [0.532]        [0.247]
          Sum of 6 GSS Questions for Entire Group                                                                                                         0.1210**
                                                                                                                                                          [0.998]+++
        Did not maximize available debt (savings > borrowing)      -0.0953***     0.0184      0.0928*          0.0383       0.0479         -0.0765         -0.0026
                                                                    [0.040]+      [0.647]      [0.963]+        [0.740]       [0.792]       [0.045]+         [0.477]
        Connectedness to group
          Proportion of group of similar culture                     0.0989       -0.2120     0.2799*         0.4058*       0.1765         0.0914          0.0684
                                                                     [0.725]      [0.092]      [0.958]+       [0.988]++      [0.890]        [0.855]         [0.637]
          Distance to others in group                                0.1163     -0.1478**      -0.0344         0.0456     0.4130***       -0.1896*         0.0783
                                                                     [0.725]      [0.070]       [0.388]        [0.650]     [0.998]+++     [0.000]+++        [0.750]
          Proportion of others who live within 10-minute walk       -0.0881       0.0588       -0.1149        -0.0102       0.1434         -0.0613
                                                                     [0.247]      [0.677]       [0.185]        [0.490]       [0.895]        [0.168]
          Instances borrowing from group member in side-contract    -0.0412*     0.0170**       0.003         0.0143*       -0.0074       0.0088*
                                                                     [0.060]      [0.938]       [0.563]        [0.815]       [0.357]        [0.715]
          Number of other members able to name from memory           0.0006       -0.0016      -0.0016        -0.0075       -0.0034        0.0017
                                                                     [0.568]      [0.345]       [0.378]        [0.085]       [0.163]        [0.672]
        Connectedness to partner
          Partner in same lending/saving group                      -0.0443       0.0763
                                                                     [0.158]      [0.965]+
          Both partners indigenous                                 0.2439***      0.0406
                                                                    [0.988]++     [0.665]
          Both players western                                       0.0522       -0.0121
                                                                     [0.805]      [0.438]
          Player Western; partner indigenous                         -0.055     0.1766***
                                                                     [0.285]     [0.983]++
          Player indigenous; partner Western                         0.1241       -0.0200
                                                                     [0.875]      [0.420]
          Partner lives within 10-minute walk                       0.0901**      0.0555
                                                                            +
                                                                    [0.950]       [0.895]
          Attends same small church as partner                      0.1993**      0.0450
                                                                            +
                                                                    [0.950]       [0.680]
          Knew partner and her name                                  0.0444       -0.0049
                                                                     [0.900]      [0.412]
          Attended/Invited partner to party                          0.0636       -0.0273
                                                                     [0.667]      [0.407]
          Absolute value of age difference                           0.0009       0.0004
                                                                     [0.695]      [0.615]
        Demographic information
          Completed high school                                     0.1221**      0.0521       0.0408          0.0802       0.0759         -0.0339
                                                                    [0.975]++     [0.897]       [0.782]        [0.877]     [0.978]++        [0.107]
          ln(age)                                                   0.1055**      0.0782       -0.0404        -0.0262       0.0549*        -0.0615
                                                                   [0.998]+++    [0.983]++      [0.177]        [0.305]       [0.917]       [0.045]+
          Indigenous                                                -0.0741       0.0292      0.0869*          0.0824       0.0912*        -0.0031
                                                                     [0.182]      [0.693]      [0.953]+        [0.905]      [0.970]+        [0.497]
          Western                                                   -0.0017       0.0789       -0.0615        -0.0997*      -0.0193      -0.1204***
                                                                     [0.470]      [0.897]       [0.092]        [0.040]+      [0.313]      [0.000]+++
          Months since last attended church                          0.0003       -0.0056      0.0134          0.0142      0.0677**       -0.0454*
                                                                     [0.507]      [0.445]       [0.725]        [0.647]       [0.910]      [0.000]+++
          Does not attend church                                     0.0503       -0.0504     0.2437**         0.1069       0.0271         -0.0269
                                                                     [0.667]      [0.285]     [0.995]+++       [0.853]       [0.677]        [0.417]
          Attend largest church                                     -0.0782*      -0.0051     -0.0781*        -0.0333       -0.0296        0.0555
                                                                            +                          +
                                                                    [0.043]       [0.495]      [0.043]         [0.268]       [0.185]       [0.960]+


        Observations                                                  397           307          397             397             307         864              41



Notes: Repetition of Table 19 using random seed which produces large number of obser-
vations in the left tail. Significance levels based on sampling-based inference with clus-
tered standard errors indicated by *, **, and *** for 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respec-
tively. Randomization-based p-value using 400 draws appears in square brackets beneath.
+
  : p < 0.05 or p > 0.95, ++ : p < 0.025 or p > 0.975, and +++ : p < 0.005 or p > 0.995.
                                               61
