What Do Employee Referral Programs Do? Measuring the Direct and Overall Effects of a
Management Practice
Guido Friebel, Matthias Heinz, Mitchell Hoffman, and Nick Zubanov
NBER Working Paper No. 25920
June 2019, Revised in August 2020
JEL No. D23,M51,M52

                                          ABSTRACT

Employee referral programs (ERPs) are randomly introduced in a grocery chain. Larger referral
bonuses increase referrals and decrease referral quality, though the increase in referrals from
having an ERP is modest. However, the overall effect of having an ERP is substantial, reducing
attrition by roughly 15% and decreasing firm labor costs by up to almost 3%. This occurs, partly,
because referrals stay longer than nonreferrals, but, mainly, because all workers stay longer in
treated than control stores, even among stores where no referrals are made. The most-supported
mechanism for these indirect effects is that workers value being involved in hiring.


Guido Friebel                                    Mitchell Hoffman
Goethe University Frankfurt                      Rotman School of Management
and CEPR                                         University of Toronto
gfriebel@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de                   105 St. George Street
                                                 Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
Matthias Heinz                                   CANADA
University of Cologne                            and NBER
Department of Economics                          mitchell.hoffman@rotman.utoronto.ca
Albertus-Magnus-Platz
50923 Köln                                       Nick Zubanov
Germany                                          Konstanz University
heinz@wiso.uni-koeln.de                          nick.zubanov@uni-konstanz.de




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25920
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/964
 What Do Employee Referral Programs Do? Measuring
the Direct and Overall Effects of a Management Practice
  Guido Friebel             Matthias Heinz              Mitchell Hoffman§              Nick Zubanov¶
                                             August 2020


                                                 Abstract

          Employee referral programs (ERPs) are randomly introduced in a grocery chain.
      Larger referral bonuses increase referrals and decrease referral quality, though the in-
      crease in referrals from having an ERP is modest. However, the overall effect of having
      an ERP is substantial, reducing attrition by roughly 15% and decreasing firm labor
      costs by up to almost 3%. This occurs, partly, because referrals stay longer than non-
      referrals, but, mainly, because all workers stay longer in treated than control stores,
      even among stores where no referrals are made. The most-supported mechanism for
      these indirect effects is that workers value being involved in hiring.

      JEL Classifications : M51, M52, D23
      Keywords : Management practices; organizational economics; hiring; respect




   
      We thank Nick Bloom, Tore Ellingsen, Matt Gentzkow, Mark Granovetter, Maria Guadalupe, Michael
Kosfeld, Edward Lazear, Rosario Macera, Kathryn Shaw, John Van Reenen, Russell Weinstein, and espe-
cially Lowell Taylor for their comments and suggestions. We are grateful to the World Management Survey
(WMS) and especially Daniela Scur for sharing their data with us, which we use to report on the prevalence
of employee referral programs. We thank the study firm's management and employees for their collabora-
tion. We thank numerous seminar/conference participants for their feedback, particularly those at NBER
Organizational Economics and NBER SI Labor Studies/Personnel Economics. We thank Muhammad Azim,
Daphn´  e Baldassari, Julija Mozureviciute, Monika Mozureviciute, and Sonja Settele for excellent research as-
sistance. Financial support from the Institutional Strategy of the University of Cologne within the German
Excellence Initiative (Hans Kelsen Prize 2018), Michael Lee-Chin Family Institute, and SSHRC is gratefully
acknowledged. The experiment was pre-registered on 11/23/2015 with the AEA RCT registry under ID
AEARCTR-0000964.
    
      Goethe University of Frankfurt and CEPR and IZA
    
      University of Cologne and CEPR
    §
      University of Toronto Rotman School of Management and NBER
   ¶
      University of Konstanz and IZA
       Management practices are widely held to matter for firm performance (Ichniowski et al.,
1997; Ichniowski & Shaw, 1999; Bloom & Van Reenen, 2007; Syverson, 2011). In addition
to the rich, growing body of work on the overall quality of a firm's management practices,
scholars are increasingly interested in the impact of particular practices and how they matter.
     An important area where management practices are understudied is firm hiring (Oyer &
Schaefer, 2011), which is surprising given that hiring is believed critical for firm performance
(Bloom & Van Reenen, 2011). One of the most common ways by which workers get hired is
via employee referrals.1 As surveyed by Topa (2019), while most work on referrals analyzes
the perspective of job-seekers (e.g., Granovetter, 1974; Bayer et al., 2008), a smaller stream of
work analyzes referrals from the perspective of firms, showing that referral hires tend to be of
higher quality than non-referrals, with lower turnover, lower recruiting costs, and sometimes
higher productivity (Brown et al., 2016; Burks et al., 2015). Thus, it is unsurprising that
many firms have employee referral programs (ERPs), a management practice where workers
are explicitly encouraged to refer their social contacts for jobs, often using bonuses.2
      Despite the prevalence of ERPs, that many firms use a management practice does not
necessarily imply that it is valuable (Blader et al., 2020; DellaVigna & Gentzkow, 2019).
What do ERPs do and why? Beyond a possible role in hiring good workers, can ERPs
provide firms with other benefits (or costs)? We address these questions using a 13-month
randomized controlled trial (RCT) on over 10,000 workers in a large European grocery chain,
followed by the immediate rollout of an ERP to the entire firm. Our paper is the first RCT
on ERPs in a for-profit firm. To our knowledge, it is also the first, large-scale, within-the-firm
RCT on any hiring procedure, a point we contextualize further below.
     All the firm's 238 stores were randomly assigned to Control (no ERP) or one of four
ERP treatment arms inviting referrals. One arm only provided information to encourage
referrals. The other three arms additionally paid different referral bonuses of up to 40% of
monthly salary after taxes if the referrer and the "referral" stayed at least 5 months. (As in
past work, we use "referral" both for the recommendation process and for the person hired.)
      As can be asked for many management practices, there are two key conceptual ques-
tions regarding ERPs. First, what are the direct effects, i.e., effects on the targeted worker
   1
      Roughly 25-40% of European jobs and about half of US jobs are found via networks (Topa, 2011).
Referrals may matter for many features of labor markets, e.g., wage inequality (Montgomery, 1991).
    2
      A wide range of firms use ERPs, including AT&T, Starbucks, UPS, Deutsche Bahn, IKEA, PWC,
Walmart, Enterprise Rent-a-Car, Booking.com, and Google. The Society for Human Resource Management
defines an ERP as "a recruiting strategy in which employers encourage current employees, through rewards, to
refer qualified candidates for jobs in their organizations" (SHRM, 2016). CareerBuilder.com (2012) estimated
that 69% of firms on its platform had a formal ERP. In the retail module of the World Management Survey
(Bloom & Van Reenen, 2007) covering Canada, US, and UK, 23% of establishments have an ERP (see
Appendix A.1 for details and discussion). ReferralPrograms.org (2017) reports that 82% of firms use cash
bonuses in their ERP, 2% use donations, 7% use experiences, and 9% use no reward.


                                                     1
behavior? That is, what is the impact of ERPs--both their existence and the bonus level--on
generating employee referrals, as well as the quality of referral hires? This includes assessing
whether referrals are of higher quality than non-referrals and whether this quality advantage
varies with the bonus offered. Second, what are the overall effects of ERPs, i.e., what is the
total impact of having an ERP on worker and firm outcomes? Overall effects are assessed
among all workers, including incumbent workers and non-referred new hires. If having an
ERP provides a positive signal to workers (e.g., that the firm respects its workers (Ellingsen
& Johannesson, 2008; Rebitzer & Taylor, 2011) and trusts them not to make bad referrals)
or a negative one (e.g., that the firm needs its workers' help in recruiting new workers), then
overall effects may diverge sharply from direct effects.
     By randomizing both the structure and existence of ERPs across stores, we designed
the RCT to assess both direct and overall effects of ERPs. Beyond the large sample size
it offers, the particular firm we study (described more in Section 2) is well-suited for the
RCT. First, because of high worker turnover, grocery stores are constantly looking for new
workers. Second, grocery cashier jobs have minimal qualifications, so everyone's friends
could reasonably be hired. Third, the firm was willing to have workers and managers take
a series of detailed surveys. In addition to being helpful for the RCT, the first two of these
characteristics are common to many low-skilled jobs worldwide. The retail setting of the
firm is also broadly representative of many jobs.
      Section 3 shows that the direct effects of ERPs are directionally as expected. Higher
bonuses lead to more referrals. However, while statistically significant, the magnitude of
the impacts seems relatively small (though ERPs are still cost-effective based only on direct
effects). Even under the largest bonus, only 5% of hires are referrals. Encouraging referrals
without using a bonus leads to no referrals. We believe the seemingly low referral rate reflects
(1) we are studying formal instead of informal referrals and (2) grocery jobs are perceived as
unattractive, a point supported by surveys.3 While the number of referrals is modest, referral
quality is high: referrals have 40% lower attrition than observably similar non-referrals and
are 19% less likely to be absent, though the absence difference is not statistically significant.
However, as bonuses increase, the relative retention benefit of referrals falls.
      Section 4 turns to overall effects, and provides the paper's quantitatively most impor-
tant result: having an ERP in a store leads to a roughly 15% reduction in worker turnover.
Effects persist throughout the RCT (i.e., for 13 months), and are similar in percentage terms
among new workers and workers hired prior to the RCT. These effects cannot be mainly at-
tributed to the incidence of referrals or to peer effects because turnover falls in treatment
   3
   These surveys are discussed in Section 7 when comparing grocery and non-grocery jobs. Section 3
addresses informal vs. formal referrals, and discusses how low rates of formal referrals occur in other firms.



                                                      2
stores where no RCT referrals are made. Nor are the effects related to managers behaving
differently in treatment stores. Instead, our surveys suggest that effects are due to workers
feeling respected because the ERP invited them to be involved in hiring, and because workers
value having a say in who they work with.
     Section 5 shows that having an ERP is highly profitable, reducing labor costs by up to
2.8%. About 5% of the savings reflects that referrals have higher retention than non-referrals
(i.e., direct benefits), while 95% of profit gains come from an ERP boosting the retention
of non-referred workers (i.e., indirect benefits). While direct benefits still exceed the costs
of an ERP, only comparing referrals vs. non-referrals dramatically underestimates the total
benefits of an ERP--this is a key takeaway of our paper. Direct benefits are non-monotonic
in the bonus level, consistent with a quantity-quality tradeoff from referral bonuses.
      Section 6 turns to heterogeneity analysis. Exploiting that our RCT was conducted
across a large, national firm, we show that the overall impact of ERPs on attrition is larger
in stores that were better performing before the RCT and in stores that are located in
stronger local labor markets. The profit benefit of ERPs is much larger in these stores.
      Encouraged by the effects of the RCT, the firm rolled out the ERP to all employees,
including grocery workers in RCT control stores, as well as non-grocery jobs in logistics and
food production, and also increased the referral bonus (Section 7). Once control grocery
stores receive an ERP, attrition rates between treatment and control stores converge, con-
sistent with long-run stability of ERP impacts. Referrals for grocery jobs remain relatively
modest. In contrast, for non-grocery jobs, the ratio of referrals to total hires is 3 times
larger than for grocery jobs. Surveys with workers, managers, and the general public reveal
that grocery jobs are seen as unattractive, and that workers who care for their friends may
hesitate to refer friends for these jobs. Non-grocery jobs are seen as more attractive.4
      Our paper contributes to several literatures, most importantly, the one on management
practices. Building on the robust empirical relation between management practices and
outcomes, recent papers conduct RCTs on broad management practices (Bloom et al., 2013)
or particular practices like work from home (Bloom et al., 2014). What is particularly
noteworthy in our paper is an RCT of a common management practice at-scale.5 Oyer &
Schaefer (2011) argue that hiring is understudied in labor and personnel economics, and
that RCTs are needed to address this gap.6 To our knowledge, ours is the first, large-scale,
   4
      The surveys also indicate (1) that job attractiveness explains why there are more referrals for non-grocery
than grocery jobs and (2) that it is grocery jobs that are unattractive, not the firm itself.
    5
      Exceptions of at-scale, within-firm RCTs include Nagin et al. (2002), Blader et al. (2020), Gosnell et al.
(2020), and Friebel et al. (2017, 2018), all on non-hiring topics.
    6
      In the Handbook of Labor Economics, Oyer & Schaefer (2011) write that personnel economics "needs
a series of carefully constructed hiring-related field experiments. Personnel Economics now has a very
solid tradition of incentives-related field experiments, and we are eager to see this toolkit applied to hiring


                                                       3
within-the-firm RCT on any hiring procedure in any context.7 If only a small subset of stores
were treated, as in many within-firm RCTs, it would have been quite hard for us to observe
the indirect benefits of ERPs. Our finding that the benefit of ERPs is larger in higher-
performing grocery stores also exploits our RCT's large scale, and is consistent with ERPs
being complementary to other HR management practices, an idea discussed frequently in
theory (Milgrom & Roberts, 1990), but, beyond key exceptions like Ichniowski et al. (1997),
Boning et al. (2007), and Blader et al. (2020), is often hard to examine empirically.8
     Second, our results contribute to a small but influential literature on dual-purpose
HR practices. As surveyed in Rebitzer & Taylor (2011), HR practices can have multiple
effects on workers, e.g., performance pay may both increase effort and attract better workers
(Lazear, 2000). However, with some noteworthy exceptions (Ritter & Taylor, 1994; Landers
et al., 1996), evidence on dual-purpose HR practices is relatively scarce. We show that
having an ERP generates referrals (who yield benefits to the firm relative to non-referrals)
and separately causes workers to stay longer, arguably because they value being involved in
hiring. Our results are consistent with the theoretical insight of Ellingsen & Johannesson
(2007, 2008) that workers care about being well-regarded by their employer. As far as we
know, ours is the first academic paper in any field to show that ERPs can have broader
organizational consequences beyond the referrer and referral.
     Third, the paper substantially expands what is known empirically about referrals and
ERPs. Beyond how ERPs affect referral-making, our RCT enables us to assess how having
an ERP and the level of referral bonus affect worker outcomes and firm profits. While
larger bonuses increase referrals, we show for the first time that they decrease the quality
of referral hires, illustrating a quantity-quality tradeoff. As surveyed by Topa (2011, 2019)
and Hoffman (2017), prior work on referrals from the perspective of firms compares average
worker outcomes between referrals and non-referrals, but lacks variation in ERPs (exogenous
or otherwise) and thus cannot assess the firm consequences of ERPs--that is, our paper is
the first to evaluate ERPs as a management practice.9 Building on Topa's 2019 suggestion
for research to analyze how referral differences vary across local labor markets, we exploit
the wide geographic scale of our RCT to show that ERPs have larger overall effects in better
decisions."
   7
     Development studies have randomized selection procedures in government (e.g., Ashraf et al., 2020) or
NGOs (e.g., Del Carpio & Guadalupe, 2018), but not in a private firm. Audit studies examine hiring issues
across firms (instead of randomizing a firm's hiring procedures). Appendix A.2 discusses further.
   8
     We underscore that results are consistent with instead of indicative of complementarity, as we lack the
detailed management surveys needed to measure non-ERP management practices.
   9
     Papers randomize referral programs in non-inside-the-firm contexts to study different questions from
ours, such as what type of customers should be targeted in customer referral programs (Kumar et al., 2010).
Appendix A.2 discusses further.



                                                     4
local labor markets. Last, our RCT provides evidence on what motivates referrers, which is
useful given that referrals occur exogenously in most models of referrals. (See Ekinci (2016)
for an exception, namely, a model of ERPs where potential referrers have career concerns.)


1      Conceptual Framework
How might ERPs with different referral bonuses affect outcomes and why? Since ERPs may
be a dual-purpose HR practice (Rebitzer & Taylor, 2011), we discuss both in terms of direct
effects (i.e., quantity and quality of referral hires) and overall effects. We then discuss how
ERPs may affect firm profits, and how different effects may vary by store characteristics and
job quality. To cover a range of different theories, our discussion here is verbal. Appendix
D provides a model with analytic insights into many of these issues.
      Starting with direct effects, one would imagine that larger bonuses would increase
referrals, though this is not obvious. If larger bonuses signaled to workers that making a
referral is difficult, the effect could be zero or even negative (B´
                                                                   enabou & Tirole, 2003). In
terms of quality, one would expect following past work that referrals would be of higher
quality than non-referrals.10 For example, if incumbent workers are altruistic toward their
friends (Bandiera et al., 2009), they may only be willing to refer a friend if the match
quality between the friend and the job is above a threshold. As the referral bonus increases,
incumbent workers will lower their match quality thresholds, becoming willing to refer less
qualified friends because the financial reward is higher. Thus, increasing the bonus should
decrease the quality of referrals. The Appendix D model shows that this is the case.
      We now consider the overall effects of an ERP, including indirect effects beyond gen-
erating referrals, such as possible effects on incumbent retention. Through an ERP, a firm
is asking its workers to become involved in recruiting rather than carrying out this process
only through HR and line managers. An ERP does not delegate formal recruiting rights,
but it gives some real authority to the workers, as envisaged by Aghion & Tirole (1997).
Indeed, in our firm, 97% of referred applicants during the RCT were hired, and surveys
indicate that workers understood that their referrals would be hired. In other settings, like
large high-tech firms in the US, it is often promised to employees that referrals will receive
serious consideration instead of being lumped in the mass resume file (Bock, 2015). Workers
are thus not only given the opportunity to work with their friends; the delegation decision
may also be valuable in terms of what it communicates to incumbent workers.
  10
   This may occur because more precise signals are observed on referrals relative to non-referrals (Simon
& Warner, 1992; Dustmann et al., 2015); because good workers are friends with people like themselves
(Montgomery, 1991); or because referrer-referral ties reduce moral hazard (Castilla, 2005).



                                                   5
       As noted by B´
                    enabou & Tirole (2003), decisions to delegate can communicate to work-
ers that the firm believes workers to be of high ability and have good judgment. Workers
may value this as a signal that the firm is likely to treat them better. Another possibility
is that workers may intrinsically value the firm believing them to be altruistic. Ellingsen &
Johannesson (2008) present a model of respect in the workplace where a worker's respect is
her second-order beliefs about her social preferences, i.e., her belief about the firm's beliefs
about whether she is altruistic. Having an ERP may be a credible way for a firm to commu-
nicate its esteem, e.g., the firm may only be willing to have an ERP when it believes workers
to be altruistic (either toward their friends or toward the firm), as such workers will be more
concerned than selfish workers in avoiding bad matches. Provided that workers value feeling
esteemed, having an ERP should increase retention, even in stores where no referrals are
made. Appendix D shows this formally in a signaling model.
      We suspect that involvement and delegation may be particularly beneficial when taking
place within the realm of hiring. Anecdotally, while professors sometimes skip various faculty
meetings, nearly everyone comes to faculty hiring meetings, suggesting that faculty like being
involved in hiring. This is consistent with business case study evidence that involving workers
in hiring can have broader organizational benefits (DeLong & Vijayaraghavan, 2002).
      It is not obvious though that the signaling benefit of an ERP would be positive. Having
an ERP could communicate that the firm is having a hard time recruiting through non-
referral channels, or that it expects to experience significant turnover in the future, for which
it would need to do a lot of hiring. Such sentiments could make workers more likely to quit.
Conditional on having an ERP, the signaling benefit of larger bonuses is also ambiguous.11
      Turning to profits, ERPs will increase profits if the overall benefits (direct and indirect)
exceed the cost of referral programs. This is an empirical question. It also unclear how the
bonus level will affect profits, either overall or in terms of direct effects. For example, higher
bonuses may boost referrals, but also cost money and may decrease referral quality.
      In terms of heterogeneity, ERPs should have larger impacts in stores where benefits
of ERPs are reinforced. For example, that the firm respect its workers (a possible indirect
benefit of ERPs) may be more credible when the store is functioning well. Also, workers
may care more about respect in better labor markets, as their outside option may be better.
      Last, how would we expect referral prevalence to vary by job type? If people are
altruistic toward their friends, we would expect that people would be more willing to refer
friends for better jobs, at least comparing jobs within the realm of other lower-skill jobs.
  11
     On one hand, larger referral bonuses expose the firm to greater risk of opportunism, so it could be a sign
of greater trust. On the other hand, larger bonuses could indicate the firm expects future turnover problems.




                                                      6
2      Study Background
The study firm. The firm is one of three main grocery chains in an Eastern European
Union (EU) country. We avoid naming the country to protect confidentiality, as the firm
is one of the largest in the country. Prior to the RCT, the firm's management changed.
The new management decided to pursue a strategy of increasing quality, partly triggered by
the threat of entry from Lidl, a discount German chain. Reducing turnover was declared a
high-priority goal to assure quality service and decrease excessive worker training costs.
      As is common for low-skill jobs in many countries, attrition is high, at an annual
rate around 60% in the pre-RCT period.12 Turnover costs are non-negligible, with direct
(administrative and training) costs around e250 per exit, plus additional costs due to lost
productivity (details in Appendix A.11). In meetings with the authors, executives expressed
strong interest in reducing attrition, and this helped motivate our study.
      The average store employs 24 workers, 19 of whom are cashiers, one is the store man-
ager, and the rest are department managers or specialists (e.g., butchers, bakers). Stores
have average monthly sales of roughly e200,000. In its retail activity, the firm has roughly
5,000 cashiers, plus about 500 specialists. The firm also has 1,200 workers in non-grocery-
store jobs: logistics (primarily truckers), production (workers at a central food production
facility), and a small number of white-collar jobs. Since we observe several years of personnel
data, the number of employees observed is around 18,000.
       Cashiers perform stocking and check-out functions. Most (95%) work full-time, and
receive a monthly wage of roughly e350 (with minor variation depending on if location is
urban or rural), plus a bonus tied to store performance (4% of wages, on average). The
cashier job has no formal requirements, so anyone's friend would presumably be qualified.
Applicants are pre-screened via a centralized HR process. Those who pass the initial screen
are sent to a store manager, who does interviews and makes hiring decisions. About 20% of
non-referred applicants are hired. New cashiers receive two days of formal training (where
they are paid but do not work), followed by two weeks of on-the-job training. Cashiers were
88% of grocery worker hires during the RCT. Specialists are paid about e500 per month on
average, plus a bonus similar to cashiers.
     Why the firm did the RCT. In October 2015, we met with the firm's top manage-
ment and suggested implementing an ERP via an RCT.13 Having an ERP was quite natural
  12
     As discussed below, turnover is particularly high for new hires: about half exit in the first 5 months.
Such turnover rates are not atypical for low-skill jobs, e.g., about half of the call-center workers in Burks
et al. (2015) exit within 90 days. We use "attrition" and "turnover" synonymously for worker exit.
  13
     Before running this paper's RCT, we worked with the firm on an RCT where (1) career incentives
were emphasized to workers, or (2) the CEO communicated to store managers about the importance of



                                                     7
for the firm to consider for several reasons. First, the firm had an ERP during the 2000s,
though it was discontinued in 2008 when the firm's growth came to a halt. Second, some
of the firm's competitors pay referral bonuses. Third, we argued that an ERP could help
reduce turnover. The firm was willing to do an RCT in order to investigate whether to
have an ERP and in what form.14 While we helped in designing the RCT (including the
randomization of stores into treatments) and monitored the RCT's implementation through
our contacts in the central HR office, the RCT was carried out by the firm.
      Referral process. According to the firm's definition, a referral occurs when someone
is hired via the firm's formalized referral process. The process was designed so that making
a referral would be as quick and easy as possible. To make a referral, an existing employee
called a dedicated contact in HR and answered a few brief questions (name of referral,
relation to employee, how long they have known them, how often they meet). The phone
number and referral process details were listed in the poster put up in the staff common room
in treatment stores (Figure 1), with variations depending on treatment arm. The referrer
received a text message if the referral was hired, and could always call HR again for updates.
      RCT details. We refer to the five RCT arms as Control; information only or "R0";
or information plus bonus, with the arms called R50, R90, or R120. In the Control arm,
nothing changed relative to before the RCT. Workers were not informed about the possibility
to refer. However, HR was told to accept referrals from Control stores if any were called in.
      In the four treatment arms (R0, R50, R90, R120), store managers conducted informa-
tion meetings with employees. During the meetings, all employees received a letter explaining
the ERP, which store managers read aloud. Appendix E shows the letters. The meetings
focused solely on the ERPs; managers did not tell workers that they were valued or that
retention was important, nor did they discuss other worker concerns.
      The central HR office ensured that meetings took place. Also, HR communicated with
the regional managers (to whom store managers report) who monitored that store managers
were in compliance with the new ERP. Neither workers nor store managers knew that an
RCT was occurring.15 Beyond the information provided, workers in R50, R90, and R120
received e15 after the referral was hired to provide an immediate reward. The remainder of
e50, e90, or e120 (i.e., an additional e35, e75, e105) was paid if the referrer and referral
reducing turnover (Friebel et al., 2018). Section 4.1 compares the impact of these treatments to our results.
Controlling for a store's treatment status in Friebel et al. (2018) does not affect any of our results.
  14
     The firm's executives are generally interested in running experiments (or "pilots"), particularly in regard
to operations. Several pilots occurred during the ERP RCT (e.g., changing the order of items on the shelves).
  15
     Regional managers were informed at a training event with one of the authors about the nature of the
RCT. We felt it was important to inform regional managers about the RCT to ensure that stores were fully
compliant. Regional managers were not involved in any operational or implementation aspects of the RCT,
but rather solely monitored whether store managers were complying.

                                                       8
stayed 5 months. This was clearly explained in the letter and posters, and workers hired
after the RCT began were given letters explaining the ERP.
     Rationale for bonus structure. We suggested a 5-month tenure threshold because
a substantial share of cashiers leave in the first 5 months (about half in our pre-RCT data)
while attrition is significantly lower after that. Tenure thresholds are very common in ERP
bonuses (Brown et al., 2016; Burks et al., 2015; Fernandez et al., 2000). To choose bonus
amounts, we surveyed non-grocery workers, who were not part of the RCT. We asked them
how much money would make them willing to make a referral for a hypothetical vacancy in
their unit. We suggested bonus amounts for the treatment arms corresponding to the 25th
(e50 per referral), 50th (e90), and 75th (e120) percentiles of the distribution of survey
responses.16 All bonuses were paid in after-tax amounts (i.e., the firm already paid the
worker's taxable share), and relative to wages were substantial. The combined post-tax
bonus of e120 represents 40% of a cashier's monthly post-tax salary, which is comparable
to or higher than referral bonuses examined in other studies (Appendix A.3 gives details).
       RCT timing. Materials (posters, letters, and instructions for store managers) were
sent to treatment stores around 11/20/2015, with instructions to implement the ERP imme-
diately. Central HR and regional managers ensured compliance of treatment store managers
with RCT procedures. We registered our RCT in the AEA Registry on 11/23/2015. In fall
2016, about a year after the RCT began, we met with top management to present the RCT
results. After this, the firm decided to roll out an ERP to all firm jobs and to increase the
referral bonus to e30 at hire and e100 after 3 months (see Section 7 for rollout details).
       Safeguards to assure RCT validity. There are two immediate concerns for an RCT
like ours. First, it is critical that employees in treated stores are aware of the ERPs. We
address this using posters and letters to employees, and by having regional managers ensure
that stores are in compliance. Also, in surveys carried out in fall 2016, 87% of employees in
treatment stores reported being aware of the ERPs, indicating substantial awareness of the
program, despite high employee turnover.
      Second, workers need to trust that bonuses will be paid. While trust is low in many
post-Communist countries, we do not think this was a concern at all for us, given the group
meetings, and the paper trail from the company letters and posters. Workers were told that
they could call HR about any questions on the ERPs. Further, given that the country is in
the EU and has high formal legal standards, the firm is legally bound to pay bonuses it tells
workers it will pay, and workers are aware of this. In the surveys we carried out (explained
  16
    The non-grocery workers were told truthfully that we were surveying them as part of academic research;
to avoid announcement effects, no explicit reference to any pilot project in the firm or to our RCT was given.



                                                      9
more later), we find no evidence of problems with procedural compliance in the RCT.
       We assemble the firm's personnel and accounting data for Feb 2014-May 2017 to create
worker-month and store-month panels. The personnel data are for grocery store workers,
cover over 18k workers (7k active only in the pre-RCT period, and 11k active during the RCT
or beyond), and contain standard personnel variables (e.g., hire and termination dates, exit
codes), as well as absences, earnings, bonuses, hours, and demographics.17 The personnel
data also include information from the firm's ERP, including who the referrer and referral
are, date of referral, and relationship of referrer to referral.18 We observe referred applicants
(hired and not hired), though 85 of the 88 referred applicants during the RCT are hired, so
referred hires and referred applicants are almost the same. Among non-referrals, we only
observe hires, not applicants, though the firm informed us that roughly 20% of non-referred
applicants are hired. The main accounting variables are monthly sales, shrinkage (i.e., share
of inventory lost to theft, spoilage, and other reasons), and operational profits (i.e., sales
minus cost of goods minus wages minus shrinkage) by store.
      Besides firm administrative data, we use surveys we carried out before, during, and
after the RCT. In line with Shaw (2009) and Ichniowski & Shaw (2012), the surveys cover
different types of respondents: store workers, store managers, and the country's general
public. Topics include reactions to the ERPs; beliefs about mechanisms for the ERP effects;
social perceptions of grocery jobs and our firm; and manager time use (Bandiera et al., 2020).
Information on the surveys is discussed along the way, with details in Appendix A.4.
      Randomization. The 238 stores were randomized into the five RCT arms.19 Table 1
shows that the five store groups are well-balanced over observables. In each row of columns
1-6, we regress a pre-RCT observable on a constant and dummies for the four treatment arms.
Thus, the constant corresponds to the control group mean, and the coefficients correspond
to differences between the different treatment groups and the control group. We also show
p-values for the F-statistic of joint significance of the four treatment dummies for each
observable, and none are statistically significant. Columns 7-8 compare ERP stores (i.e.,
any of the treatments) vs. control stores, and we find no significant differences.
  17
      The firm's non-grocery workers are not part of the RCT and are not in our worker-month panel. Thus,
our analyses of non-grocery workers are more limited and use auxiliary data.
   18
      In the firmwide rollout (Jan-May 2017), we only have data on who made referrals, not who was referred.
   19
      Randomization took place on a coauthor's computer. Allocations were re-drawn numerous times until
store averages were reasonably similar across the treatment groups in store employees ("head count"), attri-
tion, sales, and store square footage. We control for these variables linearly in our regressions, as suggested
by Scott et al. (2002) and Bruhn & McKenzie (2009) for RCTs with multiply drawn randomization alloca-
tions. Our use of multiply drawn randomization allocations, coupled with significant correlations between
many of the variables shown, contributes to the high p-values in Table 1, many of them close to 1.




                                                      10
3      Direct Effects: Quantity and Quality of Referrals
3.1     Impact of the ERPs on Generating Referrals
Table 2 summarizes referral patterns across the five arms. There are 88 referred applicants
and 85 referred hires. In 79 of 85 cases, referrals are hired in the same store as their referrers.
Of the 6 exceptions, 3 are hired in the Control stores, where no information about an ERP
was provided and no referrals are made. There are also no referrals made in information
only ("R0") stores. The number of referrals made monotonically increases with the bonus.
Still, in the highest bonus arm ("R120"), only 5% of hires are referred.
      Figure 2 plots the share of referrals made per hire by quarter, showing a modest ratio
during the RCT. After the RCT, when a single ERP is rolled out to the entire firm and the
bonus increased, referrals increase, with similar referral rates across the former RCT arms.
      Panel A of Table 3 shows RCT impacts of ERPs on whether a hire is referred, but using
regressions with various controls listed in the table notes. Standard errors are clustered by
store, as ERPs are randomized by store. Column 1 of Panel A regresses whether a hire is
referred on dummies for the four treatment arms (an observation is a hire), where Control
is the excluded category.20 The results are similar with controls in Column 2. Instead of
using dummies for the four ERPs, Column 3 uses a dummy for having any of the four ERPs
(excluded category is Control). Having an ERP increases the chance an employee is referred
by 2.5pp. This is highly statistically significant, but seems economically modest.
      Panel B of Table 3 analyzes store-level referral hires during the RCT and yields similar
conclusions. Having an ERP increases referral hires by 0.37 workers.
      How does one square the low rate of referrals in our RCT with the understanding that
a large share of jobs are typically found via networks? As described by Topa (2019), a key
distinction is between formal referrals through ERPs and informal referrals. As part of our
During RCT survey in fall 2016, we surveyed 342 cashiers on how they found out about their
jobs. For 154 workers hired during the RCT, 27% said they found out about the job through
a friend or family member working at the firm, within the 25-40% of hires through informal
networks reported by Topa (2011) for Europe. Obtaining under 10% of hires through ERPs
is also common in other firms.21 As noted by Topa (2019), the informal passing along of
  20
     The coefficient on R0 is slightly negative, reflecting that there are 3 referrals hired at Control stores and
0 referrals hired at R0 stores. The 3 referrals hired at Control stores were referred by workers at different
stores paying bonuses.
  21
     Little is known about the share of workers getting hired through ERPs since survey datasets usually
measure informal referrals. Of firms listed on ReferralPrograms.org, a site primarily focused on the US tech
industry (where ERPs are common (Bock, 2015)), the mean share of hires through ERPs is 33%, though a
non-trivial share of firms (14%) get 10% or less of their hires from ERPs. For the four European firms listed
on ReferralPrograms.org, the average share of hires from ERPs was 12%, the same percentage as in grocery


                                                       11
job information from one person to another may differ qualitatively from the decision to
formally refer someone to one's employer, e.g., there may be more important reputational
considerations in the latter.22
     The 88 referrals occur in 34 stores and are made by 75 referrers. As shown in column
1 of Table B1, referral hires are 2.7 years younger than non-referral hires, and are also 10pp
more likely to be female, though the latter difference is not statistically significant. People
tend to refer people like themselves demographically (Table B5), consistent with past work
on referrals (Hoffman, 2017). Appendix A.5 provides additional facts on who makes referrals.


3.2     The Quality of Referred Workers
As described in the RCT pre-registration, our main outcome is attrition, and our secondary
outcome is absence. We focus on attrition for three reasons. First, like many firms, our firm
regards high attrition as a critical business issue, causing it to spend large sums recruiting
and training new hires, and high-turnover stores also have lower sales.23 Second, worker
retention is a standard measure of match quality (e.g., Dustmann et al., 2015). Third, past
work finds that some of the largest differences between referrals and non-referrals are in
attrition (Hoffman, 2017; Topa, 2019), so it is natural to study attrition when analyzing
ERPs. Absenteeism is also an important outcome in low-skill jobs and is costly for our firm,
but we emphasize it less, first, because the firm regards attrition as the HR outcome of
greatest interest, and second, because the distribution of days absent per month is highly
skewed, yielding less precision in estimation.24
      Attrition. Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows that referred hires have higher survival than
non-referred hires without any controls. Next, we add the controls that we will generally use
for analyzing panel data, namely month-year of hire dummies, current month-year dummies,
a 5th order polynomial in tenure, a dummy for being a cashier, demographic controls, and
jobs at our firm in the post-RCT rollout (see Section 7). Also, talking to another large grocery chain in the
country where our study firm is located, that firm's share of hires from ERPs is less than 5% for grocery
jobs. Thus, the fact that only a relatively modest share of grocery job hires at our firm comes from ERPs is
consistent with data in other settings, particularly in the country we study and in Europe.
  22
     Consistent with formal referrals differing qualitatively from informal referrals, in our data, there is no
evidence that ERPs boost informal referrals, and there are no significant attrition differences between workers
who are informally referred and those who are not. A different but related issue is whether workers have
an incentive to report referrals formally. While there is no incentive to formally report referrals in R0, the
incentive is substantial in the R50, R90, and R120 arms.
  23
     Table B7 shows the negative correlation between attrition and sales. High attrition also imposes serious
costs in US retail firms (Ton, 2014). Kuhn & Yu (2020) show that worker exits harm performance in Chinese
retail stores. As a policy issue, when attrition is high, firms may invest less in worker skill development.
  24
     Another common outcome in supermarkets is items scanned per minute (Mas & Moretti, 2009), but
the firm's IT system does not allow us to measure worker-level items per minute. The firm's main HR key
performance indicator is attrition and its secondary one is absence.


                                                      12
pre-RCT means of store-level characteristics (with the full list in the table notes). Table 4
estimates linear probability models of the attrition of workers hired during the RCT. In line
with past work, column 1 of Table 4 shows that, compared to non-referred workers, referred
workers are 7.0 pp or 44% less likely to leave each month.
    Column 2 analyzes referral differences in turnover separately during a worker's first five
months of tenure and also afterwards. In months 1-5, referral attrition is lower by 9pp (or
50% relative to the attrition rate of non-referrals in the first 5 months), whereas it is lower
by 3pp or 1/3 thereafter. Thus, while referral differences in attrition are strongest during
the first five months, consistent with the structure of the referral bonus, referrals are still
less likely to attrite after the 5-month milestone.25
       Consistent with the quantity-quality tradeoff in our conceptual framework, column 3
of Table 4 shows that referral attrition differences are smaller at higher referral bonuses. For
the R50 group, the referral attrition difference is -11pp or about 70%. In contrast, for the
R90 and R120 groups, the referral differences are about -6pp or a bit under 40%. These
differences are statistically significant (p=0.04 for R50 vs. R90; p=0.06 for R50 vs. R120).
The survival curves in Panel (b) of Figure 3 show similar results.
     Table 4 classifies referrals according to the store where they work. However, results are
robust to excluding the 6 referrals who get hired in different stores than their referrers.

      Absences. As the distribution of monthly absences is highly skewed, we use negative
binomial models.26 Column 4 shows that referrals have 19% fewer absences per month,
but this is not statistically significant. Column 5 shows that, during the first 5 months,
referrals have significantly fewer (41%) absences than non-referrals, but after that, there is
no difference. This could be due to referrals not wanting to be fired before 5 months to
ensure their friend gets a bonus. Referral differences do not significantly vary by bonus size.

      Adding store dummies. For analyzing referral/non-referral differences, we can add
store fixed effects, which is useful given it is a non-randomized comparison.27 Appendix
Table B2 shows that referral attrition differences are similar (and slightly larger) when store
fixed effects are added. Absence differences are statistically insignificant and noisy. Broadly
consistent with Burks et al. (2015), there are stark referral differences in attrition, but we
   25
      If referrals were staying longer than non-referrals solely to get a bonus, then referred attrition would be
higher than non-referred attrition after 5 months, but this is not the case. Also, that referral differences
are larger in the first 5 months than after does not mean that referrals are not useful for the firm. Even if
referrals stayed longer solely to get a bonus, which is not the case for us, this could still be valuable to the
firm. Figure B1 shows that referrals are less likely to depart than non-referrals at most tenure levels.
   26
      In column 4, the estimated overdispersion parameter is  = 23.2 (s.e.=0.95). This indicates sizable
overdispersion and that negative binomial is more appropriate than Poisson.
   27
      In our main results on the overall impact of ERPs, we cannot control for store fixed effects because ERPs
are randomized at the store level, though we can control for store fixed effects if we exploit pre-RCT data.


                                                       13
do not observe significant differences in our non-attrition performance variable of absence.


4     The Overall Impact of ERPs on Worker Outcomes
4.1    Results
Attrition. Table 5 shows that ERPs reduce attrition of all workers, with similar percentage
effects on new hires and incumbents. Beyond showing conventional standard errors clus-
tered by store, we also perform randomization inference for our main results (Young, 2019).
The resulting p-values are similar to those from conventional clustering-by-store inference.
Our statistical significance for attrition is also robust to accounting for multiple hypothesis
testing, namely, that we have two key outcome variables (see Appendix A.6 for details).
      Column 1 of Table 5 analyzes the impact of the randomized ERP treatments on at-
trition during the RCT (as opposed to comparing referrals vs. non-referrals). Relative to
workers in Control stores, workers in R0, R50, R90, and R120 stores have monthly attrition
that is lower by 1.00pp, 0.47pp, 1.59pp, and 0.81pp, respectively, corresponding to attrition
reductions of 15%, 7%, 23%, and 12%. These differences are statistically significant for R0,
R90, and R120. Column 2 shows that having an ERP reduces attrition by 0.97pp or 14%.
Given that referrals are only 2.5% of hires in ERP stores, it seems unlikely that these dif-
ferences are primarily due to referrals staying longer than non-referrals or people becoming
more likely to stay as a result of making a referral. Comparing R0 vs. Control, recall there
are 0 referrals made and 0 referral hires in R0 stores. Thus, any reduction in attrition in R0
stores relative to Control stores cannot be due to workers being referred or making referrals.
       Though our treatments are randomized, we may obtain additional power or control by
exploiting the personnel data before the RCT. Columns 3-4 report the results from a diff-in-
diff regression of attrition on interactions between treatment arm and whether the current
month is during the RCT. Store dummies account for persistent differences across stores
in employee attrition and other characteristics (including treatment arm during the RCT),
and current month-year dummies account for differences in attrition over time. Relative to
column 1, results are slightly stronger in column 3, with statistical significance for all 4 ERPs.
The column 4 coefficient of -1.19pp corresponds to a reduction of roughly 20%. Results are
further robust to (and slightly stronger when) including store-specific time trends.
       To better understand the dynamics of the ERP effects, Figure 4 presents an event study
where having an ERP is interacted with quarter of the year. There is no pre-trend. While
ERP effects seem to take a few months to realize, with the largest estimated impact in the
RCT's 2nd quarter (Mar. 2015-May 2015), we cannot statistically reject that effects are the


                                               14
same throughout the RCT. The magnitudes of ERP effects remain economically important
over the 13 months of RCT, with an ERP impact of -15% in the RCT's final quarter. After
the RCT ends, and an ERP is rolled out to Control stores, the attrition difference between
treatment and Control stores vanishes. Panel (a) presents overall results. Panel (b) shows
similar results restricting to stores where no referrals are made during the RCT. Instead of
showing the difference between Control and ERP stores, panel (c) shows separate regressions
restricting to Control or ERP stores. The attrition rate is higher during summer (as for many
retail jobs) and increases over time as the country's overall economy improves. Repeating
panel (c) but restricting to stores with no RCT referrals, panel (d) shows similar results.
     Columns 5-6 of Table 5 show impacts of the ERPs on attrition of workers hired during
the RCT, whereas columns 7-8 show impacts on incumbent workers, i.e., people already
working at the firm at the start of the RCT. Panels (c)-(d) of Figure 3 show that non-
referred hires have higher survival in ERP than Control stores. Panels (a)-(b) of Figure B2
show ERP impacts interacted with quarter of the RCT for new hires and incumbents.
      Panels (c)-(d) of Figure B2 show that the overall impact on attrition is driven by a
decrease in voluntary attrition ("quits"), with no significant impact of ERPs on involuntary
attrition ("fires"). Focusing on quits further enhances event study statistical precision.
      Attrition magnitudes. Having an ERP reduces attrition by 15-20% durably for 13
months. As a benchmark, Friebel et al. (2018) study two treatments in an earlier RCT with
the study firm. First, informing workers about career incentives (i.e., that managers are
promoted from within) had no impact on turnover. Second, a letter from the CEO to store
managers asking them "to do what they can" to reduce turnover led them to spend more
time with employees and brought down turnover by 25% for several months before reverting
back. The firm has also tried out various initiatives on their own to reduce turnover and
most have been unsuccessful. For example, before we started working with the firm in 2015,
the firm tried out increasing training for cashiers, introducing this gradually across stores,
but this failed to reduce turnover.
      The RCT ERP is one of the most successful initiatives the firm has ever had in terms
of reducing turnover. This is noteworthy, as the firm is mature and modern, and has had
top executives with prior experience leading major grocery chains in Western Europe.
      Besides being economically sizable, the magnitude of the ERP effects is still plausible.
As another benchmark, Bloom et al. (2014) show that randomly assigning employees to work
from home reduces attrition by half in Chinese call centers.
     Absences. Appendix Table B3 shows no significant impact of ERPs on absence.
Column 2 (baseline) estimates a coefficient close to 0. Column 4 ("diff-in-diff") indicates
that ERPs reduce absence by 8%, but the coefficient is statistically insignificant.

                                             15
        Total hires and other store-level outcomes. Table B4 presents impacts of having
an ERP on store-level outcomes using a store-month panel. Panel A uses only data from the
RCT, whereas Panel B exploits the pre-RCT period to add store fixed effects, as in columns
3-4 of Table 5. As seen in column 1 of Table B4, total store hires decline by 0.13-0.22 hires
per month. This decrease of 10-19% in hires is consistent with our 15-20% drop in turnover.
The impact is statistically significant at the 10% level in Panel B, but not in Panel A.
    Table B4 also shows that ERPs do not have a statistically significant effect on stores'
monthly shrinkage, sales per worker, operational profit per worker, or total hours worked.
Still, the coefficients on hires, shrinkage, sales, and operational profit have a sign indicating
benefit to the firm. ERPs are estimated to increase operational profits by 2.0-2.3%; increase
sales per worker by 2%; and cut shrinkage by 1.7-2.5%. For these additional outcomes that
we did not pre-register as main outcomes, we lack power to detect small to moderate changes
using only store-month data.28 We see no evidence that ERPs harmed store-level outcomes.


4.2      Mechanisms for Overall ERP Impacts
The most natural reason an ERP would reduce turnover is by promoting referrals, as referrals
are less likely to quit and referrers may be more likely to stay to get a bonus. However, Section
4.2.1 provides evidence that promoting referrals explains only a modest share of the impact
of an ERP. Section 4.2.2 next discusses additional mechanisms that, while plausible ex ante,
are ex post inconsistent with the RCT results. Section 4.2.3 discusses mechanisms that are
consistent with the RCT evidence, including our preferred mechanism of workers valuing
being involved in hiring, and uses surveys to tease these apart.

4.2.1     Assessing Referrals as a Mechanism

How much of the effect of ERPs on attrition (a 15% reduction) comes via effects related to
referrals, i.e., getting more referrals or making referrers more likely to stay? The simplest
evidence against referrals as the main mechanism comes by comparing R0 and Control stores.
Workers in R0 stores have roughly 15% lower attrition than workers in Control stores, even
though the R0 treatment induced no referrals.
      A second way to address this question is mediation analysis. We repeat the analyses
in columns 1-2 of Table 5, but additionally control for whether someone is referred and/or
the number of referrals a person has made to date. The estimates imply that only 5% of the
  28
    Thus, in analyzing impacts on profits in Section 5, we will combine the treatment effects on attrition
with two different values of the cost of turnover, including one intended to account for lost sales following
Blatter et al. (2012). We also note that operational profit in Table B4 is not a full measure of profit (e.g., it
does not account for personnel costs at the central HR office).


                                                       16
impact of having an ERP on attrition is mediated via having more referral hires and having
workers made more referrals to date, whereas 95% of the impact remains unexplained. Also,
relative to someone who has not made a referral, someone who has made a referral is no
more likely to stay on average, though they are more likely to stay in the first 5 months after
a referral. For brevity, we present mediation results in Appendix A.7.
      Last, Appendix Table B6 shows that our main attrition results are similar when re-
stricting attention to stores where no referrals are made during the RCT. If no referrals are
made in a store, then there are no referrers, and only referrals that are made from other
stores, making it very hard for referrals to drive the impact of the ERP.29

4.2.2    Unlikely Mechanisms for Non-referral Channel

Peer effects in attrition from referrals. It is unlikely that peer effects from referrals or
referrers drive our results. First, there were relatively few referrals made. Second, and more
importantly, the overall impact of having an ERP on attrition is similar to our baseline
estimate even while restricting to stores where no referrals are ever made during the RCT.
      ERPs help the firm improve hiring decisions. Perhaps ERPs help store managers learn
about what type of candidates to hire, or free up time spent on interviews? This is also
unlikely to explain our results. Beyond the fact that ERPs have large effects in stores where
no referrals are made, ERPs have similar percentage impacts on incumbents relative to their
impacts on new hires. This mechanism cannot explain why ERPs reduce incumbent attrition.

    Other concurrent policies or managerial reactions in treatment stores. Throughout the
RCT, the firm did not differentiate any management practice by treatment status. Recall
that store managers were not aware there was an RCT. Further, having an ERP did not
affect firing or self-reported store manager time use (time use details in Appendix A.8).
      Control store frustration. Instead of workers in treatment stores being less likely to
quit, perhaps workers in control stores became more likely to quit, if they happened to
hear about the ERPs in other stores, a particular form of a treatment spillover. There is
evidence against this interpretation. First, HR was told to accept referrals from control
stores if employees called to make them, but they did not get any referrals from control
stores. Second, we instructed HR to record any complaints that it received from control
stores about there not being an ERP, but there were no complaints made. Third, in all the
surveys we conducted, both during and after the RCT, we never heard a worker mention
anything about control store frustration.
  29
    Results are similar if we restrict to stores with no referral hires (instead of no referrals made). Panels
(c) and (d) of Figure 3 show that non-referrals have better survival in ERP than Control stores.


                                                     17
4.2.3     Possible Mechanisms for Non-referral Channel

The impact of an ERP is strong in stores where no referrals are made; is relatively flat
over time; affects hires and incumbents in similar percentage terms; is driven by quits, not
fires; affects turnover, not absence; and treatment/control differences vanish once the ERP
is rolled out to control stores. What explains this? It should be a mechanism or mechanisms
that increase the non-wage value of working at the firm, making employees less likely to quit
but no more likely to exert effort to not be absent. Such mechanisms may include:

   1. Employees feel respected after being asked to be involved in hiring or liked having some
        say about who they might work with. Workers may value being involved in hiring,
        perhaps because it makes them feel respected (Ellingsen & Johannesson, 2007), or be-
        cause it gives workers some voice (Hirschman, 1970; Turco, 2016) or some real authority
        (Bartling et al., 2014; Rasul & Rogger, 2018; Rasul et al., 2020) in hiring.
   2. The introduction of an ERP is a positive signal about the firm being a better place to
      work. Instead of being simply about hiring or whom a worker gets to work with, an
      ERP may increase a worker's perception of the overall quality of the firm, e.g., having
        a costly ERP may raise a worker's expectation of the firm's future profitability.
   3. Workers think they may make referrals in the future. Even if relatively few workers
        made referrals during the RCT, workers may think that they will do so in the future.
   4. ERPs increase informal referrals. The ERPs could have increased informal referrals,
        i.e., people who may have informally heard about the job from a friend, but where the
        friend may not have been willing to call HR to register the referral.30

      To shed further light on these explanations, we conducted phone surveys with 222 store
managers and an in-store electronic kiosk survey with 113 store workers from the study firm.
We explained that ERPs had reduced attrition at the firm separate from generating referrals,
and asked them their opinion on which of the above four mechanisms (or a 5th option of a
mechanism of their own choosing) was most likely to explain the result. We randomized the
order in which the above four mechanisms were presented, with the option for the respondent
to provide their own alternative mechanism always presented last, as is common in surveys.
      Panel A of Table 6 shows that mechanism (1) is by far the most commonly chosen
explanation, chosen by 66% of managers and 50% of workers. There are modest differences
between workers and managers, e.g., a larger share of workers believe in mechanism (3), but
the overall message from both groups is the same.31
  30
    Recall that ERPs fail to boost informal referrals in our During RCT worker survey (see footnote 22).
  31
    For ERPs to credibly signal respect, workers must believe that candidates they refer will be hired.
Indeed, 97% of referred candidates were hired compared to roughly 20% of non-referred candidates. Also,


                                                  18
      Is it possible to parse further into whether (a) employees felt respected about being
involved in hiring or (b) whether they liked having some say about who they might work
with? We asked workers choosing (1) to specify whether (a) or (b) was the main reason
or whether both were equally likely. As seen in Panel B of Table 6, 15% said (a), 17%
said (b), and 67% said both were equally likely. While (a) and (b) may be conceptually
distinct, workers view them as closely related.32 We refer to (a) and (b) together as workers
valuing being involved in hiring. While researchers have not previously considered that
workers valuing being involved in hiring is a mechanism for the impact of ERPs, it is highly
consistent with evidence from practitioners, as we discuss further in Appendix A.9.
    Beyond surveying firm managers and workers about reasons for the indirect effects, a
complementary approach to identifying mechanisms is to use a vignette. In late 2018, we
surveyed a representative sample of 548 US workers, what we call the Vignette Survey of
US Workers. This allows us to study whether the mechanism we identify may hold in other
contexts. We used the following vignette (with bolding as in the original):

           An employee is working at a firm where an employee referral program is
       introduced. Under the program, employees are asked to refer their friends for jobs,
       and they are paid a bonus if their friend is hired. In addition, under the referral
       program, the firm will provide special consideration in the hiring process to
       referred candidates. Do you think the firm having the employee referral program
       would make the employee feel more respected?

In the survey, 68% of workers said having an ERP would likely make the employee feel more
respected, whereas only 11% said it was unlikely to make the employee feel more respected,
and 21% said they were uncertain. Appendix A.10 provides details on the Vignette Survey.
      Overall, our evidence indicates that most of the impact of ERPs does not come gener-
ating referrals. Rather, the explanation most supported by the survey evidence (intra-firm
and US vignette) and intra-firm data patterns is that workers feel respected after being asked
to be involved in hiring or value having some say about who they might work with.


5      The Impact of ERPs on Firm Profits
We use the results from Sections 3-4 to calculate the profitability of the ERPs. Past work
has calculated the profits of hiring a referral relative to a non-referral (Fernandez et al.,
most survey respondents indicated that referred candidates would likely be hired, giving a mean of 6.1 on a
scale between 1 (don't believe a referred friend would be hired) to 7 (are sure a referred friend will be hired).
  32
     This is unsurprising. Part of why someone may feel respected is that the firm is allowing them to help
influence who they might work with.


                                                       19
2000; Burks et al., 2015), but has yet to be able to calculate profit gains from an ERP. Since
the ERPs reduced turnover, but did not significantly affect absence, sales, or shrinkage, we
focus only on attrition impacts. ERPs may also reduce recruiting costs (e.g., due to less time
interviewing candidates), but we set that aside, given we lack applicant data on non-referrals.
    The attrition benefit of an ERP per worker-month is tc, where t is the impact of an
ERP on turnover and c is the turnover cost. We estimate t using column 2 of Table 5.
We present results where c is based on direct, administrative costs (c =e250) or where c
is based on the "full costs" of higher turnover (c =e1,150). Direct costs account for job
advertising costs and the time spent by employees to hire someone. Full costs additionally
account for lost productivity costs, which are hard to precisely detect experimentally, but
which we account for following Blatter et al. (2012).
      We also calculate benefits separately for referrals, non-referral new hires, and pre-RCT
incumbents. For population p, the benefit of lower turnover is p tp c, where p is the share
of ERP store worker-weeks represented by p, and tp is the attrition difference within p. See
Appendix A.11 for details on c and Appendix A.12 for details on calculating profits.
      The cost of an ERP is the bonus paid to the referrer. The cost per referral is b0 +
P r(both)  b1 , where b0 is the bonus paid upon hire; P r(both) is the probability that referrer
and referral stay 5 months after the referral; and b1 is the bonus paid after 5 months.
     Results. Panel A of Table 7 reports the overall benefits from having an ERP vs.
not. Starting with c =e250, the benefit from an ERP is e2.44 per worker-month, far above
the cost per worker-month of e0.10. Overall net profit per worker-month is e2.34 or 0.6%
of labor costs. Only 5% of the turnover benefits come from ERPs yielding referrals, who
have lower attrition. Most of the benefit comes from incumbents and non-referral hires
having lower attrition in ERP stores. Under c =e1,150, ERPs become even more profitable,
increasing profits by e11 per month, or 2.8% of labor costs, a substantial benefit in a
competitive industry like grocery retail.
      If ERPs are evaluated solely based on lower turnover from referrals (i.e., direct benefits
alone), benefits outweigh costs, with a return on investment (ROI) of 32% for c =e250 and an
ROI of 507% for c =e1,150, where ROI=100*(Benefit-Cost)/Cost. However, the comparison
is vastly different once we account for ERPs' indirect effects on turnover. Accounting for
direct and indirect effects, the ratio of ERP benefits to costs goes up by a factor of 19.
      Panel B of Table 7 repeats Panel A separately for the different ERPs. We use the more
conservative c =e250. Direct benefits (i.e., turnover benefits from referrals hired during the
RCT) are non-monotonic in the bonus, reflecting differences in the quality and prevalence
of referrals across treatment arms. Overall turnover savings are also non-monotonic in the
bonus, reflecting the non-monotonic relation in column 1 of Table 5. Focusing only on direct

                                              20
benefits yields misleading conclusions, e.g., on direct benefits alone, there is little profit
benefit from R120. R0 yields large overall gains despite producing 0 referrals.
      Panel C looks at profits under the post-RCT firmwide ERP rollout (discussed in further
detail in Section 7). The share of turnover benefits from referral hires is 14%, which is higher
than during the RCT, but most benefits are still not from referral hires.


6      Heterogeneity in ERP Impacts on Attrition
While we focus on the pre-registered overall impact of ERPs on attrition, we here examine
heterogeneity based on two dimensions often discussed in the management practices litera-
ture. ERP impacts are larger in higher-performing stores and better local labor markets.

      Store performance. A key question in experimentally evaluating any management
practice is how do effects vary based on initial performance of the treated units? As seen
in Panel A of Table 8, the direct effect of having an ERP on referrals does not significantly
vary with store productivity, though results are in the direction of larger effects in higher-
performing stores. In contrast, columns 1-3 of Panel B of Table 8 show that the overall effect
of ERPs on attrition is larger in stores that are more productive pre-RCT. As above, we use
three standard measures of retail performance: shrinkage rate, Log(Sales per Worker), and
Log(Operational Profits per Worker). We normalize each variable to ease interpretation.33
      Column 1 shows that for a store at the mean level of shrinkage, the impact of having
an ERP on attrition is -0.94pp per month or roughly -15%. However, at the 90th percentile
of store shrinkage (i.e., stores with the worst shrinkage), the impact of ERPs on attrition is
only -0.12pp or -2%, whereas at the 10th percentile, the ERP impact is -1.8pp or -27%.34
Similar results are found measuring store performance using sales or operational profit. For
a store at p10 of operational profit, the impact of ERPs on attrition is only -1%, whereas for
a store at p90, the ERP impact is -25%. Table B11 shows similar findings in split samples
based on above/below median pre-RCT performance, thus showing that our heterogeneity
findings are not driven by outliers or our use of linear interaction terms. In contrast, ERP
impacts do not vary based on stores' pre-RCT attrition rates.
      An interpretation of these results is that the ability of ERPs to generate feelings of
  33
     Table B7 shows that heterogeneity variables are correlated in expected directions. Still, all correlations,
besides that between sales and operational profit, are below 0.6 in magnitude, indicating that our different
heterogeneity analyses are not all exploiting the same comparisons across stores. To assess how direct benefits
of ERPs vary by store performance, one also needs to know how referral/non-referral differences vary. Table
B8 shows some evidence that referral/non-referral attrition differences are larger in higher-performing stores,
at least with respect to shrinkage as the performance measure, though standard errors are fairly large.
  34
     At p10, the ERP impact is -0.96+1.28*0.66=-0.12pp. At p90, the ERP impact is -0.96-1.28*0.66=-1.8pp.



                                                      21
involvement and respect is higher in higher-performing stores. In lower-performing stores,
the notion that the firm respects its workers may be less credible. The results are also
consistent with complementarity between ERPs and the other management practices that
drive performance in those stores.35 Thus, our results are broadly consistent with work
showing HR management (HRM) practice complementarity (Ichniowski et al., 1997; Boning
et al., 2007), as well as supportive of theories of management practice complementarity.

      Local labor markets. Another key question in analyzing an HRM practice is how
do effects vary by labor market quality? This is hard to answer in most RCTs because it
requires observing effects across many labor markets. Beyond work on management practices,
as noted by Topa (2019), examining heterogeneity in referral results by strength of the local
labor market is important because theories predict that referrals do different things in tight
and slack labor markets (Calvo-Armengol & Jackson, 2004). We exploit substantial cross-
municipality variation in 2015 unemployment rates: across the 238 stores, which are in 78
municipalities, mean unemployment is 7.7, the SD is 2.3, the min is 4.8, and the max is 15.4.
A municipality approximates a worker's local labor market in the country we study.
     The direct effect of ERPs does not vary by labor market quality (column 5 of Panel
A of Table 8). However, Panel B shows that the overall effect of an ERP on attrition is
significantly larger in better local labor markets. If the municipal unemployment rate is
at p90 (i.e., the local labor market is bad), our results imply that the impact of ERPs on
attrition is -0.24pp per month or -4%. In contrast, if the unemployment rate is at p10, the
ERP impact on attrition is -28%. In tight labor markets, workers have more options, so
attrition may respond more strongly to HR practices that make workers feel more respected.
Our results are broadly consistent with Burks et al. (2015), who show that differences between
referrals and non-referrals tend to be larger in stronger local labor markets. The difference is
we study the impact of ERPs, which are primarily driven by indirect effects, whereas Burks
et al. (2015) examine referrals vs. non-referrals.36
       To account for multiple hypothesis testing, Table 8 shows Westfall-Young adjusted p-
values for the interaction terms. These support that the treatment heterogeneity on overall
ERP effects for pre-RCT performance and labor marker quality is statistically significant.
       Profits. Panels C-D of Table 8 show that our attrition heterogeneity estimates imply
  35
     Our results are consistent with instead of indicative of complementarity because we do not measure
whatever practices may drive performance differences across stores. Non-management explanations for per-
formance differences are possible but seem unlikely (e.g., product selection and technology are similar across
stores). Appendix A.13 discusses further.
  36
     In our data, differences between referrals and non-referrals are also larger in better labor markets (Table
B8). However, this is far less consequential for profits compared to the indirect benefits of ERPs being larger
in better labor markets.



                                                      22
strong heterogeneity in profits. At stores in p90 of pre-RCT performance (based on shrinkage,
sales, and profits) or local labor market quality, ERPs decrease labor costs by around 5%.
For stores at p10 of performance or labor market quality, the impact is close to 0.
       Other heterogeneity. For brevity, Appendix A.14 discusses worker demographics.
ERP effects on attrition are larger among men than women, but do not vary by age. In
addition, having an ERP modestly increases the share of hires who are female.


7      Firmwide ERP Rollout
Because of the benefits shown in the RCT, the firm decided to roll out an ERP to the whole
firm (excluding management), including grocery stores previously in the control group. Man-
agement was interested in reducing turnover further, and taking into account that referrals
were increasing with bonus size in the RCT, they decided to make bonuses more attractive.
Under the new firmwide ERP, employees receive e30 when a referral is hired, plus an ad-
ditional e100 if both parties stay 3 months. Relative to the RCT bonuses, twice as much
money is paid at hire; the duration that referrer and referral must stay is 2 months lower;
and total payment (e130) is higher than in all RCT arms. As the ERP was extended to non-
grocery workers, namely, food production and logistics workers, we examine how ERPs work
in these jobs, which are perceived as more attractive (based on surveys discussed below).
      Other than covering the whole firm and using a larger bonus, the new firmwide ERP
is similar to the RCT ERPs. As before, referrals are made by calling HR. The new ERP
was rolled out firmwide in Jan. 2017, and, as in the RCT, was introduced using posters,
letters, and meetings (Figure E1 shows posters from the rollout). As in the RCT, the firm
did not accompany the new ERP by emphasizing that workers were valued or that retention
was important. Unlike for the RCT, for the time period of the firmwide ERP rollout (i.e.,
Jan-May 2017), we only have data on who made each referral, not on who was referred.
      Results on referral rates. Panel A of Table 10 summarizes the ratio of referrals
made to hires across different jobs and time periods. Among grocery store workers, the
ratio of referrals made to hires is 12% in the post-RCT period (Jan.-May 2017), which is an
increase above the 5% ratio in the RCT's highest bonus arm, R120.37 In contrast, among
non-grocery workers in food production and logistics, the post-RCT ratio is 37%.
      Thus, while front-loading and raising the bonus increases referrals for grocery jobs, the
ratio of referrals made to hires only increases to 12%; this suggests that front-loading plays a
  37
   The post-RCT ratio for grocery workers is similar across the 5 arms of the previously completed RCT
(Panel (a) of Figure 2).



                                                 23
role, but is unlikely the main cause of our RCT finding that ERPs modestly boost referrals
for grocery jobs. Also, the referral rate is substantially higher for non-grocery jobs.
      Grocery jobs can be separated into cashier and non-cashier grocery jobs (e.g., butcher,
baker, assistant manager), with non-cashier jobs seen as more attractive. Table 10 shows
that the referrals ratio is higher for non-cashier jobs both during and after the RCT.
     Results on attrition. For grocery workers, as noted above, the RCT treatment effect
on attrition vanishes once an ERP is rolled out to control stores. While Figure 4 uses all
our data, we can also use data only from the RCT and post-RCT periods (i.e., no pre-RCT
data) to estimate how much attrition falls in control stores relative to treatment stores due
to the rollout. As seen in the diff-in-diff in Table B9, the rollout ERP reduces monthly
attrition by 1.36pp in control stores, which is similar (and opposite) to the 1.19pp RCT drop
in treatment stores in column 4 of Table 5. This corroborates that ERPs reduce attrition.
We cannot analyze the attrition of non-grocery workers because our main worker-month
panel only covers grocery workers.


7.1     Using Surveys to Understand the Referral Rate Results
As during the RCT, why are there relatively few referrals for grocery jobs during the rollout?
Why are there more referrals for non-grocery jobs, i.e., those in logistics and food production?
The answer supported by surveys is that non-grocery jobs are more attractive, and people
prefer to refer friends to more attractive jobs. While there are differences between grocery
and non-grocery jobs other than attractiveness, these differences seem to reinforce our story.38
Being more willing to refer for better jobs is also consistent with the model in Appendix D.
      Employee and manager surveys on why the RCT ERP generated few refer-
rals. Table 9 shows that managers and workers believe that the reason why the RCT only
modestly increased referrals is because grocery jobs are regarded as undesirable. In the fall
2016 manager survey, we asked an open question on why ERPs had little impact on getting
referrals. Undergrads in a lab classified the reasons into 10 categories. The most common
explanation, given by half of managers and four times more common than the next most
common explanation, is that grocery store jobs are undesirable (column 1 of Panel A). In
column 2, the share rises to 68% if we exclude the mechanical explanation of no open jobs,
the response that ERPs worked well, and instances where managers gave no reason. Panel
  38
     For production and logistics jobs, pay is higher than for cashier jobs, making the fixed e30 + e100
referral bonus a smaller share of pay. Another difference is that, unlike grocery jobs, not everyone's friends
could work in logistics or food production. Most logistics jobs are truckdriver positions requiring a license.
Food production jobs require working at a central facility (unlike the grocery store jobs which are located
around the country). Such restrictions should work against generating more referrals.


                                                     24
B of Table 9 shows that similar findings apply to workers. We gave cashiers the six most
frequently mentioned reasons from the manager survey and asked them to rank them.39 51%
listed "Many people perceive working conditions in supermarkets as not very attractive (e.g.
low salary, high workload)" as the #1 reason why employees were not making referrals.
      Other reasons received limited support. On reputational concerns vis-a-vis the firm
(as opposed to vis-a-vis friends), 12% of managers gave a response about people not making
referrals to avoid embarrassment. Likewise, only 16% of workers thought "Employees don't
want to be responsible if their friend doesn't do a good job" was the main reason for the
limited impacts observed.
       General public surveys on occupational attractiveness and why there were
more referrals for non-grocery than grocery jobs in the rollout. Given the above
surveys results, we wanted to learn more about how cashier jobs are regarded compared to
others. Thus, we did a survey of the general population in the host country. Panel (a) of
Figure 5 shows ratings of different occupations' attractiveness. Cashier jobs, comprising 90%
of grocery hires in the RCT, score the lowest. Non-grocery jobs at the firm, namely, those
in logistics and food production, rate substantially higher.40 Instead of grocery jobs being
unattractive, could results be driven by our firm being unattractive? Panel (b) of Figure 5
indicates not, as our firm is well-regarded relative to other retail firms in the country.
     In a second survey of the general public (General Population Survey 2 ), we also asked
why there were more referrals for non-grocery than grocery jobs in the rollout. We asked
them why they thought that few referrals were made for grocery jobs, whereas significant
referrals were made for non-grocery jobs. As seen in Column 3 of Panel A of Table 9, 74%
of respondents ascribed the difference in referral rates between grocery and non-grocery jobs
to grocery jobs being undesirable. Appendix A.15 discusses alternative explanations.
      Vignette evidence. As discussed in Appendix A.10 for brevity, we also find in our
Vignette Survey of US Workers (see Section 4.2.3) that US workers describing their current
job as more attractive are more willing to refer a qualified friend for a hypothetical opening.


8      Concluding Remarks and External Validity
ERPs are a very common management practice used in hiring. ERPs may affect firms in two
ways: (1) Directly, by affecting referrals in quantity or quality, or (2) Indirectly, via costs or
  39
     These were the five most frequently mentioned reasons; to these, we added a sixth reason that wasn't
mentioned, namely, that the size of the bonus could have been too small.
  40
     While Panel (a) of Figure 5 accords with many aspects of occupational prestige in the US, there are
differences, e.g., doctors or teachers are not ranked very highly. This reflects historic reasons (the country is
a post-communist society) as well as lower earnings in these professions relative to required qualifications.

                                                       25
benefits separate from affecting referrals. We use the first RCT on ERPs in a for-profit firm
and the post-RCT firmwide ERP rollout to better understand these two pathways.
     On (1), we find that larger bonuses increase referrals and that referrals are higher
quality than non-referrals, though the share of referrals is modest, at least relative to statistics
from studies of informal referrals. Despite this, the direct profit benefits of ERPs are greater
than ERP costs (with an ROI of at least 30% based on direct benefits alone), so ERPs are a
valuable management practice in our setting based on direct benefits alone. Larger bonuses
decrease referral quality, and the direct profit benefits of ERPs are non-monotonic in the
bonus. There are more referrals for more attractive jobs. These results broadly support
models where workers are altruistic toward friends (e.g., Bandiera et al., 2009; Ashraf &
Bandiera, 2018), and run contrary to popular claims that ERP bonus size does not affect
referrals (Bock, 2015).
    However, the most important finding of our paper concerns (2). Namely, the firm's
ERPs have substantial indirect benefits. ERPs durably reduce turnover by 15-20% and these
effects are present even in stores where no referrals are made. 95% of the profit gains of ERPs
come from indirect benefits, thus swamping the direct benefits, and profit gains are larger in
stores with better pre-RCT performance and in better local labor markets. Surveys suggest
that indirect benefits arise from employees valuing being involved in the hiring process and
having some say over who they would work with. The indirect effects we observe broadly
support the Ellingsen & Johannesson (2008) model of respect in the workplace. Beyond
ERPs, our results help rationalize why firms seek employee participation in hiring (beyond
the importance of using worker information for selection). Beyond hiring, the notion that
HR practices that involve workers may cause them to feel more respected may be relevant
for many workforce practices, such as idea suggestion systems and 360 evaluation.
      We are aware that--as in many other RCTs--we cannot fully rule out alternative
mechanisms for the indirect effects. Our main contribution, though, is to be the first paper
to measure the overall effects of ERPs, as well as the first to separately measure the direct
and indirect effects of ERPs. We believe that our findings help rationalize why ERPs are
a common management practice. Specifically, not only can ERPs be profitable based on
the referrals they generate, but they may be highly profitable and have first-order effects on
total firm labor costs even when they generate relatively few referrals.
      Our 13-month RCT is quite long relative to most existing studies on management
practices41 and impacts on attrition were as large in the last quarter of the RCT as in the
  41
    E.g., the work-from-home RCT in Bloom et al. (2014) lasted for 9 months. In another noteworthy
example, Jayaraman et al. (2016) study the impact of raising wages on productivity. Initial effects dissipate
by month 2 and they refer to their 4 months of data as an extended period of time. Most firms are unwilling
to carry out firm-wide RCTs for many years when the goal is to learn from the RCT to maximize profits.


                                                     26
first. Still, one may wonder whether indirect effects would have persisted several years into
the future. We cannot experimentally answer this question because the firm rolled out ERPs
to the whole firm after the successful RCT, but we can look instead at whether the use of the
management practice persisted in the longer-run (Bloom et al., 2020). At our last discussion
with management in May 2019, about 2.5 years after the RCT ended, the firm continued
to use the rolled-out ERP. In informal interviews in late 2018, both executives and store
managers report high satisfaction with having an ERP. According to auxiliary records from
the firm, referral rates remain sizable at roughly 30% for non-grocery jobs, and remain fairly
low (but non-trivial) at roughly 10% for grocery cashier jobs.
     In all one-firm RCTs, it is important to consider whether conclusions are likely to be
different in other contexts, even when the sample size is very large. On (1), our results do
not imply in general that ERPs will only modestly increase formal referrals--in fact, the
post-RCT ERP was very effective in motivating referrals for non-grocery jobs at our firm. In
a high-skilled context, it could be that people are more responsive to bonuses, or potentially
less responsive, e.g., if referral-making is instead driven by strong career motivations.
      On (2), would ERPs generate sizable indirect effects in other contexts? As seen in
Panel B of Table 10, we observe substantial indirect effects for different jobs and ERPs
within our firm, suggesting that indirect effects could be substantial for other low-skill jobs.
Our analysis does not cover high-skill jobs, but we speculate that ERPs may still generate
indirect benefits from workers valuing being involved in hiring. Of course, workers in high-
skill jobs may feel more respected than workers in low-skill jobs, so it is possible that indirect
benefits of ERPs would be lower. Higher skill jobs also often have much lower hiring rates,
even for referred workers. On the other hand, if people are more willing to make referrals
for better jobs, then there may be more opportunities to be involved in hiring for high-skill
jobs than for low-skill jobs, possibly making respect benefits larger for high-skill jobs.
       To go beyond casual observation and speculation on external validity of the indirect
effects, note that our Vignette Survey of US Workers (see Section 4.2.3) strongly supported
that ERPs may also make US workers feel more respected. In that survey data, US workers
with a bachelor's degree or higher are 10pp (s.e.=4.0pp) more likely than less-than-bachelor's
workers to agree that having an ERP would make an employee feel more respected. This is
consistent with the possibility that indirect benefits of ERPs occur in contexts with higher-
skill workers.
       Future RCTs can examine the ideas from our paper in other settings, both other low-
skill settings and high-skill ones, and both for ERPs and other management practices.




                                               27
References
Aghion, Philippe, & Tirole, Jean. 1997. Formal and Real Authority in Organizations. Journal
 of Political Economy.
Ashraf, Nava, & Bandiera, Oriana. 2018. Social Incentives in Organizations. Annual Review
  of Economics.
Ashraf, Nava, Bandiera, Oriana, Davenport, Edward, & Lee, Scott S. 2020. Losing
  Prosociality in the Quest for Talent? Sorting, Selection, and Productivity in the Delivery of
  Public Services. American Economic Review.
Bandiera, Oriana, Barankay, Iwan, & Rasul, Imran. 2009. Social Connections and Incen-
 tives in the Workplace: Evidence From Personnel Data. Econometrica.
Bandiera, Oriana, Prat, Andrea, Hansen, Stephen, & Sadun, Raffaella. 2020. CEO
 Behavior and Firm Performance. Journal of Political Economy.
Bartling, Bjo¨ rn, Fehr, Ernst, & Herz, Holger. 2014. The Intrinsic Value of Decision
 Rights. Econometrica.
Bayer, Patrick, Ross, Stephen L., & Topa, Giorgio. 2008. Place of Work and Place of
  Residence: Informal Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy.
 ´nabou, Roland, & Tirole, Jean. 2003. Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation. Review of
Be
  Economic Studies.
Blader, Steven, Gartenberg, Claudine, & Prat, Andrea. 2020. The Contingent Effect of
  Management Practices. Review of Economic Studies.
Blatter, Marc, Muehlemann, Samuel, & Schenker, Samuel. 2012. The Costs of Hiring
  Skilled Workers. European Economic Review.
Bloom, Nicholas, & Van Reenen, John. 2007. Measuring and Explaining Management Prac-
  tices Across Firms and Countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bloom, Nicholas, & Van Reenen, John. 2011. Human Resource Management and Productiv-
  ity. Handbook of Labor Economics.
Bloom, Nicholas, Eifert, Benn, Mahajan, Aprajit, McKenzie, David, & Roberts,
  John. 2013. Does Management Matter? Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bloom, Nicholas, Liang, James, Roberts, John, & Ying, Zhichun Jenny. 2014. Does
  Working from Home Work? Evidence from a Chinese Experiment. QJE.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mahajan, Aprajit, McKenzie, David, & Roberts, John. 2020. Do
  Management Interventions Last? Evidence from India. AEJ: Applied.
Bock, Laszlo. 2015. Work Rules!: Insights from Inside Google. Twelve.
Boning, Brent, Ichniowski, Casey, & Shaw, Kathryn. 2007. Opportunity Counts: Teams
 and the Effectiveness of Production Incentives. Journal of Labor Economics.
Brown, Meta, Setren, Elizabeth, & Topa, Giorgio. 2016. Do Informal Referrals Lead to
  Better Matches? Evidence from a Firm's Employee Referral System. Journal of Labor Economics.
Bruhn, Miriam, & McKenzie, David. 2009. In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice
  in Development Field Experiments. AEJ: Applied.
Burks, Stephen V., Cowgill, Bo, Hoffman, Mitchell, & Housman, Michael. 2015. The
 Value of Hiring through Employee Referrals. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Calvo-Armengol, Antoni, & Jackson, Matthew O. 2004. The Effects of Social Networks


                                              28
  on Employment and Inequality. American Economic Review.
CareerBuilder.com. 2012. Referral Madness: How Employee Referral Programs Turn Good
 Employees Into Great Recruiters and Grow Your Bottom Line. CareerBuilder e-Book.
Castilla, Emilio J. 2005. Social Networks and Employee Performance in a Call Center. American
 Journal of Sociology.
Del Carpio, Lucia, & Guadalupe, Maria. 2018. More Women in Tech? Evidence from a
 Field Experiment Addressing Social Identity. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13234.
DellaVigna, Stefano, & Gentzkow, Matthew. 2019. Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics.
DeLong, Thomas, & Vijayaraghavan, Vineeta. 2002. S.G. Cowen. HBS Case Study.
Dustmann, Christian, Glitz, Albrecht, Scho                       ¨ cker, Herbert. 2015.
                                               ¨ nberg, Uta, & Bru
 Referral-based Job Search Networks. Review of Economic Studies.
Ekinci, Emre. 2016. Employee Referrals as a Screening Device. RAND Journal of Economics.
Ellingsen, Tore, & Johannesson, Magnus. 2007. Paying Respect. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives.
Ellingsen, Tore, & Johannesson, Magnus. 2008. Pride and Prejudice: The Human Side of
  Incentive Theory. American Economic Review.
Fernandez, Roberto M., Castilla, Emilio J., & Moore, Paul. 2000. Social Capital at
  Work: Networks and Employment at a Phone Center. American Journal of Sociology.
Friebel, Guido, Heinz, Matthias, Krueger, Miriam, & Zubanov, Nikolay. 2017. Team
  Incentives and Performance: Evidence from a Retail Chain. American Economic Review.
Friebel, Guido, Heinz, Matthias, & Zubanov, Nick. 2018. Middle Managers, Personnel
  Turnover and Sales: a Long-term Field Experiment in a Retail Chain. WP, Frankfurt University.
Gosnell, Greer K., List, John A., & Metcalfe, Robert D. 2020. The Impact of Manage-
 ment Practices on Employee Productivity: A Field Experiment with Airline Captains. Journal
 of Political Economy.
Granovetter, Mark. 1974. Getting a Job. Harvard University Press.
Hirschman, Albert O. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty. Harvard University Press.
Hoffman, Mitchell. 2017. The Value of Hiring through Employee Referrals in Developed Coun-
 tries. IZA World of Labor.
Ichniowski, Casey, & Shaw, Kathryn. 1999. The Effects of Human Resource Management
  Systems on Economic Performance: An International Comparison of US and Japanese Plants.
  Management Science.
Ichniowski, Casey, & Shaw, Kathryn. 2012. Insider Econometrics: A Roadmap for Estimat-
  ing Empirical Models of Organizational Design and Performance. Handbook of Organizational
  Economics.
Ichniowski, Casey, Shaw, Kathryn, & Prennushi, Giovanna. 1997. The Effects of Human
  Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines. American
  Economic Review.
Jayaraman, Rajshri, Ray, Debraj, & de Ve   ´ricourt, Francis. 2016. Anatomy of a Contract
  Change. American Economic Review.
Kuhn, Peter J., & Yu, Lizi. 2020. How Costly is Turnover? Evidence from Retail. Journal of
 Labor Economics, Forthcoming.

                                              29
Kumar, Vita, Petersen, J. Andrew, & Leone, Robert P. 2010. Driving Profitability by
 Encouraging Customer Referrals: Who, When, and How. Journal of Marketing.
Landers, Renee, Rebitzer, James B., & Taylor, Lowell J. 1996. Rat Race Redux: Adverse
  Selection in the Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms. American Economic Review.
Lazear, Edward. 2000. Performance Pay and Productivity. American Economic Review.
Mas, Alexandre, & Moretti, Enrico. 2009. Peers at Work. American Economic Review.
Milgrom, Paul, & Roberts, John. 1990. The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technol-
 ogy, Strategy, and Organization. American Economic Review.
Montgomery, James D. 1991. Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Toward an Eco-
 nomic Analysis. American Economic Review.
Nagin, Daniel, Rebitzer, James B., Sanders, Seth, & Taylor, Lowell J. 2002. Moni-
 toring, Motivation, and Management: The Determinants of Opportunistic Behavior in a Field
 Experiment. American Economic Review.
Oyer, Paul, & Schaefer, Scott. 2011. Personnel Economics: Hiring and Incentives. Handbook
 of Labor Economics.
Rasul, Imran, & Rogger, Daniel. 2018. Management of Bureaucrats and Public Service
 Delivery: Evidence from the Nigerian Civil Service. The Economic Journal.
Rasul, Imran, Rogger, Daniel, & Williams, Martin J. 2020. Management, Organiza-
 tional Performance, and Task Clarity: Evidence from Ghana's Civil Service. Journal of Public
 Administration Research and Theory, Forthcoming.
Rebitzer, James B., & Taylor, Lowell J. 2011. Extrinsic Rewards and Intrinsic Motives:
 Standard and Behavioral Approaches to Agency and Labor Markets. Handbook of Labor Eco-
 nomics.
ReferralPrograms.org. 2017. 2017 Referral Programs Benchmarks Report. Online report.
Ritter, Joseph A., & Taylor, Lowell J. 1994. Workers as Creditors: Performance Bonds
  and Efficiency Wages. American Economic Review.
Scott, Neil W., McPherson, Gladys C., & et al. 2002. The Method of Minimization for
  Allocation to Clinical Trials: A Review. Controlled Clinical Trials.
Shaw, Kathryn. 2009. Insider Econometrics: A Roadmap with Stops Along the Way. Labour
  Economics.
SHRM. 2016. Designing and Managing Successful Employee Referral Programs.
Simon, Curtis J., & Warner, John T. 1992. Matchmaker, Matchmaker: The Effect of Old
  Boy Networks on Job Match Quality, Earnings, and Tenure. Journal of Labor Economics.
Syverson, Chad. 2011. What Determines Productivity? Journal of Economic Literature.
Ton, Zeynep. 2014. The Good Jobs Strategy. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Topa, Giorgio. 2011. Labor Markets and Referrals. Handbook of Social Economics.
Topa, Giorgio. 2019. Social and Spatial Networks in Labour Markets. Oxford Review of Economic
 Policy.
Turco, Catherine J. 2016. The Conversational Firm. Columbia University Press.
Westfall, Peter, & Young, S. Stanley. 1993. Resampling-based Multiple Testing. Vol. 279.
Young, Alwyn. 2019. Channeling Fisher: Randomization Tests and the Statistical Insignificance
 of Seemingly Significant Experimental Results. Quarterly Journal of Economics.


                                             30
      Figure 1: Referral Program Posters Used During RCT (translated and with firm identifiers redacted)


                                                                                               Inviteafriendtoworkat
                 /ZZ
                  &/ZDED                                                                             FIRMNAME­
                 ZZ                                                                            workingtogetherwillbe
                                                                                                         fun!




31
     tZZZZ                                                            If your friend meets the requirements of the position and gets
                                                                      employed, you will receive X ­ euro!*
                                                                       Itonlytakes4steps:


      &                                  dZ
      Z                Z                 Z
      ZZZ                                ZZZ                              Findasuitable          Calland                Tellyourfriend        Onceyourfriend
      ZZ                                 Z                                                                                                    ishired geta
                                                                          candidatefor           registeryour           whichstores
                                                                                                                                              bonus!
                                                                          yourstoreor            friend***              arelookingfor
                                                                          anotherstore                                  employees
                                                                          seekingstaff**

     ,ZZZZZ                                                          *Amountofbonusaftertaxes.Youreceivethefirstpartofthebonus( 15)whenthecandidateishiredand
     ZZZZZ                                                           therestofthebonusifyouandyourfriendstayatFIRMNAMEforatleast5months(youreceivethebonus
                                                                     togetherwithyoursalaryinthefollowingmonth).
     &ZZZZZZZZ,KDW'&/ZD                                              **Forinformationaboutvacancies,talktoyourstoremanagerorvisitHOMEPAGEFIRM
     dZZW,KEEhDZDW>KzED                                              ***Toregisteryourfriend,callPHONENUMBER(EMPLOYEENAME,recruitingmanager).




             (a) Information Only Arm (R0)                               (b) Information + Bonus Arms (R50, R90, R120)
           Figure 2: Referrals Made over Time in the RCT and Firmwide Rollout




                                         .2
                                                    RCT period                                  Firmwide rollout


                 Referrals Made per Hire
                   .05      .1
                             0    .15
                        16




                                                                 16




                                                                16




                                                                                     16




                                                                                                       17




                                                                                                                         17
                      eb




                                                              20




                                                              20




                                                                                   20




                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                       20
                    -F




                                                            ay




                                                           ug




                                                                                 ec




                                                                                                   ar




                                                                                                                     ay
                                                                                                  M
                  15




                                                                                D
                                                        -M




                                                                                                                   -M
                                                         -A




                                                                              6-




                                                                                                7-
                ec




                                                      16
                                                      16




                                                                                                                 17
                                                                            01




                                                                                              01
               D




                                                    20
                                                   20




                                                                                                               20
                                                                          p2




                                                                                            n2
                                                ne
                                                 ar




                                                                                                             pr
                                                                        Se




                                                                                          Ja
                                              M




                                              Ju




                                                                                                            A
                                                                       Date of Referral

                                                                       Control               R0
                                                                       R50                   R90
                                                                       R120


                                                                    (a) Five Arms
                             .2




                                                    RCT period                                  Firmwide rollout
                 Referrals Made per Hire
                  .05       .1
                             0      .15
                        16




                                                                 16




                                                                16




                                                                                     16




                                                                                                       17




                                                                                                                         17
                      eb




                                                              20




                                                              20




                                                                                   20




                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                       20
                    -F




                                                            ay




                                                           ug




                                                                                 ec




                                                                                                   ar




                                                                                                                     ay
                                                                                                  M
                  15




                                                                                D
                                                        -M




                                                                                                                   -M
                                                         -A




                                                                              6-




                                                                                                7-
                ec




                                                      16
                                                      16




                                                                                                                 17
                                                                            01




                                                                                              01
               D




                                                    20
                                                   20




                                                                                                               20
                                                                          p2




                                                                                            n2
                                                ne
                                                 ar




                                                                                                             pr
                                                                        Se




                                                                                          Ja
                                              M




                                              Ju




                                                                                                            A




                                                                       Date of Referral

                                                                       Control               ERP


                                                                 (b) ERP vs. Control


Notes: This figure shows referrals made divided by hires over time during the experiment across the 5
experimental arms. The vertical line is located in between 2016m9-2016m12 and 2017m1-2017m3, and
separates the RCT period from the firmwide rollout. Panel (a) shows the 5 arms and panel (b) shows
control vs. ERP stores. In panel (b), over the four quarters of the RCT, the number of referrals made is
24, 17, 21, and 26, whereas the ratio of referrals per hire is 3.8%, 2.3%, 2.3%, and 3.7%. The ratio is lower
in June-August 2016 because there is more hiring then.

                                                                         32
    1.00
                                                 Figure 3: Survival Curve Comparisons




                                                                                              1.00
                                             Wilcoxon Test for Equality: p = 0                                      Wilcoxon Test for Equality for R50 v. R120: p = .047
                                                                                                                     Wilcoxon Test for Equality for R50 v. R90: p = .09




                                                                                              0.75
    0.75




                                                                                           Survival
 Survival




                                                                                             0.50
   0.50




                                                                                              0.25
    0.25




                                                                                              0.00
    0.00




                                                                                                       0        5              10                          15                     20
            0          5            10                     15                    20                                       Month of tenure
                               Month of tenure
                                                                                                                           R50                     R90
                           Non-referred               Referred                                                             R120



                (a) Referrals vs. Non-referrals                                                       (b) Referral Survival by Bonus Level
    1.00




                                                                                              1.00
                                                                                                                                           Wilcoxon Test for Equality: p = .001
    0.75




                                                                                              0.75
 Survival
   0.50




                                                                                           Survival
                                                                                             0.50
    0.25




                                                                                              0.25
    0.00




            0          5            10                     15                    20
                                                                                              0.00




                               Month of tenure

                               Control               R0                                                0        5              10                          15                     20
                                                                                                                          Month of tenure
                               R120                  R50
                               R90                                                                                  Control store                   ERP store



     (c) Survival of Non-Referrals by Bonus                                                     (d) Survival of Non-Referrals, by ERP
                      Group                                                                               Stores vs. Control


Notes: This figure presents different survival comparisons. Panel (a) compares referrals and non-referrals in
terms of survival. Panel (b) analyzes the survival of referrals across the three positive bonus groups. Panel
(c) analyzes the survival of non-referrals according to the five randomized treatments (Control, R0, R50,
R90, R120). Panel (d) repeats panel (c) but splits according to whether there was an ERP, thereby
grouping R0, R50, R90, and R120 together vs. Control. We restrict attention to workers hired during the
RCT (December 2015-December 2016), but we follow them here through May 2017.




                                                                                      33
              Figure 4: Event Studies: ERP Lowers Attrition during the RCT, and the Effect is
             Reversed Once ERP is Rolled out to Control Stores. ERP Effects are Similar in Stores
                                    with No Referrals During the RCT.

                                No ERP                       RCT period               Firmwide rollout                                     No ERP                      RCT period               Firmwide rollout
             2




                                                                                                                           2
             1




                                                                                                                           1
 Coefficient estimate




                                                                                                               Coefficient estimate
                 0




                                                                                                                               0
          -1




                                                                                                                        -1
   -2




                                                                                                                 -2
             -3




                                                                                                                           -3
             -4




                                                                                                                           -4
                  5

                  8

                 11


                  2

                  5

                  8

                 11


                  2

                  5

                  8

                 12


                  3

                  5




                                                                                                                                 5

                                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                               11


                                                                                                                                 2

                                                                                                                                 5

                                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                               11


                                                                                                                                2

                                                                                                                                5

                                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                                2

                                                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                                                 5
                 m

               4m




               5m


                m

                m




               6m


                m

                m




                m

                m




                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                               m




                                                                                                                             5m


                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                               m




                                                                                                                             6m


                                                                                                                              m

                                                                                                                             6m


                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                               m
               m




               m




               m




                                                                                                                             m




                                                                                                                             m




                                                                                                                             m
              2-




              15

              15




              16

              16




              17

              17




                                                                                                                            2-

                                                                                                                            14




                                                                                                                            15

                                                                                                                            15




                                                                                                                            16




                                                                                                                            17

                                                                                                                            17
             01

            14

            01




            15

             01




            16




                                                                                                                           14

                                                                                                                           01




                                                                                                                           15

                                                                                                                          01




                                                                                                                           01

                                                                                                                          16
            m




                                                                                                                          m
           20

           20




           20

           20




           20

           20




                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                         20
          -2

         20

          -2




         20

          -2




         20




                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                        -2




                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                        -2




                                                                                                                        -2

                                                                                                                        20
        14




                                                                                                                       14
        3-

        6-




        3-

        6-




        1-

        4-




                                                                                                                      6-




                                                                                                                      3-

                                                                                                                      6-




                                                                                                                      3-




                                                                                                                      1-

                                                                                                                      4-
        6




       12




       12




                                                                                                                     12




                                                                                                                     12




                                                                                                                      6
       9-




       9-




       9-




                                                                                                                     9-




                                                                                                                     9-




                                                                                                                     9-
      20

      m




      m

      m




      m

      m




      m

      m




                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                     m




                                                                                                                     m

                                                                                                                     m




                                                                                                                    m

                                                                                                                     m




                                                                                                                     m

                                                                                                                     m
     m

     m




     m

     m




     m




                                                                                                                   m

                                                                                                                   m




                                                                                                                   m

                                                                                                                   m




                                                                                                                   m
    14




    15

    15




    16

    16




    17

    17




                                                                                                                  14




                                                                                                                  15

                                                                                                                  15




                                                                                                                  16

                                                                                                                  16




                                                                                                                  17

                                                                                                                  17
  14

  14




  15

   15




  16




                                                                                                                 14

                                                                                                                 14




                                                                                                                 15

                                                                                                                15




                                                                                                                16
 20




 20

 20




 20

 20




 20

 20




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                               20
20

20




20

20




20




                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                              20
                                          Quarter relative to start of RCT                                                                          Quarter relative to start of RCT



                               (a) ERP Impact in All Stores                                                   (b) ERP Impact in Stores with No Referrals

                                 No ERP                      RCT period               Firmwide rollout                                     No ERP                      RCT period               Firmwide rollout
             8




                                                                                                                           8
   2 3 4 5 6 7




                                                                                                                 2 3 4 5 6 7
 Attrition in pp per month




                                                                                                               Attrition in pp per month
             1




                                                                                                                           1
             0




                                                                                                                           0
                 5

                  8

                 1

                 2

                  5

                  8

                11


                 2

                  5

                  8

                12


                  3

                  5




                                                                                                                               5

                                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                                              11


                                                                                                                               2

                                                                                                                               5

                                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                                              11


                                                                                                                               2

                                                                                                                               5

                                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                                              12


                                                                                                                               3

                                                                                                                               5
               m

                m

                1

              5m


                m

                m




              6m

              6m


                m




                m

                m




                                                                                                                             m

                                                                                                                              m




                                                                                                                            5m


                                                                                                                              m

                                                                                                                              m




                                                                                                                            6m


                                                                                                                              m

                                                                                                                              m




                                                                                                                              m

                                                                                                                              m
              m




              m




              m




                                                                                                                            m




                                                                                                                            m




                                                                                                                            m
             2-

             14




             15

             15




             16




             17

             17




                                                                                                                           2-

                                                                                                                          14




                                                                                                                          15

                                                                                                                          15




                                                                                                                          16

                                                                                                                          16




                                                                                                                          17

                                                                                                                          17
           14

           01




           15

           01

            01




           16




                                                                                                                         14

                                                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                         15

                                                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                         16
           m




                                                                                                                         m
          20




          20

          20




          20




          20

          20




                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                        20
         20

         -2




         20

         -2


          2




         20




                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                       -2




                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                       -2




                                                                                                                       20
       14




                                                                                                                     14
        6-




        3-

        6-




        3-

        6-




        1-

        4-




                                                                                                                      6-




                                                                                                                      3-

                                                                                                                      6-




                                                                                                                      3-

                                                                                                                      6-




                                                                                                                      1-

                                                                                                                      4-
      12




      12




                                                                                                                    12




                                                                                                                    12
      9-




      9-




      9-




                                                                                                                    9-




                                                                                                                    9-




                                                                                                                    9-
     m




     m

     m




     m

     m




     m

     m




                                                                                                                   m




                                                                                                                   m

                                                                                                                   m




                                                                                                                   m

                                                                                                                   m




                                                                                                                   m

                                                                                                                   m
     20




                                                                                                                   20
    m

    m




    m

    m




    m




                                                                                                                  m

                                                                                                                  m




                                                                                                                  m

                                                                                                                  m




                                                                                                                  m
   14




   15

   15




   16

   16




   17

   17




                                                                                                                 14




                                                                                                                 15

                                                                                                                 15




                                                                                                                 16

                                                                                                                 16




                                                                                                                 17

                                                                                                                 17
  14

  14




  15

  15




  16




                                                                                                                14

                                                                                                                14




                                                                                                                15

                                                                                                                15




                                                                                                                16
 20




 20

 20




 20

 20




 20

 20




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                               20
20

20




20

20




20




                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                              20
                                           Quarter relative to start of RCT                                                                          Quarter relative to start of RCT

                                             Control store                ERP store                                                                    Control store                ERP store



                             (c) ERP vs. Control in All Stores                                                (d) ERP vs. Control, Stores with No Refs


Notes: Panel (a) analyzes the impact of having a randomly assigned ERP (i.e., one of the four RCT
ERPs) on attrition. The solid line denotes the coefficient estimates, with the dotted lines denoting the 95%
confidence intervals. The regression used in plotting the event study is similar to column 4 of Table 5. The
difference is that, instead of having an ERP*RCT dummy (i.e., an ERP store dummy times a dummy for
the current month being during the RCT), we interact the ERP dummy with year-quarter dummies. The
omitted quarter is the last quarter before the RCT, 2015m9-2015m11. Panel (b) repeats Panel (a) while
restricting attention to workers in stores where no referrals are ever made during the RCT. Panels (c)
and (d) perform regressions separately for ERP and Control stores. We regress attrition on year-quarter
dummies (where the quarter before the RCT, 2015m9-2015m11, is the omitted category), as well as store
dummies, a 5th order polynomial in tenure, age controls (with age in 6 bins, plus a dummy for age being
missing), gender (including a dummy for gender being missing), and a dummy for being a cashier. All
coefficients shown are normalized relative to Control store mean attrition in the quarter before the RCT
(i.e., we show the year-quarter regression coefficients plus Control store mean attrition in
2015m9-2015m11). Panel (c) uses all stores. Panel (d) repeats panel (c) restricting attention to workers in
stores where no referrals are ever made during the RCT. Note that some "quarters" are not three months,
reflecting that the pre-RCT, RCT, and post-RCT period are not multiples of three months. We divide the
13 months of the RCT into Dec. 2015-Feb. 2016, March 2016-May 2016, June 2016-Aug. 2016, and Sept.
2016-Dec. 2016, but results are similar if have 4 months for the first quarter instead of the last quarter.
The RCT actually begins toward the end of 2015m11 (on 11/20/2015), but results are robust to dropping
2015m11.
                                                                                                         34
                                  Figure 5: Attractiveness of Occupations and Grocery Chains in our Firm's Host Country

            Service: banking and finance                                                               Retailer 3
                                 Engineer
                             IT specialist
                                  Lawyer
              Food production operative                                                                Study firm
                                   Doctor
                      Logistics operative
                                    Nurse
           Service: public administration
                                                                                                       Retailer 2
                      Service: sales clerk
                                  Teacher
        Service: beautician or hairdresser
            Service: restaurants and bars
                            Police officer                                                             Retailer 1
                                Secretary
                Service: car maintenance
                               Taxi driver
                                  Cashier                                                                    Lidl
                                             1        2        3        4         5        6       7                1    2                   3                   4      5
                                                 Occupational attractiveness (1-lowest, 7-highest)                      Employer attractiveness (1-lowest, 5-highest)




35
                                      (a) Occupations                                                                   (b) Grocery Chains

     Notes: Dots are mean attractiveness ratings, and whiskers are 95% confidence intervals for the means. The data are from our General Population
     Survey 1 in early 2017. The sample is people from the general public of the country where our retailer is based. In panel (a), in measuring occupational
     attractiveness, we use an approach similar to that in the General Social Survey (see GSS Methodological Report 122 by Tom Smith and Jaesok Son).
     Specifically, to reduce survey time and ensure maximize time, respondents are asked about 6 occupations from our overall list of 18 occupations. Each
     respondent saw the cashier occupation plus 5 other occupations. In the survey in panel (b), each respondent is asked about all 5 grocery retailers
     (our study firm, 3 other local retailers, and the German chain Lidl).
Table 1: Comparing Pre-Treatment Store Means across the Treatment Groups (N = 238
                          stores): Randomization Check

                                                        Comparing All 5 Arms                              ERP vs. Control

                                      Control         R0        R50         R90        R120      p-val     ERP         p-val
                                        (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)         (8)
 Outcome Variables
 Monthly hires                       1.05***          0.13        0.12       0.16       0.34     0.77        0.19      0.22
                                      (0.12)        (0.18)      (0.20)     (0.20)     (0.27)               (0.15)
 Attrition rate                      5.01***         0.29         0.32       0.30       0.27     0.98        0.29      0.52
                                      (0.42)        (0.54)      (0.57)     (0.58)     (0.59)               (0.46)
 Quit rate                           5.40***          0.35       -0.17       0.55      -0.09     0.82        0.16      0.78
                                      (0.51)        (0.76)      (0.69)     (0.72)     (0.69)               (0.56)
 Fire rate                           0.78***         0.15        0.05       0.03       0.19      0.92       0.10       0.59
                                      (0.18)        (0.25)      (0.23)     (0.23)     (0.24)               (0.19)
 Absences per worker                 1.23***         0.10        -0.10      -0.08      0.10      0.25       0.00       0.96
                                      (0.08)        (0.12)      (0.13)     (0.11)     (0.11)               (0.09)
 Sales in 000's of e                209.78***         1.08      -16.13      -2.22       0.71     0.97       -4.14      0.87
                                     (23.34)       (30.01)     (31.07)    (32.16)    (33.82)              (25.56)
 Log(Sales per worker)               9.01***         -0.01       -0.02      -0.02       0.01     0.86       -0.01      0.67
                                      (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)               (0.02)
 Log(Operational profit              7.44***         0.00        -0.02      -0.02      -0.01     0.99       -0.01      0.68
 per worker)                          (0.03)        (0.04)      (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)               (0.03)
 Log(Shrinkage ratio)                -3.58***        0.03       -0.03       0.00       -0.03     0.72       -0.01      0.83
                                      (0.03)        (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.05)     (0.05)               (0.04)
 Non-outcome Variables
 Head count                          25.11***         0.58      -0.98        0.75       0.08     0.99        0.11      0.97
                                      (2.70)        (3.55)     (3.76)      (3.93)     (3.89)               (2.99)
 In big city                         0.37***          0.11       0.07        0.09      -0.06     0.42        0.05      0.51
                                      (0.07)        (0.10)     (0.10)      (0.10)     (0.10)               (0.08)
 Lidl store nearby                   0.24***          0.05       0.03       -0.05      -0.05     0.66        0.00      0.95
                                      (0.06)        (0.09)     (0.09)      (0.09)     (0.09)               (0.07)
 2015 unemployment rate in           7.85***         -0.26      -0.44       0.06       0.06      0.79       -0.15      0.69
 a store's municipality               (0.33)        (0.45)     (0.48)      (0.49)     (0.48)               (0.37)
 Store size (square meters)         648.55***       13.31       -35.44      4.29      -15.70     0.97       -8.38      0.90
                                      (58.78)      (75.23)     (79.57)    (82.38)    (79.43)              (64.10)
 Share of store workers              77.76***        1.87        2.26       1.02       1.54      0.62        1.68      0.16
 who are cashiers                      (1.08)       (1.52)      (1.53)     (1.55)     (1.47)               (1.20)
 Share female                        88.93***        -1.14      0.60        -0.49      0.51      0.84       -0.13      0.92
                                      (1.18)        (1.70)     (1.66)      (1.75)     (1.72)               (1.33)
 Worker age                          32.31***         0.12      0.36        -0.57      0.68      0.62        0.15      0.83
                                      (0.63)         (.81)     (0.85)      (0.88)     (0.81)               (0.69)

Notes: This table compares pre-RCT store-level characteristics across the different treatment arms. Each row contains two
store-level OLS regressions (N = 238). In columns 1-6, we regress characteristics on dummies for the four treatment arms.
The estimated constant corresponds to the mean in the control group. The p-value in column 6 correspond to the test for
joint significance of the treatment dummies. Columns 7-8 lump all treatment stores together and compares ERP versus
Control stores. There are 46 stores in the control group, and 48 stores in each of the 4 treatment groups. "Head count" is the
number of employees in a store. Note that the breaking of attrition into quits and fires is only available starting in 2015m4.
The "quit rate" is the rate of voluntary attrition. The randomization was not stratified, but as noted in footnote 19, we drew
randomization allocations numerous times, with an eye for detecting balance on several variables. The pre-RCT period is
2014m2-2015m10 (excluding 2015m11 since the RCT began midway through that month). The two treatments from Friebel
et al. (2018) are also balanced across the treatments here, with p-values of 0.87 (column 6) and 0.61 (column 8) for one
treatment and 0.77 (column 6) and 0.82 (column 8) for the other treatment. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%                                              36
                                    Table 2: Summary of the Treatments and Referrals Made during RCT

                                                                    Control         R0          R50          R90           R120
                                                                   (N = 46)      (N = 48)     (N = 48)     (N = 48)      (N = 48)
                         Panel A: Summary of the Five RCT Arms
                         Information to encourage referrals No Yes                               Yes           Yes          Yes
                         (posters, letter, meeting)
                         Bonus paid to referrer after                   0            0           e15          e15           e15
                         referral is hired




37
                         Bonus paid to referrer if both                 0            0           e35          e75          e105
                         referrer & referral stay 5 months
                         Panel B: Total Hires, Referrals Made, and Referrals Hired
                         Number of Hires                   763      748        750                             709           841
                         Number of Referrals Made           0        0          18                              28            42
                         Number of Referral Hires           3        0          16                              27            39
                         Referrals as Share of Hires      .004       0        .021                            .038          .046
     Notes: This table compares means across treatment arms in the number of referrals made, as well as in the characteristics of referrals (as reported
     by the referrer). The first two columns of Panel B are blank because there were no referrals made in the Control or R0 conditions. During 2016, e1
     was worth between about $1.04-$1.16 USD.
Table 3: The Impact of ERPs on Whether New Hires are Referred (Worker-level) and on
        a Store's Total Number of Referrals Hired During the RCT (Store-level)

                                             (1)           (2)           (3)
                        Panel A: The Impact of ERPs on Whether
                        New Hires are Referred
                        DV = Hire is a Referral, Observation is a Hire
                        R0                 -0.004*         -0.000
                                           (0.002)        (0.005)
                        R50               0.017**         0.022**
                                           (0.008)        (0.009)
                        R90               0.034**        0.037***
                                           (0.014)        (0.013)
                        R120              0.042***       0.041***
                                           (0.014)        (0.011)
                        ERP                                           0.025***
                                                                       (0.006)
                        Observations        3,811         3,811         3,811
                        Controls             No            Yes           Yes
                        Panel B: The Impact of ERPs on the
                        Total Referrals Hired During the RCT
                        DV = Total Refs Hired, Observation is a Store
                        R0            -0.065*     -0.079
                                      (0.037)    (0.107)
                        R50           0.268** 0.340**
                                      (0.126)    (0.163)
                        R90           0.497** 0.506**
                                      (0.220)    (0.223)
                        R120          0.747** 0.715***
                                      (0.300)    (0.258)
                        ERP                                  0.371***
                                                              (0.133)
                        Observations         238           238           238
                        Controls             No            Yes           Yes
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the store level. The implied p-values here are also similar when made
using randomization inference following Young (2019). In Panel A, an observation is a grocery worker hired
during the RCT and the dependent variable is whether the worker was referred. Controls are store-level
controls (pre-RCT average monthly turnover rate, pre-RCT average monthly head count, pre-RCT average
monthly sales, square footage, region dummies, whether the store is in a big town, and whether there is a
Lidl store nearby), year-month of hire dummies, age controls (with age in 6 bins, plus a dummy for age
being missing), gender (including a dummy for gender being missing), and a dummy for being a cashier. In
Panel B, an observation is a store and the dependent variable is the number of referrals made. The controls
are the store-level controls from Panel A. The Panel B findings are similar if the dependent
variable is total referrals made (instead of hired) during the RCT or if the dependent
variable is the share of RCT hires who are referred. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%
                                                    38
                                          Table 4: Comparing Referrals vs. Non-referrals during the RCT

                          Dep. var.:                                      Attrition (0-1) x 100                 Monthly absences
                          Method:                                      Linear Probability Model                Negative Binomial
                                                                       (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)
                          Hire was referred                         -6.96***                                 -0.19
                                                                     (1.17)                                 (0.20)
                          Referred X first 5m                                    -8.76***                              -0.41*
                                                                                  (1.62)                               (0.24)
                          Referred X after 5m                                     -2.86*                                0.22
                                                                                  (1.67)                               (0.45)
                          Referred X R50                                                      -11.00***                            0.07
                                                                                                (1.66)                           (0.37)
                          Referred X R90                                                       -6.15***                           -0.08
                                                                                                (1.61)                           (0.39)




39
                          Referred X R120                                                      -6.09***                          -0.41*
                                                                                                (2.00)                           (0.24)

                          Observations                               14,879       14,879        14,879      14,879     14,879    14,879
                          Mean DV if referred=0                       15.91                      15.91       1.362                1.362
                          Workers                                     3,796        3,796         3,796       3,796     3,796      3796
                          Mean DV in first 5m if ref=0                             17.75                               1.152
                          Mean DV after first 5m if ref=0                          9.100                               2.143
                          F(R50 vs. R90)                                                         0.04                              0.77
                          F(R50 vs. R120)                                                        0.06                              0.28
     Notes: An observation is a worker-month during the RCT (December 2015-December 2016). The sample is grocery workers hired during the RCT.
     Standard errors clustered at the store level are in parentheses. Columns 1-3 are linear probability models, where the dependent variable is whether
     an employee attrites in a month, with coefficients multiplied by 100 for readability. That is, the DV equals 0 until the worker attrites, where s/he
     has a DV=1 and exits the sample. Columns 4-6 are negative binomial models, where the dependent variable is a worker's number of sick days in a
     month. Controls are the same as in Panel A of Table 3, plus current month-year dummies and a 5th order polynomial in tenure. Columns 2 and 5
     also have a dummy for "after 5m of tenure." In column 3, the excluded category is non-referred, but we do not include a "Referred X R0" dummy
     because there were no referral hires in R0 stores. We also do not include "Referred X Control" because there are only 3 hires in Control
     stores--however, the other coefficients are similar if "Referred X Control" is included. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                  Table 5: The Impact of the ERPs on Attrition (Linear Probability Models)

                      Type of workers:             All         All         All         All       Hires     Hires       Inc         Inc
                      Sample period:              RCT         RCT         Pre         Pre        RCT       RCT        RCT         RCT
                                                                         &RCT        &RCT
                      Coefficients                   Treatment          Treatment X RCT                        Treatment
                      shown:                          dummies            period dummies                         dummies

                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)
                      R0                         -1.00**                  -0.92*                  -0.91             -1.05***
                                                  (0.40)                  (0.47)                 (1.15)               (0.34)
                                                 [0.015]                 [0.071]                [0.425]              [0.001]
                      R50                          -0.47                  -0.98*                  -1.29                -0.38
                                                  (0.45)                  (0.50)                 (1.32)               (0.39)
                                                 [0.301]                 [0.060]                [0.336]              [0.323]
                      R90                       -1.59***                -1.75***                -2.90**             -1.25***




40
                                                  (0.38)                  (0.41)                 (1.22)               (0.34)
                                                 [0.000]                 [0.000]                [0.016]              [0.001]
                      R120                        -0.81*                 -1.11**                  -1.95                -0.52
                                                  (0.42)                  (0.45)                 (1.23)               (0.36)
                                                 [0.066]                 [0.016]                [0.110]              [0.141]
                      ERP                                   -0.97***                -1.19***              -1.76*                -0.81***
                                                              (0.34)                  (0.39)               (1.04)                 (0.28)
                                                             [0.007]                 [0.008]              [0.087]                [0.003]
                      Store FE                     No          No         Yes         Yes         No        No         No          No
                      Mean DV if ERP=0            6.677       6.677      5.434       5.434      17.24     17.24      4.362       4.362
                      Observations               74,188      74,188     203,798     203,798     14,879    14,879     55,953      55,953
                      Workers                    10,003      10,003      16,942      16,942      3,796     3,796      5,870       5,870

     Notes: Standard errors clustered by store are in parentheses. "Rand-t" randomization inference p-values following Young (2019) are in square
     brackets (1,000 replications). All columns are linear probability models, where the DV is whether an employee attrites in a month, with coefficients
     multiplied by 100 for readability. An observation is a worker-month. Controls are the same as in column 1 of Panel A of Table 3 except we do not
     use age controls because age is missing for workers who are hired before the start of the data and who do not attrite, and this missingness is highly
     correlated with attrition. Columns 3 and 4 add store fixed effects and exclude pre-RCT store-level controls. In terms of type of workers, "All" refers
     to all grocery workers working at the firm from Feb 2014-Dec 2016, "Hires" refers to people hired during the RCT, and "Inc" refers to incumbents,
     i.e., individuals working with the firm at the time the RCT began. The RCT period is December 2015-December 2016. Data from the firmwide ERP
     rollout (2017m1-2017m5) are not used here; this is why the number of workers in columns 3 and 4 is roughly 17k instead of 18k. In the
     randomization inference, we do not account for the fact that allocations were re-drawn multiple times in the actual RCT randomization, as described
     in footnote 19. Stars are based on the clustered standard errors in parentheses, with * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                            Table 6: Why did ERPs Reduce Turnover Separate from Generating More Referrals?

                    Reason                                                                        Managers            Workers
                                                                                                   N=222              N=113
                    Panel A: Why did ERPs Reduce Turnover Separate from Generating More Referrals?
                    "Employees felt more respected after being asked to be                           66%                 50%
                    involved in the hiring process or liked having some say
                    about who they might work with"
                    "Because FIRM NAME started the referral program, it made                         23%                 14%
                    employees think that FIRM NAME was a better place to work."
                    "Employees didn't have a person to recommend, but                                13%                 28%
                    they hoped to recommend a friend in the future."
                    "Employees referred their friends, but they did not tell                          3%                 5%
                    FIRM NAME about it (and they did not get a bonus). The




41
                    employees or their friends were more likely to stay
                    at FIRM NAME."
                    "None of these reasons are important or likely. What                             10%                 4%
                    is your explanation?"
                    Panel B: Parsing Further for Workers Selecting the First Reason Listed Above
                    "Employees felt more respected after being asked to be                                               15%
                    involved in the hiring process"
                    "Employees liked having some say about who they                                                      17%
                    might work with"
                    "Both were equally likely"                                                                           67%
     Notes: This is from the Post-RCT Surveys of Grocery Store Managers and Workers. Managers did the survey by phone and could select more than
     one option (hence, the options don't add up to 100%). Workers did the survey via an electronic kiosk at work and could only select one option. The
     manager response rate was 93%, with 222 of 238 managers responding. For Panel A, we randomized the order in which the four reasons were
     presented to respondents, with "None of these reasons are important or likely" always presented last. For Panel B, as noted in the main text, for
     workers selecting "Employees felt more respected after being asked to be involved in the hiring process or liked having some say about who they
     might work with", we asked them to parse further about whether "Employees felt more respected after being asked to be involved in the hiring
     process" or Employees liked having some say about who they might work with" was the main reason or whether both were equally likely.
                                        Table 7: Profits from the ERPs

                       Panel A: Overall Profits from an ERP vs. Control
                       Turnover cost number:                           e250               e1,150
                       Justification:                                Admin cost         "Full cost"
                       Total savings in turnover costs                     2.44             11.21
                       Contribution to savings from:
                       Referrals hired during RCT                          0.13               0.58
                       Non-referral hires during RCT                       0.75               3.47
                       Pre-RCT incumbents                                  1.56               7.16
                       % of savings from referrals                         5%                 5%
                       hired during the RCT
                       Costs of the ERP                                    0.10               0.10
                       Profit per worker-month                             2.34             11.12
                       Profit as share labor costs                         0.6%             2.8%
                       Panel B: Profit by Particular ERP
                       (turnover cost = e250)
                                                    R0 R50                             R90      R120
                       Total savings in turnover costs               2.50      1.18    3.97      2.02
                       Contribution to savings from:
                       Referrals hired during RCT                      0       0.20 0.15         0.18
                       Non-referral hires during RCT                 0.44      0.42 1.25         0.92
                       Pre-RCT incumbents                            2.05      0.56 2.57         0.92
                       Costs of the ERP                                0       0.05    0.11      0.22
                       Profit per worker-month                       2.50      1.13    3.86      1.80
                         Panel C: Profits from Rollout ERP vs. Control
                         Turnover cost number:       e250    e1,150
                         Total savings in turnover costs                2.68            12.31
                         Contribution to savings from                   0.37             1.68
                         referrals hired during rollout
                         % of savings from referrals                    14%              14%
                         hired during the rollout
                         Costs of the rollout ERP                       0.54             0.54
                         Profit per worker-month                        2.13            11.76
Notes: This table reports profit calculations using the method outlined in Section 5. Panel A reports the profit gains from
having an ERP vs. Control, pooling all the RCT ERP treatments together. Panel B reports the profit gains from having one
of the particular ERPs compared to Control. Panel C reports the profit gains from having the ERP used in the firmwide
rollout (with e30 on hire and e100 after 3 months) vs. Control. All numbers are in euros per worker-month. Labor costs are
assumed to be e400 per worker-month. The difference between the "administrative costs" and "full costs" of turnover is that
the administrative costs are only the direct costs to hire and train a replacement and do not account for lost productivity, as
explained in Appendix A.11. See Appendix A.12 for further details on the profit calculation.

                                                              42
Table 8: Heterogeneity by Pre-RCT Store Performance and Local Unemployment: Direct
                        and Overall Effects of Having an ERP

          Characteristic:                     Log             Log            Log              Attri-       Unemploy
          (all normalized)                 shrinkage          sales       operational          tion         -ment
                                              rate             per          profit             rate          rate
                                           Higher is         worker           per
                                             worse.                         worker
                                               (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)
          Panel A: Direct Effects. DV = Hire is a Referral (x100).
          ERP                                2.46***        2.43***         2.30***          2.44***         2.44***
                                              (0.63)         (0.59)          (0.59)           (0.62)          (0.62)
          ERP X Characteristic                 -0.05          0.45            0.67             0.30            -0.94
                                              (0.54)         (0.53)          (0.47)           (0.49)          (0.59)
          Westfall-Young p-vals               {0.92}         {0.64}         {0.27}           {0.68}          {0.22}
          Panel B: Overall Effects. DV = Worker Attrites in a Month (x100).
          ERP                               -0.94***       -0.90***         -0.88***        -0.96***        -1.07***
                                             (0.33)         (0.33)           (0.33)          (0.35)          (0.33)
          ERP X Characteristic               0.66**         -0.57*           -0.64*           0.06           0.65**
                                             (0.31)         (0.30)           (0.35)          (0.24)          (0.25)
          Westfall-Young p-vals              {0.06}         {0.06}           {0.07}          {0.75}          {0.02}
          Panel C: Reduction in Labor Costs from Having an ERP, Assuming
          Turnover Cost of e250, i.e., "Admin Costs."
          Calculated for Stores at p10 and p90 of Various Characteristics
          10th Percentile Stores               1.1%           0.1%             0%              0.6%           1.2%
          90th Percentile Stores                0%            1.0%            1.0%             0.5%           0.1%
          Panel D: Reduction in Labor Costs from Having an ERP, Assuming
          Turnover Cost of e1,150, i.e., "Full Costs."
          Calculated for Stores at p10 and p90 of Various Characteristics
          10th Percentile Stores               5.1%           0.5%            0.2%             3.0%           5.4%
          90th Percentile Stores               0.3%           4.6%            4.9%             2.5%           0.7%
Main notes: Standard errors clustered at the store level are in parentheses. In Panel A, each column is similar to column 3 of
Table 4, with the difference being that we add two regressors: ERP X Characteristic and Characteristic. In Panel A, an
observation is a new hire during the RCT. In Panel B, each column is similar to column 2 of Table 5, with the difference being
that we add two regressors: ERP X Characteristic and Characteristic. In Panel B, an observation is a worker-month during
the RCT among all grocery workers. Panels C-D present the profit gains from having an ERP as a share of firm labor costs,
similar to Table 7. The difference is that we use the estimates in Panel B of this table to calculate the profit gains as a share
of labor costs for stores at the 10th percentile of a characteristic and at the 90th percentile of a characteristic. Panel C does
the calculation assuming a turnover cost of e250 (i.e., the administrative cost of turnover), whereas Panel D does the
calculation assuming a turnover cost of e1,150 (i.e., the full cost of turnover). Shrinkage is the share of inventory lost to theft,
spoilage, and other reasons, so higher shrinkage means worse performance.
Additional notes on inference: To account for multiple hypothesis testing in analyzing treatment effect heterogeneity, the
curly brackets display family-wise error rate (FWER) adjusted p-values based on the Westfall & Young (1993) free step-down
procedure (5,000 replications) and while accounting for clustering by store by using a clustered bootstrap. In both Panels A
and B, the family of tested hypotheses is the set of five tests about whether the coefficient on ERP X Characteristic equals 0
for the 5 displayed characteristics. That is, each family has 5 hypotheses. For multiple hypothesis testing adjustments applied
to our baseline overall attrition results in Table 5, please see Appendix A.6. Stars are based on the conventional
clustered-by-store standard errors in parentheses, with * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


                                                                43
       Table 9: Manager and Employee Surveys: Why Did the ERPs Generate Only a Few Referrals? General Popular Survey:
                     Why Fewer Referrals from Cashiers than from Logistics and Food Production Workers?

               Panel A: Managers & General Population
               Reason                                                    All managers           All managers           General population
                                                                           (N=156)           except those giving            (N=68)
                                                                                          reasons 8, 9, 11 (N=118)
               Undesirable job                                                48%                    68%                       74%
               No friends to refer                                            10%                    13%
               Didn't want to refer someone who could embarrass               12%                    13%
               People were unaware of referral system                          9%                    10%
               No trust that firm will pay the money                           6%                     7%
               Referral process was burdensome                                 5%                     5%
               Bonus too low; referral might not stay                          4%                     4%
               No open jobs in the store                                       6%
               Referral system worked in her store                            11%
               Other reasons                                                  11%                    10%                    3%




44
               No reasons mentioned                                            8%                                           22%
                   Panel B: Employee Survey (N=342)                                   Rank 1    Rank 2     Rank 3    Rank 4 Rank 5
                    "Many people perceive working conditions in supermarkets            51%       29%       13%        5%         3%
                    as not very attractive (e.g. low salary, high workload)"
                    "Employees' friends already have jobs"                              23%       32%       30%        6%        10%
                    "Employees don't want to want to be responsible                     16%       23%       36%        17%        8%
                    if their friend doesn't do a good job"
                    "Employees were not informed by the company about                   4%        12%       14%        50%       19%
                    the opportunity to refer a friend/did not know
                    how the referral program worked"
                    "The amount of money that employees could get                       7%         6%        6%        21%       59%
                    for a bonus was too low"

     Notes: This table is based on the During RCT Survey of Grocery Store Managers and Employees in fall 2016, as well as a post-RCT survey of the
     general population of the country where the study firm operates (General Population Survey 2 ). In the During RCT Survey, store managers in
     treatment stores were presented with the findings of the RCT and asked for their opinion why the ERPs had produced only a few referrals. Their
     answers, in free text, were classified into Reasons 1 to 11 by undergraduate coders. In the General Population Survey 2, randomly selected members
     of the general population were contacted after the ERP rollout and asked "why were there fewer referrals from cashiers than from the logistics and
     food production workers?". Their answers were coded similarly to managers. In the During RCT Survey, randomly selected cashiers were asked the
     same question as store managers, except that they had to choose from a fixed set of possible reasons.
Table 10: Heterogeneity by Job and by Time Period: Referrals Made as a Share of Hires
      (Panel A) and the Share of Turnover Savings from Referral Hires (Panel B)

                                           RCT               Post-RCT Rollout
               Panel A: Referrals Made as a Share of Total Hires
               All Grocery Jobs    3%                 12%
               Cashier             3%                 11%
               Grocery Non-cashier 5%                 17%
               Non-Grocery Jobs                       37%
               Panel B: Share of Turnover Benefits from Referral Hires
               (i.e., the Share of Benefits that are Direct Benefits)
               All Grocery Jobs       5%                 14%
                Cashier               4%                 13%
                Grocery Non-cashier 12%                  20%
               Non-Grocery Jobs                          35%
Notes: Panel A shows the number of referrals made as a share of total hires by job and period. For
example, if there were a job-period where employees made 3 referrals and for which 10 new workers were
hired, the number shown would be 30%. Italics are used to indicate that grocery jobs are separated into
cashier and grocery non-cashier jobs (e.g., butcher, baker, assistant manager). The time period for the
RCT is December 2015-December 2016. The post-RCT period is January 2017-May 2017, and is the period
during which the firm rolled out a new ERP to all the firm at once (paying e30 at hire and e100 after 3
months). During the post-RCT period, there are 1,079 hires in grocery jobs and about 500 hires in
non-grocery jobs. Panel B shows the share of turnover benefits from referral hires. The percentage shown
is the direct benefit share, whereas the indirect benefit share is equal to 100% minus the percentage shown.
For example, for grocery non-cashier jobs in the post-RCT ERP rollout, 20% of the turnover benefits are
direct and 80% are indirect. In both panels, the entry for non-grocery jobs during the RCT is missing
because the RCT was restricted to grocery jobs.




                                                    45
