                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                   EMPLOYEE COSTS OF CORPORATE BANKRUPTCY

                                        John R. Graham
                                         Hyunseob Kim
                                             Si Li
                                          Jiaping Qiu

                                      Working Paper 25922
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25922

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019

We thank John Abowd, Ashwini Agrawal, Jonathan Berk, Rob Fairlie, Todd Gormley, Michael
Hertzel, Joseph Hotz, Po-Hsuan Hsu, Robert Jarrow, Yawen Jiao, Pab Jotikasthira, Andrew
Karolyi, Bryant Kim, Pauline Leung, Chen Lin, David Matsa, Roni Michaely, William Mullins,
Paige Ouimet, Wendy Rotenberg, Ken Singleton, Yongjun Tang, Karin Thorburn, Michael
Waldman, Wei Wang, Liu Yang, Hayong Yun, and seminar and conference participants at AFA,
Census Bureau RDC Conference, Chicago Fed, Chinese University of Hong Kong, CICF, City
University of Hong Kong, Cornell University (Finance and Labor Economics), CSEF-EIEF-SITE
Conference on Finance and Labor, EFA, FIRS Conference, FMA Asia, IDC, Maryland Junior
Corporate Finance Conference, NFA, SFS Finance Cavalcade, SOLE/EALE, University of
Calgary, University of Hong Kong, and U.S. Census Bureau (CES) for helpful feedback. We also
thank Bert Grider at the TFSRDC for help with data and clearance requests, Nichole Szembrot at
the NYFSRDC (Cornell) for administrative support, and Dawoon Kim, Eric Kim, and Cindy Lu
for research assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been
reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. This research uses data from the
Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics Program, which was partially
supported by the following National Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093, SES-0339191 and
ITR-0427889; National Institute on Aging Grant AG018854; and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation. We are grateful to Lynn LoPucki at UCLA for sharing his Bankruptcy Research
Database and Edward Altman at NYU for sharing his dataset of default events. Kim
acknowledges generous financial support from the Kwanjeong Educational Foundation. Li and
Qiu acknowledge financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada. This paper was previously circulated under the title "Human Capital Loss in Corporate
Bankruptcy."

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John R. Graham, Hyunseob Kim, Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Employee Costs of Corporate Bankruptcy
John R. Graham, Hyunseob Kim, Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu
NBER Working Paper No. 25922
June 2019
JEL No. G32,G33,J21,J31,J61

                                        ABSTRACT

An employee's annual earnings fall by 10% the year her firm files for bankruptcy and fall by a
cumulative present value of 67% over seven years. This effect is more pronounced in thin labor
markets and among small firms that are ultimately liquidated. Compensating wage differentials
for this "bankruptcy risk" are approximately 2.3% of firm value for a firm whose credit rating
falls from AA to BBB, about the same magnitude as debt tax benefits. Thus, wage premia for
expected costs of bankruptcy are of sufficient magnitude to be an important consideration in
corporate capital structure decisions.

John R. Graham                                Si Li
Duke University                               School of Business and Economics
Fuqua School of Business                      Wilfrid Laurier University
100 Fuqua Drive                               Waterloo, ON
Durham, NC 27708-0120                         N2L 3C5, Canada
and NBER                                      sli@wlu.ca
john.graham@duke.edu
                                              Jiaping Qiu
Hyunseob Kim                                  DeGroote School of Business
Cornell University                            McMaster University
Johnson Graduate School of Management         Hamilton, ON
321 Sage Hall                                 L8S 4M4, Canada
114 East Avenue                               qiu@mcmaster.ca
Ithaca, NY 14853
hk722@cornell.edu
1. Introduction

        When a firm experiences a negative shock, its employees bear personal costs resulting from

labor market adjustments. An extensive literature documents such costs to workers caused by plant

closures, international trade, and environmental regulation, among other shocks (Jacobson,

LaLonde, and Sullivan, 1993; Walker, 2013; Autor et al., 2014; Hummels et al., 2014). In this

paper, we focus on costs to the workforce resulting from corporate bankruptcy and their

implications for the firm's risk-sharing role and capital structure decisions.

        According to the theory of the firm as an insurance provider, it is optimal for a risk-neutral

firm to provide insurance to risk-averse workers (e.g., Baily, 1974; Azariadis, 1975). Workers are

willing to accept lower wages in response, implicitly paying for this insurance (Guiso, Pistaferri,

and Schivardi, 2005). When firms choose to use more debt financing (perhaps to achieve tax

benefits), they increase bankruptcy risk, thereby reducing the risk-sharing benefit provided to

employees (Berk, Stanton, and Zechner, 2010). Employees in response demand higher promised

wages (Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981). We estimate these compensating wage differentials, which

can be thought of as an implicit bankruptcy-related cost of debt (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013). Most

empirical estimates of the bankruptcy costs of debt seem small relative to the benefits (the "debt

conservatism" puzzle; Graham, 2000).1 In this vein, our estimates help quantify a hard-to-measure

indirect cost of bankruptcy, namely increased wages due to reduced risk sharing. We explore the

extent to which wage premia could offset debt benefits as firms make capital structure choices.

        We investigate these issues by estimating the impact of an employer's bankruptcy filing

on its workers' earnings. Our analysis relies on worker-firm matched data from the U.S. Census

Bureau's Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) program from 1985 to 2008,


1
  Traditional costs of financial distress or bankruptcy include those due to the bankruptcy process, such as lawyer's
fees, loss of market share, and asset fire sales.

                                                         1
combined with a comprehensive database of public firm bankruptcy filings. The LEHD data allow

us to follow individual workers across firms over time and observe their wages and other

characteristics of employment, such as industry and geographical location. As a result, we are able

to estimate the effect of bankruptcy on employees, even when they change employers post-

bankruptcy.

       We construct a sample of 140 bankruptcy filings by U.S. public firms from 1991 to 2005

and follow for up to six years approximately 277,000 workers who were employed by the bankrupt

firms. We estimate the effect of bankruptcy filing on worker outcomes by comparing affected

employees to workers in control firms matched to bankrupt firms using key firm characteristics

before bankruptcy. In particular, using a propensity-score matching approach, we explicitly control

for observable employer characteristics that are likely to be correlated with post-bankruptcy

worker earnings, such as the firm's industry and economic performance.

       We find that on average, employee earnings begin to deteriorate in the year of bankruptcy,

relative to those of the control group. By two years after bankruptcy, annual earnings are 14%

lower than pre-bankruptcy annual earnings. The present value (PV) of earnings losses from the

year of bankruptcy to six years afterward is 67% of pre-bankruptcy annual earnings. Importantly,

earnings losses are larger for workers who leave the industry, and who work for small firms or in

thin local labor markets, suggesting that labor mobility is an important determinant of labor market

adjustments after corporate bankruptcy.

       In competitive labor markets, employees would consider expected earnings losses that

follow corporate bankruptcy and demand a wage differential ex ante. We estimate this

compensating wage differential using two approaches. First, we regress employee earnings on firm

leverage along with firm- and worker-level control variables, using 2.7 million worker-year



                                                 2
observations from the LEHD data. These regressions indicate that employees of highly levered

firms are indeed paid higher wages outside financial distress, controlling for firm and worker

characteristics, and time-varying industry and local labor market conditions. Second, we document

similar magnitude effects in an alternative approach based on a valuation model with plausible

assumptions (such as worker risk aversion). We find that the expected additional present value

cost to compensate for bankruptcy-driven earnings loss risk is about 1.3% (3.6%) of firm value for

a typical AA-rated (BBB-rated) firm, relative to a risk-free firm. This 2.3% incremental distress

cost is substantial in that it amounts to 51% (70%) of the tax benefits of corporate debt for an AA-

rated (BBB-rated) firm estimated in previous research (e.g., Graham, 2000). These two approaches,

despite relying on different assumptions and estimates, produce quantitatively similar magnitudes

of annual wage premia for bankruptcy risk (see Table 9). Overall, our analysis suggests that the

magnitude of bankruptcy effects on employees may help explain the debt conservatism puzzle.

       Our paper is related to two strands of literature. The first literature examines the earnings

losses of displaced workers. A central finding of this line of research is that job displacement (i.e.,

job loss resulting from mass layoffs) leads to large and persistent earnings losses (e.g., Jacobson,

Lalonde, and Sullivan, 1993; von Wachter, Handwerker, and Hildreth, 2009; Couch and Placzek,

2010; von Wachter, Song, and Manchester, 2011). This literature also shows that the effect of job

displacement on earnings is especially large when labor market conditions are weaker, such as in

recessions (Schoeni and Dardia, 2003; Kodrzycki, 2007; Davis and von Wachter, 2011).

       Our paper differs from the existing work on displaced workers in several important ways.

First, we focus on one specific financial shock on workers, namely corporate bankruptcy, as

opposed to pure job displacements. As we show later, the workers in our sample of bankrupt firms

are not necessarily displaced, with a substantial fraction of them staying with the bankrupt



                                                  3
employer. Thus, our estimates of earnings losses are based on bankrupt firm employees, whether

or not they separate from or remain with the firm after bankruptcy. Second, importantly, it is not

possible to directly infer the employee cost of bankruptcy from estimates in the displacement

literature, which is important for drawing implications for the corporate cost of debt and capital

structure. This is because i) given that not all employees leave the bankrupt firm, non-job

separators may not be an appropriate control group for bankrupt firm employees, even though they

are often used as the counterfactual earnings group in the job displacement literature; and ii)

relative to workers who leave the firm, workers who stay with the bankrupt firm may have different

earnings loss patterns associated with bankruptcy, which a displaced worker analysis would not

capture. For example, we find that firm stayers of bankrupt firms lose about present value 72% of

pre-bankruptcy annual earnings after bankruptcy relative to firm stayers of non-bankrupt firms.

Third, in a step beyond what most of the job displacement literature does, we attempt to disentangle

the effect of financial distress from economic distress on employee earnings.

        The second strand related to our paper is the finance literature on the impact of financial

distress on employees. Our paper is among the first to use worker-firm matched micro data to

examine labor market outcomes for individuals after financial distress of the firm.2 While previous

research has examined the effects of bankruptcy filings on firm-level outcomes such as accounting

performance and management turnover (Gilson, 1989; LoPucki and Whitford, 1992), relatively

little is known about the consequences of bankruptcy and financial distress for employees, other

than firm-level employment.3 Our paper estimates detailed changes in employee earnings upon


2
  A contemporaneous paper by Baghai, Silva, Thell, and Vig (2018) uses Swedish employer-employee matched data
to document that financially distressed firms lose their most skilled employees. However, they do not examine changes
in employee wages around financial distress nor wage premia for financial distress risk, which are our focus.
3
  For instance, using Compustat data on firm-level employment, Falato and Liang (2016) show that firms cut
employment substantially after loan covenant violations, and Agrawal and Matsa (2013) show that firms reduce
employment by about 30% during the years surrounding bond defaults. Similarly, Hotchkiss (1995) shows that firms
suffer employment reductions around Chapter 11 bankruptcy filings.

                                                         4
bankruptcy relative to a control group using worker-level data. To the extent that quantifying the

magnitude of employee earnings losses associated with default or bankruptcy is important (e.g.,

for estimating expected costs of financial distress; see the next paragraph and Matsa (2018)), our

approach quantifies figures important to this line of research, namely the present value of earnings

losses associated with corporate bankruptcy filings.

       We derive wage premia for bankruptcy risk as labor-related indirect bankruptcy costs.

Capital structure theories model that employee wage loss due to financial distress discourages

firms from using debt (e.g., Titman, 1984; Butt-Jaggia and Thakor, 1994; Berk, Stanton, and

Zechner, 2010). Agrawal and Matsa (2013) and Kim (2018) provide evidence of the importance

of this mechanism by showing that changes in the cost of job loss affect corporate capital structure

decisions. In our paper, we not only show evidence for the importance of this mechanism, but we

also quantify the magnitude of these wage premia for employees' earnings loss risk due to

bankruptcy. Differing from existing estimates of wage premia based on firm-level aggregate wage

data (Chemmanur, Cheng, and Zhang, 2013) or implied by compensating differentials for

unemployment risk (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013), we use worker-level wage data from LEHD to

directly estimate the wage premia. Our analysis suggests that the resulting additional compensation

cost is of similar magnitude to the tax benefit of debt and thus could play a first-order role in

corporate capital structure decisions. The wage premia are particularly large when workers face

limited mobility (e.g., employed by small firms, in smaller local labor markets).



2. Data and Descriptive Statistics

2.1. Data Sources and Sample Selection

2.1.1. Bankruptcy Event Data and LEHD Datasets


                                                 5
         We begin by identifying corporate bankruptcy cases from the UCLA-LoPucki Bankruptcy

Research Database (BRD).4 The BRD contains public companies with more than $100 million of

assets (measured in 1980 dollars) that filed bankruptcy cases from October 1, 1979 to present.5

We focus on public firms' bankruptcy filings because we examine capital structure implications

later in the paper.6

         We merge these bankruptcy events to worker-firm matched information from the U.S.

Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) program, establishment-

level databases, and the Compustat database. The LEHD data we have access to cover 30

participating U.S. states (see Table 1 for the list of covered states) and provide detailed information

on employment relationships such as employee earnings, industries, and geographical locations

and worker characteristics such as age, education, and gender.7 The annual wage records in LEHD

are non-missing as long as an individual reports positive earnings in any of the four quarters in the

year. However, if the individual earns nothing in any quarter of the year, the annual record is

missing (as opposed to showing zero earnings). Thus, missing observations are due to two potential

reasons. First, an individual may move to any of the 20 non-LEHD states or become self-employed

(in which case no earnings are reported in the LEHD data based on state UI records). Second, the


4
  We thank Lynn M. LoPucki at UCLA for sharing this database, which is also used by Jiang, Li, and Wang (2012),
Eckbo, Thorburn, and Wang (2016), and Goyal and Wang (2017).
5
  The majority of bankruptcy cases in the database are filed under Chapter 11 (reorganization) of the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code, while only a handful are filed under Chapter 7 (liquidation).
6
  Using a 235 private firm sample selected by BankruptcyData.com that have public debt or that BankruptcyData
deemed important, we find that employees of these private bankrupt firms experience almost three times larger
earnings losses after a bankruptcy filing than their public firm counterparts. Possible explanations include that public
firms, which tend to be larger, offer better opportunities for employees to develop general skills or to switch jobs in
general. The results are consistent with our findings that there is significant heterogeneity in employee costs of
bankruptcy depending on firm size and search frictions in the labor market. See Bernstein, Colonnelli, and Iverson
(2019) for a study of asset reallocation effects of bankruptcy using a large sample of bankruptcy filings by both public
and private firms. They focus on the difference between reorganization and liquidation but do not study employee
costs or capital structure implications of the bankruptcy processes.
7
  The Census Bureau imputes the education variable as follows. For each state, a logit model is used to estimate the
probability of belonging to one of 13 education categories using the characteristics such as age categories, earnings
categories, and industry indicators. The education category is then imputed based on the predicted probability.

                                                           6
individual may become unemployed and earn no wages in a given year. We empirically address

how these sample attrition issues affect our estimates in Section 3.1.

           We link datasets from the LEHD infrastructure with other Census Bureau establishment-

level datasets and subsequently with Compustat and BRD. Specifically, among the databases

available from the LEHD infrastructure, we use the Individual Characteristics File (ICF), which

provides worker-level characteristic variables; the Employment History File (EHF), which

contains annual and quarterly earnings records, locations (state and county) and industries for each

worker-firm pair; and the Unit-to-Worker Imputation File (U2W), which is used for job-location

imputation at the SIC (or NAICS) industry and county level. We use the Business Register Bridge

(BRB) and the Compustat-SSEL Bridge (CSB) in conjunction with the Standard Statistical

Establishment List (SSEL) to link the LEHD files with the Census Bureau's Longitudinal Business

Database (LBD), Compustat and the BRD. To avoid complications associated with legal ages for

employment and early retirement, we require that worker ages be between 22 and 50 in the year

before a bankruptcy filing (e.g., Davis and von Wachter, 2011). To exclude earnings changes due

to unstable employment relations with the firm (e.g., temporary workers), we focus on workers

with at least two years of tenure with the bankrupt firm one year before its bankruptcy filing.8

           Because wages are a key variable in our analysis, we provide details on LEHD wage

records below. As discussed in Abowd et al. (2009), the LEHD wage data are reported on a

quarterly basis with historical time series extending back to the early 1990s for many states (see

Table 1). The LEHD wages are extracted from the state unemployment insurance (UI) records and

correspond to the report of an individual's UI-covered earnings, which is retained in the database

as long as the worker earns at least one dollar of UI-covered earnings during a given quarter.



8
    Robustness tests requiring at least six years of tenure give similar results, which are available upon request.

                                                              7
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), UI coverage is comprehensive and comparable

across states. For example, UI covered 96% of total jobs and 92.5% of the wage component of

national income in 1994. The UI earnings include gross wages and salaries, bonuses, stock options,

tips and other gratuities, and the value of meals and lodging, where supplied. In some states,

employer contributions to certain deferred compensation plans, such as 401(k)s, are included in

total earnings.9

                                            [Table 1 about here]

2.1.2. Census Establishment-Level Data

           We use the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) to obtain comprehensive data on

employment and wage bills at establishments owned by bankrupt firms. The LBD tracks more than

five million establishments each year from 1977 to 2011 covering all U.S. states. The variables

available in the database include the number of employees, annual payroll, industry classifications,

location identifiers (e.g., states, counties), and parent firm identifiers. However, the LBD does not

contain data on worker-level earnings, industries, or location of employment, which are contained

in the LEHD.

2.1.3. Sample Selection: Bankrupt and Matched Firms

           We begin with 510 bankruptcy cases from the BRD from 1990 to 2005 (excluding

financials and utilities). We match these firms with Compustat and SSEL and require that they

have non-missing financial information from Compustat. This step produces 360 bankruptcy cases.

We then match these bankrupt firms with LEHD data and keep firms with at least ten employees

in LEHD one year before filing. LEHD data begin its coverage in 1990 (the exception is Maryland,

which begins coverage in 1985). The LEHD covers 30 states but excludes several large states in



9
    See https://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/cew/pdf/cew.pdf at the BLS.

                                                        8
earlier years of the coverage (for example, New Jersey starts coverage in 1996). See Table 1 for a

full list of the 30 states covered and years available. Because the LEHD earnings data we have

access to are only available up to 2008, we include only the bankrupt firms that file for bankruptcy

in or before 2005. This restriction allows employees of bankrupt firms in 2005 to have up to three

years of earnings data post-bankruptcy.

         To construct a matched sample from non-bankrupt firms, we first require that the non-

bankrupt firms have non-missing matching variable information and have at least ten workers from

LEHD one year before matching from 1990 to 2005. Then for each year and three-digit SIC

industry, we use a propensity score matching approach in which we use book assets, return on

assets (ROA), market-to-book, and total number of employees (from the LBD) to find matched

non-bankrupt firms. More specifically, we obtain the financial information in the year prior to

bankruptcy filings for bankrupt firms and the information for potential matches in the same year

and industry. 10 The propensity score matching is performed within each year-industry cell to

control for the influences of unobserved time-varying aggregate and industry conditions. Note that

we use ROA and market-to-book but not leverage in matching, which allows us to control for the

impact of firm performance but allows bankrupt firms to have different leverage than matched

firms.

         For each bankrupt firm in the sample, we choose one non-bankrupt firm that has the closest

linearized propensity score (LPS or log odds ratio) as a matched firm. We follow the matching

literature and require that the absolute difference in the LPS be less than or equal to 0.25 (see e.g.,

Imbens and Rubin, 2015). If we do not find a matched firm within a given three-digit SIC-year

cell based on the cut-off, we repeat the matching process to find a matched firm within a given


10
  When we conduct the matching based on four years prior to bankruptcy filings (which is our benchmark year in
earnings regressions), we obtain similar results.

                                                       9
two-digit SIC-year cell, and then within an one-digit SIC-year cell. This one-to-one matching

procedure gives us a final event sample consisting of 140 bankrupt and 140 matched firms from

1991 to 2005 that employ at least ten workers one year before bankruptcy.

2.2. Descriptive Statistics

2.2.1. Firm Characteristics of Bankrupt and Control Firms

           Table 2 presents descriptive statistics on bankruptcy events, firms and matched firms. Panel

A shows that the distribution of bankrupt firms with employees in the LEHD data is similar to the

full sample of bankrupt firms from the BRD, in terms of bankruptcy outcomes. Bankruptcy events

that lead to acquisition, merger, or continuation of the firm represent about 43% of the events in

both samples, and those leading to liquidation, firm closure, and refiling represent about 20%. The

first four columns of Panel B further investigate the representativeness of the bankrupt firms that

have workers in LEHD based on firm characteristics measured in the latest fiscal year within two

years before bankruptcy. The statistics show that bankrupt firms from BRD that have information

from Compustat and SSEL and the bankrupt firms with employees in LEHD are similar in firm

size, leverage, and market-to-book. Bankrupt firms in LEHD are more profitable and employ more

workers (obtained from the LBD). This characterization is sensible given that firms with larger

employment are more likely to have employees across states and thus are more likely to be matched

with the LEHD data.

           Importantly, Panel B compares bankrupt firms with employees in LEHD (columns (3) and

(4)) to propensity-score matched firms (columns (5) and (6)) by examining the means and standard

deviations of firm characteristics. 11 The t-statistics reported in column (8) on the differences

between the means show that the bankrupt firms with employees in LEHD and matched firms do



11
     The Census Bureau does not permit researchers to disclose percentiles including the median.

                                                          10
not differ significantly in the matching variables, including book assets, the number of employees,

ROA, and market-to-book. The two groups also have similar sales and market value of assets,

although these variables are not explicitly employed in matching. Notably, the bankrupt firms have

significantly higher market leverage than matched firms (57% vs. 30%), which is consistent with

leverage playing a role in "treated" firms ending up in bankruptcy. (Recall that the matching

process intentionally does not match on leverage.)

                                        [Table 2 about here]

        Table 2, Panel C shows the dynamics of firm characteristics for bankrupt and matched

firms starting three years before bankruptcy filings. To facilitate a balanced comparison of

statistics across the years, we focus on a subset of bankrupt firms that have complete financial

information from Compustat and LBD (on employment) during all the three years t-3, t-2, and t-

1. This requirement leaves us with 120 bankrupt firms and their corresponding control firms. Over

the years, sales, book assets, and number of employees do not exhibit significant changes. Market

value of assets for bankrupt firms declines over the years, but the difference between the treatment

and control groups for each year is not statistically significant. Both groups also show a similar

declining trend in profitability and the market-to-book ratio over time, with the values across the

two groups being statistically indistinguishable. Notably, bankrupt firms exhibit substantially

higher levels and changes in leverage than matched firms for each year before bankruptcy,

although the matched group also experiences a modest increase in leverage over the years.

        Overall, the results in Table 2 confirm that bankrupt and matched firms are similar in firm

size, growth opportunities, profitability, and their trends prior to the event year, suggesting that the

matched firms are a valid control sample for our analysis.

2.2.2. Employee Characteristics of Bankrupt and Control Firms



                                                  11
       Table 3 presents employee characteristics from LEHD for the bankrupt and control firms.

We examine employees of these firms one year prior to the bankruptcy filing. The worker

characteristics, including education, age, experience, gender, and earnings, are similar between the

employees of bankrupt and the propensity-score matched control firms. All of the t-statistics for

testing the difference are insignificant at conventional levels (column (7)). In addition to

comparing with the propensity-score matched sample, we follow the literature on labor market

adjustments to job displacements (e.g., Couch and Placzek, 2010; Davis and von Wachter, 2011)

and construct an alternative, less strict control sample of employees. To circumvent computational

constraints, we randomly select 1% of workers in the LEHD universe (which contains more than

2.8 billion quarterly earnings records) who are (i) employed by non-bankrupt public firms and (ii)

not displaced from an employer due to plant closure. We impose the same requirements on the

control group for industry (i.e., exclude financial and utilities sectors), tenure, and age as we

impose on the sample of bankrupt firms. Column (8) shows that while the years of experience are

statistically different, other characteristics are similar between the bankruptcy and the randomly

selected workers. Overall, the comparisons of employee characteristics suggest that the propensity-

score matched group of workers is more comparable to the treatment group.

       The data in the bottom half of Table 3 documents the rate at which employees move across

firms, industries, and counties of employment around bankruptcy filings. We first report the

fraction of workers who are employed by the firm in year t-4 and stay in the same firm, industry,

or county through t-1, separately for treated and matched firms. The results show that before

bankruptcy, the treated and matched control groups are comparable in terms of employees moving.

In particular, the rates of staying in the same firm, industry, and county from t-4 to t-1 are 51.5%




                                                12
vs. 50.1%, 72.8% vs. 67.4%, and 71.1% vs. 64.1%, respectively, for bankrupt versus matched

firms, with all pairs not being statistically different from each other (column (7)).

       When tracking the employees from one year prior until three years after bankruptcy,

however, we find a considerable decline in the rates that employees of the bankrupt firms remain

in their original firm, industry, and county, relative to employees of the control firms. Only 37.2%

of employees stay in their bankrupt firm (vs. 47.5% in the control firm), 54.4% stay in their

industry of employment (vs. 64.6%), and 56% stay in the county in which they work pre-

bankruptcy (vs. 66.1%). The t-statistics for the differences in industry and county attrition rates

from t-1 to t+3 versus from t-4 to t-1 between the two groups are significant at the 5% level (see

the last two rows of column (7)).

       In summary, Table 3 shows that the employees of the bankrupt firms are comparable to

those of the matched firms along key individual characteristics observed before bankruptcy.

However, it shows that employees of bankrupt firms are more likely to leave the industry and local

area post-bankruptcy, relative to years prior to bankruptcy. This change-in-the-propensity-of-

leaving pattern does not hold for employees of non-bankrupt firms.

                                        [Table 3 about here]

3. Empirical Results

3.1. Effect of Corporate Bankruptcy on Employee Earnings

       We employ a difference-in-difference approach to estimate earnings changes for

employees of bankrupt firms relative to earnings changes that would have occurred in the absence

of bankruptcy, controlling for various fixed effects and individual characteristics. Specifically, we

estimate the following regression equation:

                                                                                 ,           (1)


                                                 13
where i, j, c, and t index workers, industries, counties, and years, and yit is worker i's logarithm of

real annual earnings (adjusted using the CPI in 2001 constant dollars) in year t. For a worker who

holds multiple jobs (i.e., several worker-firm matches) in a given year, we use the worker's total

earnings aggregated across all her jobs in that year. i, jt,    ct   represent worker, industry × year,

and county × year fixed effects. xit includes the following time-varying worker characteristics:

years of experience (defined as age - education - 6), years of experience × years of education, and

years of experience × female indicator. We do not include education or a female indicator as stand-

alone variables because they are constant at the individual level and thus are collinear with worker

fixed effects. We do not include age because it is collinear with experience and education. d[k]it is

an indicator variable equal to one if year t is |k| years before or after a bankruptcy filing, and zero

otherwise (-3  k  6). BRi is an indicator variable equal to one if worker i was an employee of a

bankrupt firm one year prior to bankruptcy, and zero if the worker was an employee of a control

firm. it is the random error. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

        We study employees that work at the bankrupt (or control) firms one year prior to the

bankruptcy filing (or year of matching) and analyze these employees from t-4 to t+6 to estimate

equation (1). Thus, the implicit benchmark is earnings in year t-4 for both groups, and the event

indicator variables begin in t-3. The estimates of k capture the change (from the benchmark year

t-4) in earnings of bankrupt firms' employees in each event year relative to those of the control

group. We include worker fixed effects to control for unobserved individual-level heterogeneity.

We include two-digit SIC industry × year fixed effects to control for unobserved time-varying

shocks specific to industries. County × year fixed effects control for time-varying economic shocks

specific to local areas.




                                                  14
       Table 4 presents results for the dynamics of employee earnings around corporate

bankruptcy filings. The control group includes employees of the propensity-score matched firms

in Panel A, and randomly selected employees of non-bankrupt public firms who are not displaced

in Panel B. The estimates on the interaction terms d[k] × BR (0  k  6), the variables of interest,

show that relative to the control group, employees of bankrupt firms experience significant

reductions in earnings over the years after a bankruptcy filing. Across all specifications, most of

the coefficients on the interaction terms are significantly negative at conventional levels from t to

t+5.

                                        [Table 4 about here]

       We examine the economic magnitude of the employee earnings losses associated with

bankruptcy filings using estimates in column (2) of Panel A, which includes worker and industry

× year fixed effects. We use column (2) as the preferred specification to ensure that our estimates

do not simply reflect time-varying industry conditions. In particular, controlling for effects of

(industry-level) economic performance on earnings is important given our goal to show an

empirical link between financial distress and employee earnings losses. For example, bankrupt

firm employees may be in industries that have suffered negative economic shocks, which would

affect their subsequent earnings even in the absence of bankruptcy filings. By including industry

× year fixed effects, we control for earnings heterogeneity driven by these industry conditions.

       In column (2), the -0.103 coefficient on d[0] × BR, which is the difference between log

earnings in year t and log earnings in benchmark years t-4 for bankrupt firms, relative to the same

difference for matched control firms, implies a 9.8% decline (= exp(-0.103) - 1) in earnings in year

t relative to the counterfactual earnings. Similarly, the coefficients on d[k] × BR (1  k  6) indicate

an average annual earnings loss of around 11% relative to the benchmark earnings and to the non-



                                                 15
bankrupt firm employees. The last row in the panel shows that the present value (PV) of earnings

losses during the seven years since bankruptcy filing, computed using a real discount rate of 5.48%,

is 67.1% of the pre-bankruptcy annual earnings (measured in benchmark year t-4).12

         The other columns in Table 4 explore whether our results are robust with respect to

econometric specifications with different fixed effects. All specifications control for worker fixed

effects. In general, when we use less refined layers of fixed effects (e.g., year rather than industry

× year), heterogeneity that we do not control for (such as industry-specific shocks mentioned above)

may result in a larger (absolute) magnitude of earnings losses for bankrupt firm employees. In

column (1), which includes year fixed effects, we find that the present value of earnings losses is

83.9% of pre-bankruptcy earnings. Columns (3) through (5) include county × year, both industry

× year and county × year, and industry × county × year fixed effects, respectively. These fixed

effects control for time-varying shocks at the industry- and county-levels. Earnings losses in these

specifications remain reasonably similar to (albeit smaller than) that in column (2). Overall, the

estimated earnings losses are substantial, persistent up to five years after bankruptcy, and robust

to specifications using different layers of fixed effects. In addition, despite some variation across

specifications, our calculations based on column (2) appear to provide a reasonable

characterization of employee earnings losses after bankruptcy.

         We report the regression results based on the randomly selected control group of workers

in Panel B of Table 4. The magnitudes of earnings loss estimates are generally larger when these

workers are used as the control group. For example, column (2) of Panels A and B shows present



12
   To calculate the PV of earnings losses, we use a real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) discount rate that is appropriate for the
risk of individual earnings, given that the earnings loss estimates are in real terms. Assuming that the risk of employee
earnings is similar to that of corporate bonds, we use the average corporate BBB bond yield minus average inflation
rate (i.e., CPI changes) from 1985 to 2008 (our sample period), which is 5.48%. Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) and
Davis and von Wachter (2011) use 4% and 5% as a real discount rate to compute the PV of earnings losses. The row
shows t-statistics based on standard errors calculated using the delta method in parentheses.

                                                            16
value earnings losses are 67% and 77% of the benchmark annual earnings, respectively. This result

suggests that the latter estimates may be biased upward (in absolute value), likely due to lack of

controls for firm-level characteristics, particularly economic performance proxies such as ROA

and market-to-book.

         Figure 1 visually presents the earnings dynamics based on the coefficient estimates in

column (2) of Panel A. The figure shows that earnings of bankrupt firm employees (relative to

those of propensity-score matched control firm employees) experience modest declines (2-4%)

from the benchmark year, t-4, during the pre-bankruptcy period from t-3 to t-1. These declines

however are not statistically different from zero. Earnings are significantly low in the year of the

bankruptcy filing and remain low from that year onward. From t to t+6, employees lose 11% of

the pre-bankruptcy (t-4) annual earnings on average, relative to the earnings of the matched firm

employees in the respective year.

                                              [Figure 1 about here]

         As mentioned in Section 2.1.1, missing earnings in the LEHD data could be due to an

individual moving to a non-LEHD state, becoming self-employed, or becoming unemployed. To

examine the implications of missing observations for earnings loss estimates, we provide

additional estimates for the present value of earnings losses using two imputation approaches.13

First, for both treatment and control groups, we replace missing earnings with the 10th percentile

value of the earnings distribution in our sample. 14 This approach essentially assumes that

individuals who disappear from the LEHD data are (nearly) unemployed. Alternatively, we replace




13
  See e.g., Walker (2013), who uses similar imputation approaches to address limitations of the LEHD data.
14
  We also impute missing earnings with the 1st and 5th percentile values of the earnings distribution and obtain similar
results. Imputing missing earnings with zero leads to many observations with zero earnings (more than a quarter of
the imputed sample). This generates noisy estimates of PV earnings loss, particularly when layers of interacted fixed
effects are included.

                                                          17
missing annual earnings with four times the individual's last observed quarterly earnings in the

LEHD data; this approach effectively assumes that the individuals who disappear move to work

in non-LEHD states or become self-employed and earn the same wages as before.15 We note that

the present value of earnings losses based on the first approach is not necessarily greater than the

second approach because in either approach, we apply the imputation to the employees of both

treatment and control firms and the present values are computed using a difference-in-difference

estimate between the two groups. We report the estimates in Table 4, Panel C. Under both

imputation approaches, the present values of earnings losses are similar in magnitude to those in

our main regressions without imputations.

3.2. Worker Reallocation as a Mechanism of Earnings Losses after Bankruptcy

        Our main analysis documents a significant decline in earnings for average employees of

bankrupt firms. However, the baseline estimates could mask rich heterogeneity in their labor

market adjustments post-bankruptcy. In this section, we condition our estimation of earnings

dynamics on whether workers reallocate across firms, industries, and geographical areas post-

bankruptcy, as well as on labor market characteristics. In the process, we shed light on two

mechanisms through which workers may suffer earnings loss: costs to worker mobility, and loss

of firm- or industry-specific human capital. We consider the results in this section suggestive and

thus interpret them with caution, given that worker selection on observable and unobservable

characteristics (e.g., ability) is likely to affect both the conditioning variable (e.g., whether

switching industries) and post-bankruptcy earnings. We partly mitigate this concern by including




15
   If a worker leaves an employer in an LEHD state for a non-LEHD state or to become unemployed in the middle of
a year (say June), annual earnings in her previous job may underreport her "true" annual earnings in that job. To
mitigate this limitation, we impute missing annual earnings using the last observed quarterly earnings multiplied by
four (i.e., annualized). Imputing using the last observed annual earnings produces similar magnitude PV earnings
losses.

                                                        18
worker fixed effects in the empirical specification. In this and other sections throughout the rest of

this paper, we use the specification that includes worker and two-digit SIC industry × year fixed

effects (see column (2) of Table 4, Panel A, and related discussion in Section 3.1).

3.2.1. Worker Movement and Post-Bankruptcy Earnings

         If an important part of earnings loss during labor market adjustments is due to the loss of

human capital specific to firms (Becker, 1962) or industries (Neal, 1995), then the costs of

bankruptcy might be largely borne by workers who leave their firms or industries. To test these

predictions, in the following regression specification we employ an indicator variable Stay, which

is equal to one if a worker stays in the same firm, the same two-digit SIC industry, or the same

county through year t+3:

                                                                                              1                    ,   (2)

where the coefficients k represent the effect of bankruptcy on earnings of the bankrupt firm

employees who stay in the firm (or industry, or county), and the coefficients k represent the effect

on earnings of the bankrupt firm employees who do not stay.16 We stratify the treatment (i.e.,

bankruptcy) group based on whether workers stay with their firms (or industries, or counties) until

t+3. We do not stratify the control group, so our analysis decomposes earnings losses of the treated

group relative to the average worker in the control group (see e.g., Walker (2013) for a similar

stratification).

                                                [Table 5 about here]

         We first examine whether the magnitudes of earnings losses are different between the

employees who stay with the bankrupt firm and those who leave the firm (Table 5, Panel A).



16
   Note that the specification in equation (2) does not include the stand-alone Stay indicator as it is collinear with
worker fixed effects. Also, we find similar results if we alternatively define the Stay indicator equal to one if a worker
stays in the same firm, two-digit SIC industry, or county through t+5.

                                                           19
Comparing the estimates indicates that "firm leavers" (column (2)) generally fare worse than "firm

stayers" (column (1)) during the years after the bankruptcy filing. For example, using the present-

value approach described in Section 3.1, workers who leave the firm lose on average 86% of their

annual earnings for the seven years from t to t+6 (significant at the 1% level), while those who

stay with the firm have a statistically insignificant gain of 25.6%.17

         We next unpack the earnings loss of the workers who leave the bankrupt firm along another

dimension, conditioning on whether they leave the industry and/or county. If an employee's human

capital (e.g., skill set) is specific to her original industry, the earnings loss would be more

pronounced for "industry leavers," all else equal. Consistent with this prediction, columns (5) and

(6) show that among county leavers, earnings losses for industry leavers are substantially more

negative than for the industry stayers. (Columns (3) and (4) examine county stayers and also find

a negative, though much smaller, industry leaver effect.) These results imply that the cost of

corporate bankruptcy is borne by workers who leave their industries (but not by those who stay in

the same industries even though leaving their original firms), consistent with industry-specific

human capital playing an important role in labor market adjustments after bankruptcy.18 We note,

however, that the association between switching industry and earnings losses could be due to



17
   Note that the above results show the earnings losses of stayers and leavers in the treated group relative to the average
worker in the control group. Instead of using the average worker in the control group as the benchmark, we further
examine whether stayers (leavers) of the bankrupt firm fare worse than the stayers (leavers) of the control firm by
including the Stay indicator (and 1 ­ Stay indicator) uninteracted with a BR indicator but interacted with the event
time indicators in equation (2). That is, we replace                        in equation (2) with 
    1           . The results for this conditional analysis that stratifies both the bankruptcy and non-bankruptcy groups
(in Online Appendix Table A4) show that both stayers and leavers of bankrupt firms lose significant earnings relative
to their counterparts in non-bankrupt firms. In particular, the finding that stayers of bankrupt firms also lose
considerable earnings relative to stayers of non-bankrupt firms suggests that earnings losses associated with corporate
bankruptcy are beyond the losses due to a job displacement.
18
   Kambourov and Manovskii (2009) show that accounting for occupation-specific tenure (based on the Standard
Occupational Classification), tenure in an industry (based on SIC) has a limited effect on wages, suggesting that the
effect of industry switches on wages that we find may be (in part) due to occupation switches (which are likely
correlated with industry switches). Unfortunately, we are unable to empirically examine this issue because the LEHD
data do not contain information on the occupation of employment.

                                                           20
selection. For example, it is possible that more able workers stay in the industry while worse

workers leave, leading to the differential earnings pattern across the groups.

       In terms of county stayer status, the comparison of columns (3) and (5) shows that for

workers who remain in the same industry, switching counties is associated with higher post-

bankruptcy earnings. This finding is consistent with self-selection of workers in which those who

find same-industry jobs by moving across counties would want to compensate their relocation

costs and thus earn higher wages than those who stay in their initial county. Interestingly, however,

the comparison of columns (4) and (6) indicates that among workers who leave the industry, those

who leave the county experience a larger earnings loss than those who stay in the county (an

average loss of 2% vs. 19% per year). This considerable difference appears to reflect a more

onerous transition period for those who relocate across geographical areas conditional on leaving

the industry.

       In sum, while the analysis in this subsection does not allow us to make a statement about

causality of earnings losses post-bankruptcy, it sheds light on potential drivers of the losses, such

as industry-specific skills and variation in worker movements across industries and local areas.

3.2.2. Heterogeneity Conditional on Firm Size, Local Labor Market Size, and Bankruptcy

Outcomes

       The analysis in the previous section suggests that costs to worker mobility and loss of

specific human capital are potential mechanisms through which workers suffer earnings losses. To

explore these mechanisms further, in this section we examine employees' post-bankruptcy

earnings conditional on labor market characteristics and bankruptcy outcomes using a modified

version of equation (2). Specifically, for this analysis we stratify both the treatment (bankruptcy)

and control (non-bankruptcy) groups of all employees based on the conditioning variables, which



                                                 21
include firm size, local labor market size, and bankruptcy outcomes. Then we compare the present

value of earnings losses across the groups in Table 5, Panel B.

       We first explore the effect of bankruptcy on wages conditional on the size of firms

measured by employment. Workers in larger firms might fare better after bankruptcy because of

better opportunities to reallocate within (e.g., to another division in the internal labor market) or

across firms (Lazear and Oyer, 2004; Tate and Yang, 2015), or because of better opportunities to

develop general skills that improve their job mobility. Consistent with these notions, the estimates

in columns (1) and (2) of Panel B show that employees of smaller firms fare significantly worse

than those of larger firms (defined as firm-level employment from the LBD larger than the third

quartile) post-bankruptcy. The difference in the present value of earnings losses (-79.1% vs. -

15.6%) is significant at the 10% level.

       Second, we explore whether the impact of bankruptcy on earnings losses is related to the

size of labor markets. The analysis is motivated by the extant literature arguing that large labor

markets reduce search frictions and thus make it easier for workers to find jobs requiring similar

skills (Diamond, 1982; Moretti, 2011). Following the labor market search literature (e.g., Petrongo

and Pissaride, 2008; Manning and Petrongolo, 2017; Kim, 2018), we measure the size of the labor

market at the local level. In particular, we use the number of workers in the two-digit SIC industry-

county cell from the LBD, and sort industry-county cells at the third quartile of the distribution

into "large" vs. "small" (or "thick" vs. "thin") labor markets. The results, reported in columns (3)

and (4) in Table 5, Panel B, show that wages decline less in larger labor markets after bankruptcy,

presumably because workers in these markets can more easily find jobs that require their skill sets.

Combined with results in Panel A, these results highlight the importance of employment




                                                 22
opportunities in the same industry (that presumably require similar human capital) and local area

in mitigating the adverse effects of bankruptcy on labor market outcomes.

       Our finding that labor market thickness affects labor market outcomes after bankruptcy

complements and adds to the existing body of work that documents that displaced workers fare

worse in recessions and when unemployment rates are higher, when the overall labor market is

likely to be "thinner" (e.g., Davis and von Wachter, 2011). Specifically, we find evidence that

cross-sectional variation (across industries and geographical areas) in labor market thickness

affects earnings losses post-bankruptcy, whereas the existing work examines the role of time-series

variation in labor market thickness (or conditions) in driving earnings after job displacements.

       Lastly, in columns (5) through (8) we estimate the earnings patterns of employees for

ultimately liquidated versus non-liquidated bankrupt firms. Given the importance of firm size in

determining post-bankruptcy earning losses (columns (1) and (2)), we also condition on firm size

in these tests. To the extent that workers are more likely to leave the firm after a bankruptcy that

ends in liquidation, earnings losses could be greater in liquidation. In addition, liquidation may

indicate poor economic or labor market conditions, under which worker reallocation is more costly,

leading to greater earnings losses.

       We find that the earnings losses are generally larger (in absolute magnitude) for liquidated

firms than for non-liquidated firms. Columns (5) and (7) show that the PV of earnings losses

amounts to 110% (of pre-bankruptcy annual earnings) for large liquidated firms but is nearly zero

for large non-liquidated firms. Similarly, columns (6) and (8) show that among small firms, the

PV of earnings losses is larger for liquidated than non-liquidated firms. The conditional analysis

thus suggests that employee losses are more pronounced when the bankrupt firm is ultimately

liquidated, and that employees of small firms fare worse whether the firm liquidates or not.



                                                23
3.3. Economic versus Financial Distress

        Not all bankruptcies are caused by financial distress; when a business opportunity

deteriorates, a firm may close even if it is financed with little debt. Since we tie our earnings loss

estimates back to firms' capital structure choices in later sections, it is important to examine the

extent to which the earnings losses we find are associated with financial versus economic distress.

In this section, we split the full sample of bankrupt and matched firms into four groups at the

medians of market leverage and ROA for bankrupt firms observed prior to bankruptcy filing.19 For

each of the four groups, we estimate equation (1) using the same specification as in Table 4, Panel

A, column (2). We report the present values of earnings losses for the four groups in Table 6.

                                           [Table 6 about here]

        The first group contains firms with high leverage and high profitability, and shows a PV

of earnings loss of -59.5% (significant at the 1% level). Comparing this magnitude with the -33.7%

PV for the group with low leverage but high ROA suggests that for relatively profitable firms, high

leverage before bankruptcy is associated with greater post-bankruptcy earnings losses for

employees. Similarly, comparing the effects of leverage among firms with low ROA, high leverage

before bankruptcy is associated with larger losses for workers (-103.6% vs. -87.4% for low

leverage). Overall, controlling for profitability, higher firm leverage is associated with 16-26

percentage point larger PV earnings losses for workers.

        When we look at the same numbers holding leverage constant, low ROA before bankruptcy

is associated with greater earnings losses. For example, comparing groups 1 and 3 indicates that

for highly levered firms before bankruptcy, low operating profitability implies a 44.1% (= -103.6%


19
  Andrade and Kaplan (1998, p.1445) attempt to isolate the costs of pure financial distress by investigating a
subsample of ultimately bankrupt firms with high leverage and positive operating performance (measured by ROA)
before bankruptcy. Brown and Matsa (2016) use ROA to control for economic performance in examining the relation
between financial distress (measured by a firm's capital structure) and the number of job applications.

                                                      24
- (-59.5%)) greater PV of post-bankruptcy earnings losses. Comparing groups 2 and 4 indicates

that for low-leverage firms, lower economic performance is associated with 53.7% (= -87.4% - (-

33.7%)) larger earnings losses. Taken together, these conditional analyses suggest that both

financial and economic distress affects employee earnings losses post-bankruptcy, with the

magnitudes perhaps larger for economic distress.

         In sum, the analyses in this section help us separate the impact of financial distress on

employee earnings losses, which is relevant for corporate capital structure choices. In the next

section, we compare our calculations to estimates of the corporate benefits of using debt, to get a

sense of whether the magnitude of employee wage losses appears large enough to plausibly affect

corporate financing decisions. We acknowledge that disentangling financial from economic

distress is difficult, and thus interpret the results in this and the next sections as suggestive.


4. Wage Premia for Bankruptcy Risk and Capital Structure Implications

         Employees exposed to higher risk of earnings loss (due to, for example, unemployment or

moving to lower-paying jobs) would plausibly demand an ex ante wage premium to compensate

for the risk (Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981; Topel, 1984).20 In the context of bankruptcy risk, such

a wage premium represents an ex ante cost of bankruptcy for the firm, creating a disincentive to

use debt. To gauge whether this indirect cost of bankruptcy is of sufficient magnitude to affect

corporate debt choices, in this section we first estimate the effect of leverage on wage premia by

regressing wages on leverage using the LEHD data. Given that regression estimates may be

affected by omitted variables, we alternatively derive wage premia using a binomial valuation


20
   Agrawal and Matsa (2013) point out that even if workers do not gauge their employment stability by observing direct
signals of the firm's financial conditions such as financial leverage and credit ratings, they can rely on indirect signals
from management, the media, and other aspects of economic conditions. Consistent with workers' ability to
understand the financial status of firms, Brown and Matsa (2016) find that job seekers accurately perceive firms'
financial health and act upon it by reducing labor supply to distressed firms.

                                                           25
model. We show that implied wage premia from the wage regression and from the binomial model

have comparable economic magnitudes. Lastly, we benchmark our implied wage premium to the

tax benefit of debt to explore capital structure implications.21

4.1. Estimating Annual Wage Premia Using Wage Regressions

         We first estimate annual wage premia for the risk of bankruptcy using a wage regression

approach. Specifically, we estimate a standard earnings equation augmented by market leverage

of the employer, a proxy for the risk of bankruptcy, as follows:

                                                                                           ,                 (3)

where log(earnings)it is the logarithm of annual real earnings (in 2001 constant dollars) for worker

i in year t, jct is industry (indexed by j) × county (c) × year (t) fixed effects, and Market leverageikt

is the market leverage ratio of firm k (where worker i is employed) in year t. xit is a set of worker-

level control variables including a female indicator, education, experience, and the interactions

between every two of these three variables. zikt includes firm-level control variables: log(book

assets), market-to-book, ROA, and asset tangibility for firm k that employs worker i in year t. it is

the random error. Controlling for employee ability (using e.g., education, experience, and ROA)

is important for identifying the effect of financial distress risk on wages (Berk, Stanton, and

Zechner, 2010). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

         We select a 10% random sample of all worker-years in LEHD with ages between 22 and

50 and at least two years of tenure at current firms.22 We require that firms are on Compustat from




21
   Our approach uses compensating wage differentials to directly estimate the cost of financial distress resulting from
the employee earnings losses due to bankruptcy. See Brown and Matsa (2016) and Baghai, Silva, Thell, and Vig (2018)
for evidence that highly levered firms lose high-quality job candidates and employees due to poor job stability. Brown
and Matsa (2016) also provide an empirical approach to estimate the indirect cost of financial distress due to
deterioration of worker quality in financial distress.
22
   The 10% random sampling is to reduce computational burden in estimating the earnings equation with a large
number of fixed effects, and thus is innocuous for the results.

                                                         26
1986 to 2008, and have S&P credit ratings between `AA+' and `B-' to ensure that observed

earnings represent wages earned outside financial distress (Benmelech, Bergman, and Enriquez,

2012). We apply the same criterion for book assets as in the bankrupt firm sample used in Section

2.23 This procedure yields about 2.7 million worker-years employed by public firms.

                                               [Table 7 about here]

         Consistent with the existence of compensating differentials for corporate bankruptcy risk,

Table 7 shows evidence that employees of firms with higher leverage are paid higher wages, all

else equal. The coefficient on market leverage in column (1) suggests that a ten-percentage-point

increase in leverage is associated with a 1.86% (= (exp(0.171) ­ 1) × 10%) increase in annual

earnings (significant at the 10% level). Importantly, this result is based on a sample of public firm

employees from the LEHD data. Thus, our estimates refine those in Chemmanur, Cheng, and

Zhang (2013), which are based on firm-level aggregate wage bills and executive compensation

data. Also, our results complement Brown and Matsa (2016), who show that firms with higher risk

of financial distress (proxied by CDS prices) offer higher wages to job applicants.

         We next examine the heterogeneity in wage premia for employees facing different risks of

losing earnings. We split the full sample at the third quartiles of firm size (measured by the number

of employees) and local labor market size (measured by employment in a given two-digit SIC

industry and county cell) distributions. Columns (2) and (3) show that significant wage premia

exist only for workers employed by smaller firms and in smaller local labor markets. A concurrent

paper by Dore and Zarutskie (2018) also estimates earnings equations using LEHD data and finds

that an increase in book leverage is associated with higher wage growth, particularly in smaller

(relative to larger) local labor markets. Combined with our finding in Table 5, Panel B that


23
  That is, we require that book assets are greater than $100 million in 1980 constant dollars and less than or equal to
the assets of the largest firm in our bankrupt firm sample.

                                                         27
bankruptcy is associated with greater earnings losses for workers employed by smaller firms and

in smaller local labor markets, the results in this section suggest that workers are paid a significant

wage premium for bankruptcy risk when expected earnings loss is considerable.

        One caveat of the analysis in this section is that the wage premium estimates may be biased

due to omitted variables in the regression. We thus employ an alternative approach to quantify

annual wage premia in the next section.

4.2. Implied Annual Wage Premia Using a Binomial Valuation Model

        Our alternative approach to derive annual wage premia builds on the notion of

compensating differentials. In a competitive labor market, firms with different risks of bankruptcy

pay risk-averse employees the same risk-adjusted present value of expected wages (or provide the

same level of expected utility), all else equal. In particular, the contracted wages for a firm with a

higher probability of bankruptcy should be higher due to greater expected personal costs of

bankruptcy for the firm's employees. This argument implies that the wage premia that a worker

demands in a given year should equal the expected PV of the earnings losses due to the likelihood

of her employer filling bankruptcy in that year.

        Section A.1 of the online appendix details the annual wage premia demanded by an

employee working for a risky firm. The appendix shows that a firm's annual wage premium


relative to a risk-free firm is equal to   , where rf is the risk-free rate, q is the annual risk-adjusted


(i.e., risk-neutral) bankruptcy probability, and    is the present value of employee earnings losses

given bankruptcy as a fraction of pre-bankruptcy wages (i.e., 67.1% as in Table 4, Panel A, column

(2)). Intuitively, at the beginning of a year, a worker employed by a risky firm with an annual

bankruptcy probability q will face an expected wage loss of q×(L/W) by the end of the year, for



                                                   28
which the worker demands a risk premium equal to its present value                            . rf is estimated to be

5.61%, the average 10-year Treasury yield during our sample period of 1985-2008.

         Because no direct estimate of the risk-neutral probability of bankruptcy, q, is available, we

estimate q as the risk-adjusted probability of default that Almeida and Philippon (2007) derive

from bond risk premia times the conditional probability of bankruptcy given default

(Prob(Bankruptcy|Default)).24 Using Moody's Default and Recovery Database (DRD) from 1981

to 2013, we find that 66.4% of public default firms ultimately file for bankruptcy. Similarly, the

Altman-Kuehne/NYU Salomon Center Bond Master Default Database shows that 58.7% of firms

in default end up filing for bankruptcy protection from 1981 to 2014.25 Thus, we use 60% as our

estimate of Prob(Bankruptcy|Default).26

         Since Almeida and Philippon (2007) provide ten-year cumulative risk-adjusted default

probabilities only, we convert the ten-year probability into the one-year probability. Specifically,

in column (2) in Table 8, for each credit rating group, we compute the annual risk-adjusted

probability of bankruptcy as q = 1 - (1-0.6 × p10)1/10, where 0.6 is the probability of bankruptcy

conditional on default discussed above, and p10 is the ten-year risk-adjusted default probability

from Almeida and Philippon (2007) shown in column (1).


24
   The implicit assumption underlying this approach is that individual worker portfolio risk is similar to bond investors.
Without detailed information on household wealth, it is difficult to know workers' overall portfolio risk. Given that
there is no credible measure of workers' risk-neutral probability (which will involve proxies for the workers' marginal
utility in the default state), we use the risk-neutral probability derived from bond risk premia as a proxy for it.
Nevertheless, to the extent that workers' portfolio (including human capital and other financial and real assets) risk
involves substantial systematic component, the risk-neutral probability derived from bond risk premia provides a
reasonable proxy for the worker's risk-neutral probability. This could be due to individuals holding substantial non-
human assets (such as financial assets) in their portfolios, and/or their labor income having a significant systematic
component (see e.g., Campbell and Viceira (2002)).
25
   We thank Edward Altman for sharing his dataset of default events.
26
   Given that bankruptcy is likely to occur in bad states, the conditional risk-neutral probability may be higher than
the conditional natural probability. However, the difference might be small given that default is also likely to happen
in bad states. We check the sensitivity of our results by increasing the conditional probability from 0.6 to 0.9 and find
that it results in the wage premium between BBB and AA-rated firms increasing from 2.32% to 3.17%, suggesting
little sensitivity of our results to the conditional probability.

                                                           29
                                        [Table 8 about here]

       We then use the annual risk-adjusted bankruptcy probability, q, to calculate the implied


annual wage premium as a fraction of wages paid by the firm :     . Column (3) in Table 8 shows

that the implied annual wage premium accounts for a considerable portion of annual wages,

particularly for firms with low credit ratings. The implied annual wage premium accounts for 0.26%

of annual wages for AA-rated firms and 0.84% for BBB-rated firms.

4.3. Comparing Regression-Based and Implied Annual Wage Premia

       In this section, we compare the implied annual wage premium derived from the binomial

valuation model in Section 4.2 to the annual wage premium estimated from the wage regression

in Section 4.1. Given that our wage regression does not benchmark with risk-free firms, we use

AA-rated firms as a benchmark for our regression-based wage premia estimates. As such, Table 9

compares the annual wage premia that BBB-rated firms pay relative to AA-rated firms between

these two approaches. Full sample comparisons are in column (1), while columns (2) and (3) show

comparisons for subsamples based on firm employment and columns (4) and (5) are based on labor

market size.

       Panel A shows that using the binomial valuation model, the additional implied annual wage

premium due to moving from AA to BBB rating is 0.58% of annual wages for the full sample. We

derive the implied annual wage premia for subsamples in columns (2) through (5) similarly

following the process explained in Section 4.2, except that we use the PV earnings loss estimates

for those subsamples from Table 5, Panel B, columns (1) through (4) (e.g., -79.1% of pre-

bankruptcy earnings for employees of smaller firms). As shown in the table, the implied annual

wage premia are larger in subsamples for which the post-bankruptcy earnings losses are greater

(i.e., for smaller firms and smaller labor markets).

                                                 30
                                                    [Table 9 about here]

         Next, we derive the differential wage premium between BBB and AA-rated firms using

the wage regression results and report the estimates in Table 9, Panel B. We begin with the

coefficient on market leverage in column (1) of Table 7 (0.171), which suggests that a one-

percentage-point increase in leverage is associated with a 0.186% (= exp(0.171) ­ 1) increase in

annual earnings. We then calculate the difference in leverage between BBB and AA-rated firms in

our sample, controlling for the difference in other firm characteristics used in the earnings

regression in Table 7. This leverage difference is equal to 2.3%.27 Lastly, the differential wage

premium between BBB and AA-rate firms is equal to the leverage difference (2.3%) times the

coefficient on leverage in the wage regression (0.186), the product of which is 0.43%. The wage

premia for subsamples are calculated similarly except that we use coefficients on leverage for

different subsamples in Table 7, column (2) or (3).

         Comparing Panels A and B of Table 9 shows that the differences in annual wage premia

between BBB and AA-rated firms are similar when we use the two different approaches. In

addition, Panel B reinforces the conclusion obtained from Panel A that wage premia are larger

when employees face potentially larger earnings losses from bankruptcy (i.e., for smaller firms

and for firms operating in smaller local labor markets).28

4.4. Implied Wage Premia and Capital Structure Implications

         In this section, we build upon the implied annual wage premia for risky firms (relative to

risk-free firms) based on the binomial valuation model (Section 4.2) and compute the capitalized

value of implied wage premia for firms with different credit ratings (relative to risk-free firms).


27
   Specifically, we regress market leverage on credit rating indicators (from `AA+' to `B-') and firm characteristics in
equation (3), and take the difference between the coefficients on the BBB and the AA indicators.
28
   Consistent with this finding for labor market size, Kim (2018) shows that leverage is lower for firms operating in
smaller labor markets.

                                                          31
The capitalized wage premia, interpreted as indirect costs of financial distress, are then compared

with tax benefits of debt for firms with different credit ratings. We are not able to compute the

capitalized wage premia over risk-free firms using the wage regression approach (Section 4.1)

because the wage regression is conducted on firms with credit risk.29

4.4.1. Capitalized Value of Implied Wage Premia as Indirect Costs of Financial Distress

        Given that tax benefits of debt are often measured as a fraction of firm value (e.g., Graham,

2000), we compute the capitalized value of implied wage premia as a fraction firm value. First, we


convert the annual wage premium as a fraction of wages (Section 4.2),                          , into the annual


premium as a fraction of market value of the firm as                                 , where      is the ratio of

total wage bill and market value of the average firm in t-4. Second, we compute the present value

of the annual wage premium for a firm with an infinite horizon, and derive that the firm's

capitalized value of wage premia relative to a risk-free firm as a fraction of firm value is equal to


      (see Section A.2 of the online appendix for details).30

                                             [Table 10 about here]

        Column (1) in Table 10 shows the annual wage premium as a fraction of firm value for

firms with different credit ratings. Column (2) shows that the capitalized value of the wage

premium is a nontrivial fraction of firm value, particularly for firms with low credit ratings. The

present value of the wage premium is 1.29% of firm value for AA-rated firms, and increases to

3.61% for BBB-rated firms. The increase in wage premia for firms with lower credit ratings (and



29
   We benchmark against risk-free firms in calculating the PV of annual wage premia because the existing estimates
on expected costs of financial distress and tax benefits are relative to risk-free firms.
30
   Almeida and Philippon (2007) use similar valuation models and risk-adjusted default probabilities to compute the
expected costs of financial distress (but they do not address employee costs or the wage premia that we compute).

                                                        32
thus higher leverage) may potentially offset the increased tax benefits of debt for these more

highly-levered firms. In the next subsection, we explore the implications of bankruptcy-induced

wage premia for capital structure decisions.

4.4.2. Comparing Implied Wage Premia to Tax Benefits of Debt and Expected Costs of

Financial Distress

      Comparing columns (2) and (3) in Table 10 indicates that the present value of implied wage

premia is a significant fraction of the tax benefits of debt. For AA and BBB-rated firms, tax

benefits of debt equal 2.51% and 5.18% of firm value, respectively, while wage premia are 1.29%

and 3.61% of firm value. Thus, wage premia offset 51% and 70% of the tax benefits of debt for

AA and BBB-rated firms, which is of large enough magnitude to affect capital structure choices.

      To further assess the importance of wage premia, we explicitly factor in non-wage costs of

financial distress by benchmarking implied wage premia with the tax benefits, net of the expected

financial distress costs estimated by Almeida and Philippon (2007) and Elkamhi, Ericsson, and

Parsons (2012). Both papers use risk-neutral probabilities to estimate expected costs of financial

distress. However, as Elkamhi et al. (2012) point out, Almeida and Philippon (2007) may overstate

the expected costs of financial distress by applying Andrade and Kaplan's (1998) 10-23%

proportional losses to the firm's current (i.e., far outside default) value. In contrast, Elkamhi et al.

(2012) use the firm's value near default, on which Andrade and Kaplan (1998) derive their 10-23%

estimates. As a result, the expected distress cost estimates from Elkamhi et al. (2012) are

considerably smaller than those from Almeida and Philippon (2007). For example, Elkamhi et al.

(2012) find that a BBB-rated firm's expected costs of financial distress are only 0.5% of firm value,

which is significantly smaller than 4.53% in Almeida and Philippon (2007).




                                                  33
       Based on the estimates from Elkamhi et al. (2012), when a firm's credit rating decreases

from AA to BBB, the gap between the tax benefits of debt and expected cost of financial distress

increases by 2.17% (= 2.67% - 0.5%, last row of columns (3) and (5) in Table 10). This is close to

our estimate of the difference in the wage premium of 2.32% between BBB and AA-rated firms

(last row of column (2)). Therefore, our estimated wage premium appears to account for a

substantial portion of the gap between tax benefits of debt and the expected cost of financial

distress documented in the literature.

       We note that our estimates of wage premium are larger than those in Agrawal and Matsa

(2013, AM). AM find that, assuming no wage replacement by unemployment insurance (UI)

benefits, firms with AA-ratings and BBB-ratings respectively pay 0.16% and 1.54% wage

premiums.31 Matsa (2018) argues that the differences between AM's (2013) estimates and ours are

understandable for several reasons. For example, Matsa (2018) points out that AM's estimates

account for unemployment risk only, while our estimates also include earnings losses for

employees who stay with a bankrupt firm (see Online Appendix Table A4). Also, our estimates

include wage losses following an unemployment spell. These differences help explain the

somewhat larger magnitude of our wage premium estimates relative to AM's.

       Overall, our estimates for wage premia associated with bankruptcy risk are large enough to

be an important component of financial distress costs (Titman (1984) and Berk et al. (2010)),

which may help to explain the debt conservatism puzzle.



5. Conclusion


31
   Agrawal and Matsa (2013, Table 8) also provide estimates that assume average UI wage replacement, for which the
magnitude is about 37% of those assuming no UI replacement. We also conduct analysis of the impact of UI on our
estimation and find that, accounting for UI, the PV of earnings losses is 59.5% of pre-bankruptcy earnings (vs. 67.1%
in our baseline estimates). We thank David Matsa for generously providing data on state UI benefits for this analysis.

                                                         34
       We examine how corporate bankruptcy leads to employee earnings losses due to

adjustments in labor markets. We use worker-firm matched data from the U.S. Census Bureau to

show that employee earnings deteriorate significantly for six years post-bankruptcy. The present

value of earnings losses accumulated over seven years averages 67% of pre-bankruptcy annual

earnings. Earnings losses are larger for individuals who leave the industry, and who work for

smaller firms or in thinner local labor markets. These results highlight the role of industry-specific

human capital and costs of moving across geographical areas as important forces behind the post-

bankruptcy earnings loss.

       Given that a firm's debt choice affects the probability of bankruptcy, we argue that these

workforce costs circle back to high-leverage companies in the form of higher ex ante contracted

wages. We show that the ex-ante wage premium that firms must pay to compensate for the

expected earnings loss due to bankruptcy is a considerable fraction of the magnitude of the tax

benefits of debt. Thus, our results suggest that these indirect bankruptcy costs borne by employees

are significant enough to be a first-order consideration when firms make capital structure choices.




                                                 35
References:
Abowd, John M. and Orley C. Ashenfelter, 1981, Anticipated Unemployment, Temporary Layoffs, and
      Compensating Wage Differentials, NBER Chapters, in: Studies in Labor Markets, pp. 141-186,
      National Bureau of Economic Research.
Abowd, John M., Bryce E. Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin L. McKinney, Marc Roemer,
      and Simon Woodcock, 2009, The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the Creation of the Quarterly
      Workforce Indicators, in: T. Dunne, J.B. Jensen and M.J. Roberts, eds., Producer Dynamics: New
      Evidence from Micro Data (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of
      Economic Research, 2009), pp. 149-230.
Agrawal, Ashwini K. and David A. Matsa, 2013, Labor Unemployment Risk and Corporate Financing
      Decisions, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 449-470.
Almeida, Heitor and Thomas Philippon, 2007, The Risk-Adjusted Cost of Financial Distress, Journal of
      Finance 62, 2557-2586.
Andrade, Gregor and Steven N. Kaplan, 1998, How Costly is Financial (not Economic) Distress? Evidence
      from Highly Levered Transactions that Became Distressed, Journal of Finance 53, 1443-1493.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Jae Song, 2014, Trade Adjustment: Worker-Level
      Evidence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1799-1860.
Azariadis, Costas, 1975, Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria, Journal of Political
      Economy 83, 1183-1202.
Baghai, Ramin, Rui Silva, Viktor Thell, and Vikrant Vig, 2018, Talent in Distressed Firms: Investigating
      the Labor Costs of Financial Distress, Working paper, Stockholm School of Economics and London
      Business School.
Baily, Martin N., 1974, Wages and Employment under Uncertain Demand, Review of Economic Studies 41,
      37-50.
Becker, Gary S., 1962, Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis, Journal of Political Economy
     70, 9-49.
Benmelech, Efraim, Nittai K. Bergman, and Ricardo J. Enriquez, 2012, Negotiating with Labor under
     Financial Distress, Review of Corporate Finance Studies 1, 28-67.
Berk, Jonathan, Richard Stanton, and Josef Zechner, 2010, Human Capital, Bankruptcy, and Capital
     Structure, Journal of Finance 65, 891-926.
Bernstein, Shai, Emanuele Colonnelli, and Benjamin Iverson, 2019, Asset Allocation in Bankruptcy,
     Journal of Finance 74, 5-53.
Brown, Jennifer and David Matsa, 2016, Boarding a Sinking Ship? An Investigation of Job Applications to
     Distressed Firms, Journal of Finance 71, 507-550.

                                                  36
Butt-Jaggia, Priscilla and Anjan V. Thakor, 1994, Firm-Specific Human Capital and Optimal Capital
      Structure, International Economic Review 35, 283-308.
Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation. London, U.K.: Oxford University
      Press.
Chemmanur, Thomas J., Yingmei Cheng, and Tianming Zhang, 2013, Human Capital, Capital Structure,
      and Employee Pay: An Empirical Analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 110, 478-502.
Couch, Kenneth A. and Dana W. Placzek, 2010, Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers Revisited,
      American Economic Review 100, 572-589.
Davis, Steven J. and Till von Wachter, 2011, Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss, Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity, 1-72.
Diamond, Peter A., 1982, Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium, Journal of Political
      Economy 90, 881­894.
Dore, Timothy E. and Rebecca Zarutskie, 2018, Firm Leverage, Labor Market Size, and Employee Pay,
      Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Eckbo, B. Espen, Karin S. Thorburn, and Wei Wang, 2016, How Costly is Corporate Bankruptcy for the
      CEO?, Journal of Financial Economics 121, 210-229.
Elkamhi, Redouane, Jan Ericsson, and Christopher A. Parsons, 2012, The Cost and Timing of Financial
      Distress, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 62-81.
Falato, Antonio and J. Nellie Liang, 2016, Do Creditor Rights Increase Employment Risk? Evidence from
      Loan Covenants, Journal of Finance 71, 2545-2590.
Gilson, Stuart, 1989, Management Turnover and Financial Distress, Journal of Financial Economics 25,
      241-262.
Goyal, Vidhan K. and Wei Wang, 2017, Provision of Management Incentives in Bankrupt Firms, Journal
      of Law, Finance, and Accounting 2, 87-123.
Graham, John R., 2000, How Big are the Tax Benefits of Debt?, Journal of Finance 55, 1901-1941.
Guiso, Luigi, Luigi Pistaferri, and Fabiano Schivardi, 2005, Insurance within the Firm, Journal of Political
      Economy 113, 1054­1087.
Hotchkiss, Edith S., 1995, Post-bankruptcy Performance and Management Turnover, Journal of Finance
      50, 3­21.
Hummels, David, Rasmus Jorgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang, 2014, The Wage Effects of
      Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data, American Economic Review 104,
      1597-1629.
Imbens, Guido W. and Donald B. Rubin, 2015, Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and Biomedical
      Sciences: An Introduction. New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                                    37
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan, 1993, Earnings Losses of Displaced
     Workers, American Economic Review 83, 685-709.
Jiang, Wei, Kai Li, and Wei Wang, 2012, Hedge Funds and Chapter 11, Journal of Finance 67, 513-560.
Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii, 2009, Occupational Specificity of Human Capital,
     International Economic Review 50, 63­115.
Kim, Hyunseob, 2018, How Does Labor Market Size Affect Firm Capital Structure? Evidence from Large
     Plant Openings, Working paper, Cornell University.
Kodrzycki, Yolanda K., 2007, Using Unexpected Recalls to Examine the Long-Term Earnings Effects of
     Job Displacement, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Lazear, Edward P. and Paul Oyer, 2004, Internal and External Labor Markets: A Personnel Economics
     Approach, Labour Economics 11, 527-554.
LoPucki, Lynn M. and William C. Whitford, 1992, Patterns in the Bankruptcy Reorganization of Large,
     Publicly Held Companies, Cornell Law Review 78, 597-618.
Manning, Alan and Barbara Petrongolo, 2017, How Local Are Labour Markets? Evidence from a Spatial
     Job Search Model, American Economic Review 83, 2877­2907.
Matsa, David A., 2018, Capital Structure and a Firm's Workforce, Annual Review of Financial Economics
     10, 387­412.
Moretti, Enrico, 2011, Local labor markets, Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier, N.H.
Neal, Derek, 1995, Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers, Journal of Labor
     Economics 13, 653-677.
Schoeni, Robert F. and Michael Dardia, 2003, Estimates of Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers Using
     California Administrative Data, Working paper, RAND and Public Policy Institute of California.
Sullivan, Daniel and Till von Wachter, 2009, Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
     Administrative Data, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1265-1306.
Tate, Geoffrey and Liu Yang, 2015, The Bright Side of Corporate Diversification: Evidence from Internal
     Labor Markets, Review of Financial Studies 28, 2203­2249.
Titman, Sheridan, 1984, The Effect of Capital Structure on a Firm's Liquidation Decision, Journal of
     Financial Economics 13, 137-151.
Topel, Robert H., 1984, Equilibrium Earnings, Turnover, and Unemployment: New Evidence, Journal of
     Labor Economics 2, 500-522.
Vilhuber, Lars and Kevin L. McKinney, 2014, LEHD Data Documentation LEHD-Overview-S2011:
     LEHD Infrastructure Files in the Census RDC ­ Overview, CES Working paper 14-26.
von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester, 2011, Long-Term Earnings Losses due to Mass Layoffs
     During the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using U.S. Administrative Data from 1974 to 2004,

                                                  38
     Working paper, Columbia University, Social Security Administration, and Congressional Budget
     Office.
von Wachter, Till, Elizabeth Handwerker, and Andrew K. G. Hildreth, 2009, Estimating the `True' Cost of
     Job Loss: Evidence using Matched Data from California 1991-2000, Working paper, Columbia
     University, Bureau of Labor Statistics, and University of California at Berkeley.
Walker, W. Reed, 2013, The Transitional Costs of Sectoral Reallocation: Evidence from the Clean Air Act
     and the Workforce, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1787-1835.




                                                   39
                                Appendix - Definition of Variables

Variable Name               Variable Definition

Firm characteristics

Sales                       Total sales of the firm in $millions

Book assets                 Total book value of assets in $millions

Market assets               Book assets + market equity ­ book equity

Book (Market) leverage      Total debt/book (market) assets, where total debt = long term plus short-term debt

ROA                         Operating income before depreciation and amortizations/lagged book assets

Market-to-book              (Total debt + market equity)/(total debt + book equity)

                            Number of employees in the firm, obtained from Longitudinal Business Database
Number of employees
                            (LBD)

Credit rating               S&P credit rating from Compustat

Asset tangibility           Net PP&E/book assets

Worker characteristics      From LEHD-ICF

Female                      An indicator variable equal to one if the worker is female, and zero otherwise

Years of experience         Years of potential work experience = age ­ (years of education + 6)

Years of education          Years of education

Dependent and main independent variables

                            Natural logarithm of annual earnings from LEHD-EHF adjusted for inflation
Log (earrings)
                            using the CPI (in 2001 constant dollars)

                            An indicator variable equal to one for employees of bankrupt firms and zero for
BR
                            employees of control firms

                            Event year indicator variables from three years before to six years after
d[k], where k = -3 to +6
                            bankruptcy




                                                     40
                           Figure 1: Effect of Corporate Bankruptcy on Employee Earnings
The figure uses the difference-in-difference estimates in Table 4, Panel A, column (2) and presents the percentage
change in real earnings (solid line) for employees of bankrupt firms from the benchmark (i.e., t-4) earnings, relative
to the earnings change for employees of matched firms. The dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals. "Year
t" represents the year of bankruptcy filing.

                         10%


                          5%


                          0%
                                t-3    t-2   t-1     t      t+1      t+2      t+3      t+4      t+5      t+6
       Earnings change




                         -5%


                         -10%


                         -15%


                         -20%


                         -25%
                                                   Years relative to bankruptcy




                                                         41
                            Table 1: Coverage of LEHD States and Years
This table presents the coverage of states and years by the U.S. Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer-Household
Dynamics (LEHD)-Employment History File (EHF). See Vilhuber and McKinney (2014) for details of the LEHD
infrastructure.

                       State              State abbreviation       First year        Last year
             Arkansas                            AR                  2002              2008
             California                          CA                  1991              2008
             Colorado                            CO                  1990              2008
             Florida                              FL                 1992              2008
             Georgia                             GA                  1994              2008
             Hawaii                               HI                 1995              2008
             Iowa                                 IA                 1998              2008
             Idaho                                ID                 1990              2008
             Illinois                             IL                 1990              2008
             Indiana                              IN                 1990              2008
             Louisiana                            LA                 1990              2008
             Maryland                            MD                  1985              2008
             Maine                               ME                  1996              2008
             Montana                             MT                  1993              2008
             North Carolina                      NC                  1991              2008
             North Dakota                        ND                  1998              2008
             Nevada                              NV                  1998              2008
             New Jersey                           NJ                 1996              2008
             New Mexico                          NM                  1995              2008
             Oklahoma                            OK                  2000              2008
             Oregon                              OR                  1991              2008
             Rhode Island                         RI                 1995              2008
             South Carolina                       SC                 1998              2008
             Texas                                TX                 1995              2008
             Utah                                 UT                 1999              2008
             Virginia                            VA                  1998              2008
             Vermont                              VT                 2000              2008
             Washington                          WA                  1990              2008
             Wisconsin                            WI                 1990              2008
             West Virginia                       WV                  1997              2008




                                                      42
                         Table 2: Descriptive Statistics on Firm Characteristics of Bankrupt and Matched Firms
This table presents descriptive statistics on characteristics of bankruptcy events, firms and their matched firms. Panel A presents bankruptcy outcomes for the full
sample of the bankrupt firms in the LoPucki Bankruptcy Research Database (BRD) from 1990 to 2005 and the bankrupt firms with at least ten employees in the
Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) database. Panel B compares firm characteristics of bankrupt and propensity-score matched
firms, with the statistics based on the values in the latest fiscal year before bankruptcy (usually year t-1 or t-2, where "year t" is the year of bankruptcy filing or
matching). Panel C presents the descriptive statistics on dynamics of firm characteristics for bankrupt and matched firms from years t-3 to t-1. See the Appendix
for variable definitions. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***.

Panel A: Bankruptcy Outcomes
                                                                 All bankrupt firms from BRD                  Bankrupt firms with employees in LEHD
                                                                  N. events           % of sample              N. events            % of sample
      Merged, acquired, or continue                                  224                43.9%                      59                  42.3%
      Liquidated, closed, or refile Chapter 11                       106                20.8%                      24                  16.9%
      Unknown                                                        180                35.3%                      57                  40.9%
      Total                                                          510                100%                      140                  100%

Panel B: Firm Characteristics of Bankrupt and Matched Firms
                                Bankrupt firms with                                                                                           Difference
                                                        Bankrupt firms with                               Propensity-score
            Sample                 information from                                                                                            (3)-(5)
                                                       employees in LEHD                                   matched firms
                                   Compustat/SSEL
                                  (1)            (2)      (3)           (4)                            (5)              (6)                (7)             (8)
   Variable
                               Mean            STD     Mean           STD                            Mean              STD              Mean          t-statistics
   Sales ($m)                   1,537          6,113    1,669         3,509                          1,416            3,818               253             0.57
   Book assets ($m)            1,390           4,244   1,320         1,820                           1,106            1,723               214             0.89
   Market assets ($m)           1,185          4,333     992          1,265                          1,228            2,859              -236            -0.73
   Number of employees          8,672         20,920   11,080        24,970                          13,920           36,130            -2,840           -0.53
   Book leverage                 0.63           0.37    0.57           0.24                           0.30             0.21               0.27          9.74***
   Market leverage               0.57           0.26     0.57          0.23                           0.30             0.21               0.27          9.74***
   ROA                          0.00            0.31    0.06          0.07                            0.06             0.07              -0.01           -1.02
   Market-to-book                1.18           0.87    1.14           0.86                           1.21             1.14              -0.07           -0.58
   N. events                     360              -      140             -                            140                -                  -               -




                                                                                 43
Panel C. Dynamics of Firm Characteristics for Bankrupt and Matched Firms Prior to Bankruptcy
                                            (1)                               (2)
                                                                                                        t-statistics for (1)-(2)
                                     Bankrupt firms                    Matched firms
  Year                         t-3           t-2       t-1        t-3         t-2         t-1     t-3             t-2              t-1
  Sales ($m)                  1,595        1,681      1,643     1,032       1,176       1,276    1.54             1.23          0.82
  Book assets ($m)            1,398        1,479      1,427      943        1,061       1,117    1.87*            1.64          1.18
  Market assets ($m)          1,403        1,206      1,004     1,107       1,094       1,210    1.01             0.43         -0.67
  Number of employees        11,510        11,900    10,960     14,810     14,400      13,390    -0.55           -0.47         -0.52
  Book leverage               0.44          0.49      0.57       0.25        0.27        0.30   6.32***         7.18***       8.74***
  Market leverage             0.38          0.45      0.57       0.21        0.25        0.30   5.84***         7.00***       8.98***
  ROA                         0.12          0.10      0.06       0.12        0.10        0.06    -0.50           -0.25         -0.49
  Market-to-book              1.60          1.28      1.06       1.70        1.37        1.21    -0.71           -0.62         -1.14




                                                               44
                      Table 3: Descriptive Statistics on Employees Characteristics of Bankrupt and Matched Firms
This table presents descriptive statistics of the workers employed by bankrupt and control firms. All variables are measured at t-1 (where "year t" is the year of
bankruptcy filing or matching). The earnings data for individual employees are from the LEHD-EHF (Employment History Files), and other individual
characteristics are from the LEHD-ICF (Individual Characteristics Files). We require that workers have at least two years of tenure and ages between 22 and 50
years in year t-1. Columns (5) and (6) show statistics for a 1% random sample of workers from the LEHD-EHF data who are employed by non-bankrupt public
firms, are not displaced, and satisfy the same requirements for industry (i.e., excluding financials and utilities), tenure, and age as the workers in the bankruptcy
sample. Earnings are CPI-adjusted (in 2001 constant dollars). "% stay in firm (before)" (industry or county) is the percent of employees who stay in the bankrupt
firm (the employee's industry or county) from t-4 to t-1. Similarly, "% stay in firm (after)" (industry or county) is the percent of employees who stay in the bankrupt
firm (the employee's industry or county) from t-1 to t+3. " % stay in firm (before  after)" (industry or county) is the change in the percent of employees who
stay in the bankrupt firm (the employee's industry or county) between t-4 to t-1 and t-1 to t+3. Definitions of variables are in the Appendix. Columns (7) and (8)
report heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics adjusted for within-firm clustering. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***.
The number of employees is rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau's disclosure rules.

                                                         Employees of                Employees of                  Randomly              t-statistic     t-statistic
                                                         bankrupt firms              matched firms             selected workers         for (1)-(3)     for (1)-(5)
                                                          (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)
                                                                                                                                            (7)             (8)
                                                        Mean         STD           Mean        STD            Mean        STD
   Years of education                                   13.42        2.35          13.43        2.39          13.41        2.42            -0.09            0.04
   Age                                                  36.21        8.21          36.22        8.35          35.23        8.15            -0.01            1.58
   Years of experience                                  16.79        8.00          16.79        8.09          15.82        7.96             0.00           1.97**
   Female                                                50.8        50.0           42.4        49.4           45.5        49.8            1.43             1.28
   Annual real earnings at t-1 (2001$)                  34,250      83,940         34,440     36,210          33,810     70,140            -0.02            0.08
   Number of employees                                 277,000         -          353,000         -          476,000         -                -               -
   % stay in firm (before)                               51.5          -            50.1          -              -           -              0.12              -
   % stay in industry (before)                           72.8          -            67.4          -              -           -              0.82              -
   % stay in county (before)                             71.1          -            64.1          -              -           -              0.96              -
   % stay in firm (after)                                37.2             -         47.5            -          56.5            -           -1.04          -3.46***
   % stay in industry (after)                            54.4             -         64.6            -          68.9            -           -1.50          -3.87***
   % stay in county (after)                              56.0             -         66.1            -          69.7            -           -1.46          -3.85***
   % stay in firm (before  after)                        -14.3            -          -2.6           -           -              -          -1.05               -
    % stay in industry (before  after)                   -18.4            -          -2.8           -           -              -         -2.66**              -
    % stay in county (before  after)                     -15.1            -          2.0            -           -              -         -2.79***             -


                                                                                  45
                  Table 4: Effect of Corporate Bankruptcy on Employee Earnings
This table presents difference-in-difference estimates of earnings changes for workers employed by bankrupt firms
around bankruptcy filings relative to a control group of workers. The control group in Panel A includes employees of
the matched firms, and in Panel B a 1% random sample of non-displaced workers from the LEHD universe employed
by public non-bankrupt firms. Panel C reports the present value of earnings losses using matched firm's employees as
the control group and after imputing missing earnings in LEHD. The dependent variable is log(annual earnings) in
2001 constant dollars. "BR" is an indicator variable equal to one for employees of bankrupt firms. The event year
indicator variables are "d[k]," where -3  k  6. The regressions use the observations from event years t-4 to t+6, with
the benchmark earnings being the earnings in year t-4. Standalone event year indicators d[k] (-3  k  6) are included
in all regressions but suppressed for expositional convenience. "PV (Earnings losses)" is the present value of earnings
losses from years t to t+6 (computed using a real discount rate of 5.48%) as a percent of the pre-bankruptcy annual
earnings in t-4. To illustrate the process to compute the PV, take Panel A, column (2) as an example. We first convert
the coefficient on "d[1] × BR," -0.129, into exp(-0.129) - 1 = -12.1%, which is the percentage change in earnings
when d[1] × BR changes from zero to one. We then discount the percentage change by a year using a real discount
rate. We repeat the calculation for all coefficients on "d[k] × BR" for 0  k  6, and then sum up the present values
across the seven years. For regression coefficients, heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics adjusted for within-firm
clustering are in parentheses. Definitions of variables are in the Appendix. For present values of earnings losses, t-
statistics for the PV significantly differing from zero are in parentheses (standard errors are computed using the delta
method). Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***. The number of observations
is rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau's disclosure rules.




                                                           46
 Panel A: Earnings Losses Using Matched Firms' Employees as Control Group
 Dep. Var. = Log(Earnings)         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
d[-3] × BR                      -0.025       -0.016        -0.015       -0.004      -0.002
                                (-0.50)      (-0.59)       (-0.42)      (-0.21)     (-0.11)
d[-2] × BR                      -0.048       -0.049        -0.028       -0.028       0.003
                                (-0.66)      (-1.14)       (-0.48)      (-0.64)      (0.05)
d[-1] × BR                      -0.013       -0.044         0.007       -0.016       0.023
                                (-0.15)      (-1.00)       (0.11)       (-0.36)      (0.36)
d[0] × BR                       -0.108      -0.103***     -0.087*      -0.097***   -0.073***
                                (-1.63)      (-2.78)       (-1.77)      (-3.62)     (-2.92)
d[1] × BR                      -0.155**     -0.129***     -0.091**     -0.097***   -0.075***
                                (-2.42)      (-4.17)       (-2.02)      (-4.11)     (-3.82)
d[2] × BR                     -0.192***     -0.150***     -0.114**     -0.105***   -0.098***
                                (-2.69)      (-4.38)       (-2.39)      (-3.66)     (-3.73)
d[3] × BR                       -0.125*     -0.104***     -0.099**     -0.085***   -0.075***
                                (-1.74)      (-3.08)       (-1.97)      (-2.68)     (-2.59)
d[4] × BR                       -0.172*     -0.129***     -0.115**     -0.095***   -0.081**
                                (-1.84)      (-3.17)       (-2.17)      (-2.72)     (-2.54)
                                       *            **            *
d[5] × BR                       -0.149      -0.111        -0.103        -0.072*     -0.065*
                                (-1.71)      (-2.01)       (-1.78)      (-1.71)     (-1.85)
d[6] × BR                       -0.149       -0.092        -0.098       -0.053      -0.057
                                -(1.46)      (-1.60)       (-1.55)      (-1.17)     (-1.51)
Experience                    -0.192***     -0.127***    -0.173***     -0.122***   -0.105***
                               -(11.14)     (-13.79)     (-12.83)      (-13.50)    (-11.96)
Female × Experience              0.006       -0.003         0.002      -0.003**    -0.004***
                                 (1.64)      (-1.53)       (0.86)       (-1.97)     (-2.64)
Experience × Education        -0.006***     -0.005***    -0.005***     -0.004***   -0.004***
                               (-17.08)     (-24.50)     (-22.93)      (-22.32)    (-19.43)
Standalone event year
                                  Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes
indicators d[k] (-3  k  6)
Worker FE                         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes
Year FE                           Yes
SIC2 × Year FE                                 Yes                        Yes
County × Year FE                                             Yes          Yes
SIC2 × County × Year FE                                                               Yes
No. of worker-years           4,672,000    4,672,000    4,672,000     4,672,000    4,672,000
R-squared                       56.9%        61.9%         59.6%        63.2%        68.6%
                                       **           ***           **
PV(Earnings losses)           -83.9%       -67.1%        -57.9%       -50.8%***    -44.2%***
                                (-2.26)       (3.56)       (-2.27)      (-3.08)     (-3.04)




                                              47
Panel B: Earnings Losses Using Randomly Selected Workers as Control Group
 Dep. Var. = Log(Earnings)       (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)
d[-3] × BR                     0.022        -0.006         0.013      -0.002      -0.001
                               (0.54)       (-0.33)        (0.38)     (-0.14)     (-0.08)
d[-2] × BR                     0.022        -0.010         0.025       0.006       0.020
                               (0.39)       (-0.29)        (0.48)     (0.18)       (0.43)
d[-1] × BR                    -0.035        -0.075*       -0.018      -0.048      -0.026
                              (-0.57)       (-1.90)       (-0.34)     (-1.18)     (-0.58)
d[0] × BR                    -0.121**      -0.145***     -0.116***   -0.141***   -0.126***
                              (-2.40)       (-4.82)       (-2.78)     (-5.15)     (-5.28)
d[1] × BR                    -0.175***     -0.167***     -0.150***   -0.156***   -0.122***
                              (-3.11)       (-6.18)       (-3.60)     (-6.36)     (-6.04)
d[2] × BR                    -0.217***     -0.198***     -0.160***   -0.154***   -0.117***
                              (-3.64)       (-6.12)       (-3.80)     (-5.33)     (-4.72)
d[3] × BR                    -0.156***     -0.124***     -0.110**    -0.100***   -0.057**
                              (-2.82)       (-3.81)       (-2.45)     (-3.07)     (-2.00)
d[4] × BR                    -0.219***     -0.149***     -0.126***   -0.096***    -0.038
                              (-2.86)       (-3.92)       (-2.97)     (-2.94)     (-1.30)
d[5] × BR                    -0.155**       -0.074*       -0.088*     -0.035       0.016
                              (-2.30)       (-1.83)       (-1.77)     (-0.92)      (0.46)
d[6] × BR                     -0.156*       -0.078*       -0.079      -0.031       0.020
                              (-1.80)       (-1.82)       (-1.50)     (-0.90)      (0.65)
Experience                   -0.178***     -0.129***     -0.165***   -0.123***   -0.116***
                             (-16.92)      (-17.59)      (-17.29)    (-17.29)    (-15.71)
Female × Experience            0.004        -0.002         0.003      -0.002     -0.003**
                               (1.48)       (-1.27)        (1.60)     (-1.41)     (-1.98)
Experience × Education       -0.005***     -0.004***     -0.005***   -0.004***   -0.004***
                             (-18.94)      (-26.67)      (-29.95)    (-27.92)    (-26.06)
Standalone event year
                               Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
indicators d[k] (-3  k  6)
Worker FE                      Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Year FE                        Yes
SIC2 × Year FE                                Yes                      Yes
County × Year FE                                           Yes         Yes
SIC2 × County × Year FE                                                             Yes
No. of worker-years          5,802,000     5,802,000    5,802,000    5,802,000   5,802,000
R-squared                      58.7%         62.0%        60.2%        63.0%       67.9%
PV(Earnings losses)          -94.8%***     -76.8%***    -68.5%***    -60.3%***   -37.9%***
                              (-3.21)       (-4.56)      (-3.13)      (-3.80)     (-2.63)




                                            48
Panel C: Present Values of Earnings Losses after Imputing Missing Earnings in LEHD
                                   (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)        (5)
                                    Imputing missing annual earnings with the employee's last
                                                   observed quarterly earnings × 4
                                          *
                                  -71.1%         -56.1%***        -53.7%*      -43.8%**  -33.9%*
  PV(Earnings losses)
                                   (-1.72)          (-2.70)        (-1.80)      (-2.37)   (-1.93)
                                                                            th
                                Imputing missing annual earnings with 10 percentile of earnings
                                            distribution of all employees in the sample
                                  -67.5%         -115.7%***       -59.4%      -90.0%*** -70.3%***
  PV(Earnings losses)
                                   (-0.96)          (3.80)         (-1.44)      (-3.91)   (-3.41)
  Worker FE                          Yes              Yes            Yes          Yes       Yes
  SIC2 × Year FE                     Yes              Yes            Yes          Yes       Yes




                                                 49
      Table 5: Effect of Corporate Bankruptcy on Employee Earnings - Conditional Analysis on
            Worker Mobility, Labor Market Characteristics, and Bankruptcy Outcomes
     This table presents the present value of earnings losses conditional on worker mobility, labor market characteristics,
     and bankruptcy outcomes. "PV (Earnings losses)" is the present value of earnings losses from years t to t+6 (computed
     using a real discount rate of 5.48%) as a percent of the pre-bankruptcy annual earnings in t-4. Panel A reports the
     present values of earnings losses conditional on worker mobility. We define a worker as a stayer if she stays in the
     same firm, industry, or county through year t+3 as her t-1 firm, industry, or county. This panel stratifies the treated
     (i.e., bankrupt) firm employees based on whether they stay with their firms, industries, or counties, but not the control
     firm employees. Thus, the panel decomposes earnings losses of the treated group workers relative to the average
     worker in the control group. Panel B reports the present values of earnings losses conditional on firm size (measured
     by employment from the LBD), local labor market size (the number of workers in a given two-digit SIC industry and
     county cell), and bankruptcy outcomes (liquidation vs. non-liquidation). We split the sample at the third quartile of
     the firm size and labor market size distributions. This panel stratifies both the treated and control firm employees. t-
     statistics for the present value significantly differing from zero are in parentheses (standard errors are computed using
     the delta method). Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***.

     Panel A: Present Value of Earnings Losses Conditional on Worker Mobility
                         (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)                                    (6)
                                                Leavers:       Leavers:      Leavers:                              Leavers:
                        Firm        Firm
   Group                                     same industry diff. industry same industry                          diff. industry
                       stayers     leavers
                                              same county    same county   diff. county                           diff. county
                                         ***
   PV(Earnings         25.6%      -85.9%         -0.2%         -11.5%        69.8%***                             -130.3%***
   losses)             (0.96)      (-4.63)       (-0.01)        (-0.53)       (2.75)                                 (-7.37)
   Controls              Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes                                     Yes
   Worker FE             Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes                                     Yes
   SIC2 × Year FE        Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes                                     Yes

        Panel B: Present Value of Earnings Losses Conditional on Firm Size, Local Market Size and
        Bankruptcy Outcome
                      (1)          (2)    (3)          (4)      (5)           (6)         (7)            (8)
                         Firm size       Labor market size                  Bankruptcy outcome
                                                                    Liquidation            Non-liquidation
                    Large        Small   Large        Small  Large firm Small firm Large firm Small firm
PV(Earnings        -15.6% -79.1%*** -39.7%* -79.0%*** -110.2%*** -150.2%***              -0.1%       -72.0%***
losses)            (-0.47)      (-4.07) (-1.73)      (-4.15)  (-2.93)         (-7.28)    (0.00)        (-3.31)
Difference
between small             -63.5%*             -39.3%**                -40.0%                   -71.9%**
and large and its          (-1.85)             (-2.41)                (-0.93)                   (-1.96)
t-statistic
Controls             Yes          Yes     Yes          Yes      Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes
Worker FE            Yes          Yes     Yes          Yes      Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes
SIC2 × Year FE       Yes          Yes     Yes          Yes      Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes




                                                               50
Table 6: Effect of Corporate Bankruptcy on Employee Earnings - Financial Distress versus
                                   Economic Distress

This table presents the present value of earnings losses conditional on bankrupt firms' financial and economic
situations before bankruptcy. We split the bankrupt and matched firms in the full sample into four groups (high vs.
low ROA and high vs. low leverage) at the medians of bankrupt firms' ROA and market leverage one year prior to
bankruptcy filing (year t-1). For each group, we estimate the regression as in Table 4, Panel A, column (2). All
regressions include control variables, worker fixed effects, and two-digit SIC industry × year fixed effects. We report
the present values of earnings losses for each group from years t to t+6 (computed using a real discount rate of 5.48%)
as a percent of the pre-bankruptcy annual earnings in t-4. t-statistics for the present value significantly differing from
zero are in parentheses (standard errors are computed using the delta method). Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***.


                  PV (Earnings losses)                High leverage              Low leverage
                                                        Group 1:                    Group 2:
                  High ROA                              -59.5%***                   -33.7%
                                                         (-2.70)                     (-1.52)
                                                        Group 3:                    Group 4:
                  Low ROA                              -103.6%***                   -87.4%**
                                                         (-3.08)                     (-2.23)




                                                           51
            Table 7: Leverage and Employee Wages - A Wage Regression Approach
This table presents the relation between corporate leverage and employee earnings. The dependent variable is the log
of employee annual earnings in 2001 constant dollars. Market leverage is defined as book value of total debt divided
by the market value of assets. The control variables include log(book assets), market-to-book, ROA, asset tangibility
of firms, gender, years of education, years of experience, gender × experience, gender × education, experience ×
education of individual workers, and county × two-digit SIC industry × year fixed effects. To select the sample for
the regression, we begin with Compustat firms with S&P credit ratings between `AA+' and `B-` and book assets
greater than $100 million in 1980 constant dollars and less than or equal to the assets of the largest firm in our bankrupt
firm sample from 1986 to 2008. Then we select a 10% random sample of all worker-years in LEHD with ages between
22 and 50 and at least two years of tenure in these firms. Column (1) presents estimates for the full sample. Column
(2) presents estimates conditional on firm employment size, measured by the number of employees in a given firm.
Column (3) presents estimates conditional on local labor market size, measured by the number of workers in a given
two-digit SIC industry and county cell. "Large" ("Small") is an indicator variable equal to one if firm employment or
local labor market size is greater than (less than or equal to) the third quartile in the sample distribution. Definitions
of variables are in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics adjusted for within-firm clustering are in
parentheses. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***. The number of
observations is rounded to the nearest thousands to follow the Census Bureau's disclosure rules.

  Dep. Var. = Log(Earnings)                     Full              Firm employment size            Labor market size
                                                 (1)                      (2)                           (3)
 Market leverage                               0.171*
                                               (1.66)
 Market leverage × Large                                                    -0.089                      0.060
                                                                           -(0.63)                      (0.50)
 Market leverage × Small                                                    0.208*                     0.253**
                                                                            (1.82)                      (2.25)
 Controls                                       Yes                          Yes                         Yes
 County × SIC2 × Year FE                        Yes                          Yes                         Yes
 R-squared                                     32.5%                        32.5%                       32.5%
 No. of worker-years                         2,699,000                    2,699,000                   2,699,000




                                                           52
                                 Table 8: Implied Annual Wage Premia
This table develops implied annual wage premia for firms with different credit ratings. We use the PV of earnings
losses as a fraction of pre-bankruptcy annual wages in a binomial valuation model (see Section A.1 of the online
appendix) to derive the implied wage premia. We first calculate a one-year risk-adjusted bankruptcy probability q in
column (2) as 1-(1-0.6×p10)1/10, where 0.6 is the estimated probability of bankruptcy conditional on default (based on
Moody's Default and Recovery Database and the Altman-Kuehne/NYU Salomon Center Bond Master Default
Database), and p10 (in column (1)) is the ten-year risk-adjusted default probability provided in Almeida and Philippon
(2007, Table III). In column (3), we use this annual q to calculate the PV wage premium a firm would pay workers
per year as [q × (L/W)/(1+rf)], where "L" represents the present value of earnings loss given bankruptcy and "W"
represents pre-bankruptcy annual wages. The risk-free rate (rf) is assumed to be 5.61%, the average 10-year Treasury
rate from 1985-2008, our sample period. All numbers in the table are in %.

                             p10 = Ten-year risk-                                       Implied annual wage
                                                           q = One-year risk-
                               adjusted default                                       premium as a fraction of
     Credit rating                                        adjusted bankruptcy
                          probability from Almeida                                             wages
                                                               probability
                            and Philippon (2007)                                     (Binomial valuation model)
                                      (1)                           (2)                          (3)
      AAA                            1.65                          0.10                         0.06
       AA                            6.75                          0.41                         0.26
        A                           12.72                          0.79                         0.50
       BBB                          20.88                          1.33                         0.84
       BB                           39.16                          2.64                         1.68
        B                           62.48                          4.59                         2.92
   BBB minus AA                     14.13                          0.92                         0.58




                                                         53
Table 9: Comparison of Annual Wage Premia as a Fraction of Wages - Binomial Valuation
                      Model versus Wage Regression Approaches
This table compares the implied annual wage premia derived from the binomial valuation model in Table 8 with those
estimated from the wage regression in Table 7. In particular, it presents the additional wage premium due to moving
from AA to BBB ratings. Column (1) presents the results for the full sample, and columns (2) through (5) present for
subsamples by firm employment size and labor market size. Firm employment size is measured by the number of
employees in a given firm, and local labor market size is by the number of workers in a given two-digit SIC industry
and county cell. "Large" ("Small") represents a subsample in which firm employment or local labor market size is
greater than (less than or equal to) the third quartile in the sample distribution. Panel A (B) presents the change in
implied annual wage premia estimated from the binomial valuation model (wage regression in Table 7) as a percent
of the firm's wage bill. Statistical significance, based on estimates from Tables 4 and 5 (for the valuation model) and
Table 7 (for wage regressions), at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                             Full        Firm employment size           Labor market size
                                            Sample        Large      Small             Large     Small
                                              (1)           (2)       (3)               (4)        (5)
                                      Panel A: Binomial Valuation Model
              PV (wage premia)
                                           0.58%***       0.14%        0.69%***       0.34%*      0.69%***
               BBB minus AA
                                           Panel B: Wage Regression
              PV (wage premia)
                                            0.43%*        -0.20%        0.53%*        0.14%        0.66%**
               BBB minus AA




                                                         54
   Table 10: Capitalized Value of Implied Wage Premia, Tax Benefits of Financial Leverage and Expected Costs of Financial
                                                         Distress
This table develops the capitalized value of implied wage premia as a fraction of firm value for firms with different credit ratings, and compares them with the tax
benefits of debt and expected costs of financial distress. Column (1) presents the annual wage premium as a fraction of firm value. Column (2) calculates the PV
of implied wage premia as a fraction of firm value that the firm would pay workers in an infinite horizon (i.e., capitalized value) as [q/(q+rf)] × L/MV, where "L"
represents the present value of earnings loss given bankruptcy and "MV" represents firm value. The risk-free rate (rf) is assumed to be 5.61%, the average 10-year
Treasury rate from 1985-2008, our sample period. The online appendix provides detailed models underlying these wage premia calculations. Columns (3)-(5) show
the tax benefits of debt and expected costs of financial distress estimated from Almeida and Philippon (2007, Table VI) and Elkamhi, Ericsson, and Parsons (2012,
Tables 2 and 3). Wage premia, tax benefits and expected costs of financial distress in the table are present values as percentages of pre-bankruptcy firm value.

                                Implied annual                                            Tax benefits of           E(costs of           E(costs of financial
                                                           Capitalized value of
                               wage premium as                                              debt from           financial distress)        distress) from
        Credit rating                                   implied wage premium as
                                fraction of firm                                           Almeida and          from Almeida and         Elkamhi, Ericsson,
                                                          fraction of firm value
                                      value                                              Philippon (2007)        Philippon (2007)          Parsons (2012)
                                       (1)                           (2)                        (3)                     (4)                      (5)
         AAA                          0.02                          0.33                       0.47                    0.32                      0.0
          AA                          0.07                          1.29                       2.51                    1.84                      0.0
           A                          0.14                          2.33                       4.40                    3.84                      0.2
          BBB                         0.24                          3.61                       5.18                    4.53                      0.5
          BB                          0.47                          6.03                       7.22                    6.81                      0.9
           B                          0.82                          8.47                       8.95                    9.54                      2.1
      BBB minus AA                    0.17                          2.32                       2.67                    2.69                      0.5




                                                                                55
                      Employee Costs of Corporate Bankruptcy
                                Online Appendix*

                                                John R. Graham
                                                 Hyunseob Kim
                                                       Si Li
                                                  Jiaping Qiu


                                                    May 2019

                                                    Abstract

This online appendix presents a detailed model to compute wage premia and supplementary tables.




*
  Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of
the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. This
research uses data from the Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics Program, which was
partially supported by the following National Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093, SES-0339191 and ITR-
0427889; National Institute on Aging Grant AG018854; and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.

  John R. Graham (john.graham@duke.edu), Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham NC 27708, phone:
(919) 660-7857; Hyunseob Kim (hk722@cornell.edu), Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14583, phone: (607) 255-8335; Si Li (sli@wlu.ca), Financial Services Research Centre,
Lazaridis School of Business and Economics, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3C5, Canada, phone:
(519) 884-0710 ext. 2395; Jiaping Qiu (qiu@mcmaster.ca), DeGroote School of Business, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4M4, Canada, phone: (905) 525-9140 ext. 23963.

                                                         1
  Online Appendix: Binomial Valuation Model to Compute Implied Wage Premia Due to

                                         Bankruptcy Risk

       In a competitive labor market, when an employee expects earnings reductions following a

bankruptcy filing of her employer, she will require higher wages ex ante to compensate for such a

potential loss. In this appendix, we first derive annual wage premium demanded by an employee

in Section A.1 and then the capitalized value of wage premium paid by a firm with an infinite life

(going concern) in Section A.2.

A.1. Annual Wage Premium the Firm Pays a Worker


                                                                      L

         PV(expected annual wage loss)

                                                                      0

                                                Figure A.1

        Let L be the employee's earnings losses given bankruptcy of her employer, p the historical

annual probability of bankruptcy, and rD the appropriate discount rate. Note that L could be

normalized by wage or firm value as in the paper. Then the present value of expected earnings

losses in a given year is equal to:

                                                                .                            (A-1)

       Assuming that the employee is risk averse and that the firm is more likely to file for

bankruptcy in bad times, the discount rate rD < rf, the risk-free rate. Because we do not observe rD,

we adopt a risk-neutral approach proposed in Almeida and Philippon (2007) to estimate the PV

expected annual wage loss. Specifically,



                                                 2
                                                                           ,                  (A-2)

where q is the annual risk-adjusted probability of bankruptcy and rf is the risk-free rate.

       If we use a risk-free firm (i.e., q = 0) as the benchmark case, in a competitive labor market

the risky firm has to offer the same expected annual wages, W1 ­ PV(expected annual wage loss),

to the employee as the wages offered by a risk-free firm W0, other things held constant. This

implies that the annual wage premium demanded by the employee over a risk-free firm is:

                       

                                                                                  .            (A-3)

This result is intuitive: the annual wage premium is equal to the marginal increase in the PV

expected annual earnings loss resulting from a marginal increase in annual bankruptcy probability.



A.2. Capitalized Value of Wage Premium the Firm Pays a Worker


                                 q              L



                                           q             L
                          1-q
                                     0
                                                     q              L
                                     1-q

                                           0
                                               1-q
                                                             0...

                                               Figure A.2

      In an infinite-period model, the firm will have an employee indefinitely. If we use a risk-free

firm as the benchmark, in year 0, the employee faces a risk-adjusted bankruptcy probability q and

                                                     3
the firm will need to offer an annual wage premium of                         over a risk-free firm as shown in

equation (A-3). If the firm survives to the next year (with probability 1 - q), the employee again

will face a risk-adjusted bankruptcy probability q in that year, and the firm will again pay an annual

wage premium of               over a risk-free firm.3 Continuing this process indefinitely, the PV of wage

premium that the firm has to offer over a risk free firm over its life is:


                                                                                              .                (A-4)

        Using a perpetuity formula, equation (A-4) can be re-written as:

                           

                                                                   


                       1                    .                                                                  (A-5)

         In general, the difference in the capitalized value of wage premium between any two firms

with risk-adjusted bankruptcy probabilities q2 and q1 (q2 > q1) is equal to:

                                                                               .                              (A-6)

         For example, if a firm's credit rating changes from AA to BBB, the capitalized value of

wage premium of AA over BBB is equal to                                   .




3
  Note that this model does not require that the same employees work for the firm indefinitely. Workers receive a risk
premium to compensate them for the risk that the firm might go bankrupt in the current period. If the firm survives
the next period, it will compensate its workers for the risk of bankruptcy in that period, whether they are the same
employees that worked in the previous period or not.

                                                            4
A.3. Capitalized Value of Wage Premium, Adjusting for Pre-bankruptcy Wage Premium

       Section A.1 shows that the annual wage premium for bankruptcy risk is          . If normalized


by wages, the annual wage premium as a fraction of wages is         , where rf is the risk-free rate, q

is the annual risk-adjusted (i.e., risk-neutral) bankruptcy probability, and L/W is the present value

of employee earnings losses given bankruptcy as a fraction of pre-bankruptcy wages (i.e., 67.1%

as in Table 4, Panel A, column (2)). Part of the present value of earnings loss L/W might be due to

the loss of a compensation differential that existed pre-bankruptcy, which we attempt to tease out

as follows.

       We first take the coefficient on market leverage of 0.171 in column (1) of Table 7 as

"causal," which suggests that a one-percentage-point increase in leverage is associated with a

0.186% (= exp(0.171) ­ 1) increase in annual earnings (although we fully acknowledge that this

estimate is likely affected by omitted variables, among other things). We then multiply the 0.186%

by the difference in market leverage between the bankrupt and matched firms in t-4 (which is 13.6%

= 34.3% - 20.8%) to get an estimated annual wage premium of bankrupt firms over matched firms

that existed pre-bankruptcy, which equals 2.5% (= 0.186% × 13.6%). This estimate implies that

the loss of the pre-bankruptcy annual wage premium may contribute a 2.5% earnings loss (out of

about an 11% loss on average) in each year from t to t+6. The present value of the loss of this pre-

bankruptcy wage premium from year t to t+6 is equal to 2.5% times the present value factor for

seven years (5.66), which is 14.4% (= 2.5% × 5.66).

        Next, we subtract this present value of the lost pre-bankruptcy wage premium (14.4%)

from the present value of employee earnings losses given bankruptcy (L/W = 67.1%) to obtain an

adjusted present value of employee earnings losses ("adjusted L/W"), which is 52.7% (= 67.1% -


                                                 5
14.4%). Lastly, with the adjusted L/W, we re-calculate the capitalized value of wage premium as

a fraction of firm value for firms with different credit ratings following the same procedure

described in Section 4.4 of the paper. Online Appendix Table A5 shows that the adjustment leads

to a smaller PV of implied wage premia.



Reference:
Almeida, Heitor and Thomas Philippon, 2007, The Risk-Adjusted Cost of Financial Distress,
     Journal of Finance 62, 2557-2586.




                                              6
        Online Appendix Table A1: Effect of Bankruptcy on Employee Earnings When
         Control Group is Matched Using Observations from the Baseline Year, t-4
This table presents the present value of earnings losses by constructing matched firms based on the information in the
baseline year, t-4. "PV (Earnings losses)" is the present value of earnings losses from years t to t+6 (computed using
a real discount rate of 5.48%) as a percent of the pre-bankruptcy annual earnings in t-4. Heteroskedasticity robust t-
statistics adjusted for within-firm clustering are in parentheses (standard errors are computed using the delta method).
Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively. The number of
observations is rounded to the nearest thousands to follow the Census Bureau's disclosure rules.

                                       (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)
Control variables                      Yes                Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
Worker FE                              Yes                Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
Year FE                                Yes
SIC2 × Year FE                                            Yes                                Yes
County × Year FE                                                           Yes               Yes
SIC2 × County × Year FE                                                                                      Yes
No. of worker-years                2,002,000          2,002,000         2,002,000        2,002,000        2,002,000
PV(Earnings losses)
                                     -57.1%           -58.9%***          -84.2%           -55.5%**         -67.4%***
as % of pre-bankruptcy
                                     (-0.95)           (-2.82)           (-1.45)           (-2.47)          (-2.62)
annual earnings




                                                           7
     Online Appendix Table A2: Effect of Corporate Bankruptcy on Employee Earnings
                            After Imputing Missing Earnings
This table presents the present value of earnings losses using the matched firms' employees as the control group and
after imputing missing earnings in LEHD. "PV (Earnings losses)" is the present value of earnings losses from years t
to t+6 (computed using a real discount rate of 5.48%) as a percent of the pre-bankruptcy annual earnings in t-4. Column
(1) shows the baseline PV estimates from Table 4, Panel A, column (2). Columns (2) and (3) impute missing earnings
in LEHD with the last observed quarterly earnings times four and the 10th percentile value of the earnings distribution
in our sample. Column (4) imputes missing earnings in LEHD with the 10th percentile value of the earnings distribution
in our sample for a subset of employees who are originally employed in states whose all neighboring states are in
LEHD. Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics adjusted for within-firm clustering are in parentheses (standard errors are
computed using the delta method). Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***,
respectively.

                                   (1)                   (2)                     (3)                      (4)
                                 Baseline         Impute with last        Impute with 10th         Impute with 10th
                                                 observed quarterly      percentile earnings      percentile earnings
                                                    earnings × 4                                 (neighboring states)
Control variables                  Yes                   Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Worker FE                          Yes                   Yes                     Yes                      Yes
SIC2 × Year FE                     Yes                   Yes                     Yes                      Yes
                                -67.1%***            -56.1%***                -115.7%***               -74.2%**
PV(Earnings losses)
                                  (3.56)               (-2.70)                  (3.80)                  (-2.42)




                                                           8
      Online Appendix Table A3: Alternative Definition of Firm, Industry, and County Stayers
                                       in Year t+3 vs. t+5
     This table presents the present value of earnings losses conditional on mobility of employees of the bankrupt firms.
     "PV (Earnings losses)" is the present value of earnings losses from years t to t+6 (computed using a real discount rate
     of 5.48%) as a percent of the pre-bankruptcy annual earnings in t-4. Panel A (Panel B) defines a worker as a stayer if
     she stays in the same firm, industry, or county through year t+3 (t+5) as her t-1 firm, industry, or county.
     Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics adjusted for within-firm clustering are in parentheses (standard errors are
     computed using the delta method). Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***,
     respectively.

                          (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)                       (5)                (6)
                                                         Leavers:         Leavers:                 Leavers:           Leavers:
    Group           Firm stayers       Firm leavers same industry      diff. industry            same industry      diff. industry
                                                       same county      same county               diff. county       diff. county
                                             Panel A: Stayers Defined in t+3
PV(Earnings             25.6%           -85.9%***          -0.2%          -11.5%                    69.8%***          -130.3%***
losses)                 (0.96)            (-4.63)         (-0.01)          (-0.53)                   (2.75)             (-7.37)
                                             Panel B: Stayers Defined in t+5
PV(Earnings            54.5%**          -78.4%***         40.4%*          -12.0%                    54.8%**           -129.0%***
losses)                 (1.96)            (-4.28)          (1.69)          (-0.63)                   (2.53)             (-8.48)
Controls                 Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                      Yes                 Yes
Worker FE                Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                      Yes                 Yes
SIC2 × Year FE           Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                      Yes                 Yes




                                                                9
          Online Appendix Table A4: Present Value of Earnings Losses Conditional on Firm,
               Industry, and County Stayer Status of both Treated and Control Groups
     This table presents the present value of earnings losses conditional on mobility of employees of both bankrupt and
     matched control firms. The main difference between this table and Table 5, Panel A in the main text is as follows.
     This table stratifies both the treated (i.e., bankrupt) and control firm employees. Thus, this table examines how stayers
     (leavers) of the bankrupt firm fare relative to the stayers (leavers) of the control firm. In contrast, Table 5, Panel A
     stratifies the treated firm employees based on whether they stay with their firms, industries, or counties, but not the
     control firm employees. Thus, the panel decomposes earnings losses of the treated group relative to the average worker
     in the control group. "PV (Earnings losses)" is the present value of earnings losses from years t to t+6 (computed
     using a real discount rate of 5.48%) as a percent of the pre-bankruptcy annual earnings in t-4. We define a worker as
     a stayer if she stays in the same firm, industry, or county through year t+3 as her t-1 firm, industry, or county.
     Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics adjusted for within-firm clustering are in parentheses (standard errors are
     computed using the delta method). Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***,
     respectively.

                          (1)                (2)               (3)                  (4)                 (5)                (6)
                                                             Leavers:           Leavers:            Leavers:           Leavers:
    Group           Firm stayers        Firm leavers      same industry       diff. industry      same industry      diff. industry
                                                           same county        same county          diff. county       diff. county
PV(Earnings
losses)
                       -71.8%**          -54.9%***          -98.5%***            -38.5%*               -8.0%           -58.5%***
as % of pre-
                        (-2.42)           (-3.13)            (-4.11)              (-1.95)             (-0.37)           (-3.39)
bankruptcy
annual earnings
Controls                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes
Worker FE                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes
SIC2 × Year FE           Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes




                                                               10
 Online Appendix Table A5: Capitalized Value of Implied Wage Premia with and without
                   Adjustment for Pre-Bankruptcy Wage Premium
This table compares the capitalized value of implied wage premia as a fraction of firm value, with (column (1)) and
without (column (2)) adjustment for pre-bankruptcy wage premium.

                                               Capitalized value of implied wage
                                  premium as fraction of firm value (Binomial valuation model)
                                              (1)                               (2)
                                                                       Without adjustment
              Credit rating            With adjustment
                                                                      (Table 10, column (2))
               AAA                           0.26                              0.33
                AA                          1.01                               1.29
                 A                           1.83                              2.33
                BBB                          2.84                              3.61
                BB                          4.74                               6.03
                 B                           6.67                              8.40
            BBB minus AA                    1.82                               2.32




                                                        11
