                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           GOOD DISPERSION, BAD DISPERSION

                                        Matthias Kehrig
                                        Nicolas Vincent

                                      Working Paper 25923
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25923


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




This paper previously circulated under the title "Do Firms Mitigate or Magnify Misallocation?
Evidence from Plant-level Data." We thank seminar participants at PSE, EIEF, Banco de Mexico,
CREI, Birmingham, Wharton, Bonn, Duke, Oxford, Penn State, the Dutch Central Bank, the
Bank of Finland, the NBER EF&G meeting, the NBER Summer Institute, the Barcelona Summer
Forum, the SED Annual Meeting, the 12th Macro-Finance Society Workshop and the BI
Conference on Asset Pricing Research as well as Andrew Abel, Klaus Adam, Christian Bayer,
David Berger, John Cochrane, Russ Cooper, Xavier Giroud, Joao Gomes, François Gourio, John
Haltiwanger, Hugo Hopenhayn, Pete Klenow, Ben Moll and Michèle Tertilt as well as our
discussants Gordon Phillips, Virgiliu Midrigan, Ilan Cooper, Vincenzo Quadrini and Cian Ruane
for helpful comments and discussions. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Matthias Kehrig and Nicolas Vincent. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Good Dispersion, Bad Dispersion
Matthias Kehrig and Nicolas Vincent
NBER Working Paper No. 25923
June 2019
JEL No. E2,G3,L2,O4

                                           ABSTRACT

Dispersion in marginal revenue products of inputs across plants is commonly thought to reflect
misallocation, i.e., dispersion is "bad." We document that most dispersion occurs across plants
within rather than between firms. In a model of multi-plant firms, we then show that dispersion
can be "good": Eliminating frictions increases productivity dispersion and raises overall output.
Based on this framework, we argue that in U.S. manufacturing, one-quarter of the total variance
of revenue products reflects good dispersion. In contrast, we find that in emerging economies,
almost all dispersion is bad and the gains from eliminating distortions are larger than previously
thought.


Matthias Kehrig
Department of Economics
Duke University
237 Social Sciences, Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
matthias.kehrig@duke.edu

Nicolas Vincent
HEC Montreal
Institute of Applied Economics
3000, chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine
Montréal (Québec), H3T 2A7
Canada
nicolas.vincent@hec.ca
1    Introduction
A considerable body of recent research has documented a large, persistent and ubiquitous degree
of productivity dispersion across production units, leading to a revival of interest in the causes
and consequences of resource misallocation. In their seminal work, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) argue
that resource reallocation in China or India that would render dispersion similar to that in the
United States would yield substantial aggregate output gains. Multiple papers have since expanded
and refined their methodology. Yet the common view in this literature remains that a high level
of productivity dispersion is a sign of resource misallocation and therefore reduced welfare; i.e.,
dispersion is "bad."
    We challenge this interpretation: We show that relaxing some frictions can in fact increase the
dispersion of marginal revenue products of inputs. In other words, dispersion is "good" in the sense
that it signals a better allocation of resources. Building on a novel quantitative model, we then
show that a sizable share of empirically observed productivity dispersion can be attributed to this
good dispersion. As a result, we argue that previous work may have substantially miscalculated the
gains from lowering productivity dispersion.
    While our conclusions are broad and could be applied in other contexts, we focus on the role
of multi-plant firms in shaping economy-wide productivity dispersion. This setting is particularly
relevant for two reasons.
    First, even if the literature has historically made little distinction between them, firms and
plants are fundamentally different institutions. While firms compete for resources in markets, they
act as planners in allocating these resources across their plants. This latter allocation activity is
economically predominant: For instance, multi-plant firms account for most of aggregate output
and investment in the U.S. manufacturing sector.
    Second, using plant-level data from the U.S. Economic Census, we document that almost two-
thirds of the overall dispersion in marginal revenue products of capital originates across plants
operated by the same firm rather than between firms. This novel empirical finding highlights the
importance of paying attention to the role played by the allocative decisions of firms. It also poses
a theoretical challenge: Why do firms tolerate surprisingly high levels of dispersion in marginal
revenue products across their plants and forgo seemingly large output gains? Why do they not
reallocate resources across their plants in order to reduce within-firm productivity dispersion? Does
the firm allocate resources less efficiently than markets? Understanding how firms work differently
from markets may therefore shed new light on the causes of resource (mis)allocation.
    To answer these questions, we first consider a simple conceptual model and show that the
relationship between frictions, misallocation and dispersion is non-monotonic: We highlight situa-
tions in which relaxing a friction or constraint leads to increased output, despite generating higher
dispersion of marginal products of inputs. In this context, more dispersion is "good."



                                                 2
    To quantitatively assess the importance of this good-dispersion margin, we then build a rich
quantitative model of capital allocation for a multi-plant firm that faces various constraints. Beyond
its multi-plant nature, our framework is standard and embeds many frictions and imperfections that
have been suggested in models of investment (see Caballero (1999) for an overview). It includes
"technological" frictions, such as a fixed investment adjustment cost and capital irreversibility (see,
among others, Abel and Eberly (1994), Caballero, Engel, and Haltiwanger (1995), Doms and Dunne
(1998), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) and Gourio and Kashyap (2007)), which are more relevant
at the level of the plant, as well as external financing constraints (see, among others, Fazzari,
Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) or Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995)), which affect the firm as a
whole.1 In our model, the firm organizes internal and costly external financing across plants that
face both fixed and convex costs of adjustment. The model is calibrated using moments from the
Annual Survey of Manufactures collected by the U.S. Census Bureau and standard parameter values
in the literature.
    Using our model simulations, we then address the key question of our study: Can higher dis-
persion be associated with a more efficient allocation? In our setting, the answer is unambiguously
"yes." To provide a quantitative assessment of this good dispersion, we compare the dispersion of
marginal products of capital as well as aggregate quantities in two economies: one in which multi-
plant firms can pool resources and allocate them freely across their production plants, and one
in which these internal capital markets (ICM) are shut down due to frictions, forcing the firm to
effectively operate its plants as standalone units. As expected, we find that allowing for functional
internal capital markets leads to higher aggregate capital and output, to the order of about 4%
and 3%, respectively. More surprisingly, this more efficient allocation of resources is accompanied
by a variance of the marginal products of capital that is 32% higher than in the economy with
standalone plants.
    While this non-standard relationship between economic activity and dispersion may seem sur-
prising, the forces behind it are intuitive: When firms are constrained in their access to external
funds, they leverage internal capital markets and focus investment on only a few plants even if the
expected rate of returns of all plants are identical. This optimal investment policy then leads to a
rise in the dispersion of both investment rates and marginal revenue products of capital within the
firm. In addition, these firms exhibit less correlated investment rates across their plants than their
unconstrained counterparts. Using plant-level data from the U.S. Annual Survey of Manufactures,
we find empirical support for these predictions at the micro level.
    Our quantitative exercises suggest two things. First, the interaction of plant- and firm-level fric-
tions is quite powerful in generating substantial within-firm heterogeneity and dispersion in general.
Second, the dispersion of marginal revenue products of capital is not necessarily an indicator of
   1
    Gomes (2001), Khan and Thomas (2013) and Eisfeldt and Muir (2016) are examples of papers that combine real
and financial frictions in a unified model of a firm operating a single plant.



                                                      3
misallocation or inefficient investment policies; it could be the outcome of constrained-efficient de-
cisions that are, in fact, welfare improving. In our setting, they are the by-product of the firm's
effort to mitigate external financial frictions. Hence, we view our results as a cautionary tale about
the risks of interpreting higher productivity dispersion as a sign of resource misallocation.
   Our findings have potentially important implications for the literature on resource allocation.
Starting with Hsieh and Klenow (2009), a large literature has studied productivity dispersion across
plants without considering the positive aspects of dispersion in marginal revenue products described
above. Bayer, Mecikovsky, and Meier (2015) distinguish the long-term from the temporary com-
ponents of dispersion, while Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011), Khan and Thomas (2013) and Moll
(2014) have studied the impact of financial frictions on misallocation, usually ignoring their effects
within firms that operate several plants. In related work, Midrigan and Xu (2014) study the effects
of financial frictions on firm entry and factor misallocation across firms. While we abstract from the
entry channel, a modified version of the latter effect is present in our analysis, albeit in a framework
in which financially constrained firms operate several plants and can overcome external financial
frictions by internally reallocating financial resources.
   In an additional quantitative exercise, we show that Hsieh and Klenow (2009) may in fact have
underestimated the gains from reallocation in emerging economies such as India or China. When
we make the U.S. economy more comparable to that of emerging economies by populating it with
single-plant instead of multi-plant firms, dispersion in the U.S. is even smaller relative to that of
India. This, in turn, implies that output losses from a distorted resource allocation are arguably
higher than initially estimated. A quantitative exercise suggests that previous work may have
missed between one-tenth and one-third of the output benefits from reallocation because it ignored
the beneficial effects of reallocation within firms.
   Ultimately, we also see our project as a first step toward modeling how the organizational struc-
ture of a firm may impact the micro-level adjustment of capital, as well as understanding the role
of firms for efficiency. While most research ignores the within-firm dimension of decision making,
some theoretical research has been done on the efficiency of internal versus external capital markets:
Stein (1997) and Malenko (2016) study mostly principal-agent problems between a firm's owner
and manager in a single-plant setup. Whether internal capital markets are more or less efficient
is theoretically ambiguous: Gertner, Scharfstein, and Stein (1994) show that division managers
may exploit imperfect monitoring by firm headquarters to build up "inefficient empires." On the
other hand, Scharfstein and Stein (2000) argue that firms are likely to monitor investment spending
better than outside financiers, thus improving capital allocation. Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013)
stress the importance of organizational or intangible capital at the firm level in order to understand
a firm's productivity, albeit without the multi-plant dimension we are interested in. With the
exception of Lamont (1997), Schoar (2002), Giroud (2013), Matvos and Seru (2014) and Giroud
and M¨
     uller (2015), empirical research on within-firm dynamics is scarce and often limited to study-


                                                   4
ing major business divisions of conglomerates. An exception is Giroud and M¨
                                                                           uller (forthcoming),
whose work is closely related to ours. They show empirically how local shocks propagate through
the firm's internal organization, and that the reaction of other establishments is only significant
if the parent is financially constrained. Finally, while we take the organizational structure of the
                c´
firm as given, Sev  ik (2015) considers the endogenous formation of multi-plant firms (which he calls
"business groups").
    Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we show evidence on the importance of the
within-firm dimension for the dispersion of marginal revenue products of capital and investment;
then we illustrate theoretically how relaxing frictions within a firm may increase rather than decrease
dispersion. Section 3 describes our multi-plant model of a firm that faces an external financing con-
straint. Section 4 conducts various quantitative exercises geared toward understanding the nature
of productivity dispersion and provides supporting evidence. Section 5 presents an application to
the setting in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), and Section 6 concludes.


2       Motivation
In this section, we motivate both empirically and theoretically our subsequent quantitative work.
As discussed in the introduction, many studies have documented the ubiquitous presence of a large
and persistent dispersion of marginal revenue products of inputs across production units. We first
show empirically that in U.S. manufacturing, the majority of the dispersion in both (log) marginal
revenue products of capital (mrpk ) and investment rates (i/k ) occurs across plants within firms
rather than across firms. In the standard economic models generally used in the literature on
misallocation, reallocating capital from low-mrpk to high-mrpk plants through investment activity
reduces mrpk dispersion and increases aggregate output.2 Yet as we show with the help of a simple
framework in Section 2.2, the opposite may be true: Relaxing frictions within firms may lead to
more dispersion of the marginal revenue products of capital. In the quantitative model of Section 3,
we show that our empirical finding could be interpreted as the outcome of an improved allocation
rather than as evidence of a suboptimal allocation of resources within the firm.

2.1     Empirical motivation: Dispersion within and across firms
Data sources and variables of interest Our data source is collected by the U.S. Census Bureau
in the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM), which is an annual dataset covering manufacturing
businesses described in detail in Appendix A.2. The Census Bureau collects its manufacturing data
    2
     For details on the assumptions underlying this, see Appendix A.1. Based on Hsieh and Klenow (2009), the
misallocation literature usually postulates equalizing revenue total factor productivity (T F P R). Like Asker, Collard-
Wexler, and De Loecker (2014), we focus on the capital allocation problem and hence equalizing mrpk. In that
context, investment should not necessarily flow toward units with the highest T F P R if they already operate a large
capital stock; it should flow to units with the highest expected capital return.


                                                           5
at the level of an "establishment," which is defined as a physical business unit at a single location
for which the primary activity is production. In this paper, we generally refer to establishments as
"plants." Each plant also carries information about its parent firm, which is defined by Census as a
collection of plants under common ownership or control.
    Following the literature, we assume a Cobb-Douglas production technology, which is common
for all plants in a 4-digit NAICS industry, and approximate the marginal revenue product of plant
n in year t with its real value added per unit of capital.3 We study the variance of its logarithm,
Vt (mrpknt )  Vt (log M RP Knt ) = Vt (log(ynt /knt )), within a 4-digit NAICS industry and aggregate
industries using value-added weights, as detailed in Appendix A.5.

Dispersion in U.S. manufacturing First, overall dispersion in marginal revenue products
across plants is large, as shown in Table 2. In the average industry and year, the standard de-
viation of its logarithm is 0.9. This means that a plant that is one standard deviation above the
mean produces e0.9  2.5 times the value added as the average plant with the same capital stock;
the difference between the plant at the 90th percentile and that at the 10th percentile even implies
an e2.12  8.3-fold value-added difference given the same capital stock.

                      Table 1: Cross-sectional moments of capital and investment

                  Variable                      Cross-sectional moments
                               Mean         StD     IDR      Skew- Kelley              Excess
                                                              ness   Skewn.           Kurtosis
                  mrpk                     0.905    2.120     0.634   0.128            1.978
                                          (0.013) (0.032) (0.028) (0.010)             (0.085)

                  i/k           0.112      0.362      0.175      6.113      0.479      57.204
                               (0.015)    (0.093)    (0.008)    (0.099)    (0.008)     (2.378)

Note: Data consist of our benchmark panel comprising annual plant-level data from the ASM 1972-2009. Moments
are computed in a given year and 4-digit NAICS industry first before being aggregated by industry and then averaged
across years. For details see Appendix A.4.


    Interestingly, Table 2 also indicates that the cross-sectional distribution of mrpk is positively
skewed. The standard coefficient of skewness is 0.634, while the quantile-based Kelly skewness
measure is 0.128 on average.4 The latter moment implies that the top half of the inter-decile range,
mrpk 90 - mrpk 50 , is about 29% more spread out than the bottom half, mrpk 50 - mrpk 10 . As we
will later argue, this evidence is supportive of some of our modeling assumptions.
   3
     Though we study average rather than marginal revenue products of capital, we consider their difference in
Appendix A.6.2.
                                                                                     90
                                                                                        +mrpk10 -2mrpk50
   4
     Following Kelley (1947), p. 250, we define the Kelley skewness as  Kelley = mrpkmrpk 90 -mrpk10     .



                                                        6
    Investment rates also differ substantially across plants, which implies that the allocative activity
of capital differs greatly across units within a typical year and industry. The cross-sectional standard
deviation of 36% is large, given that the average plant in the economy has an investment rate of
11.2% ­ an indication of the well-known lumpy nature of investment. This also makes investment
rates highly leptokurtic, which is reported in the last column of Table 2.
    Under the standard interpretation of mrpk dispersion as evidence of misallocation, reallocating
capital to high-mrpk plants in the same industry could hence result in a considerable boost in
aggregate output. We show next that the majority of this dispersion occurs across plants within
firms rather than across firms.

Dispersion within and across firms We decompose the total variance of marginal revenue
products of capital, denoted by Vt , into two components: the variance between firms, denoted by
VtB , and the average variance between plants within firms, denoted by VtW . To compare sufficiently
similar units, we perform our analysis within 4-digit NAICS industries. This means we break
up diversified conglomerates along industry lines, thus reducing the scope of actual within-firm
dispersion. Our results should thus be regarded as a lower bound on within-firm dispersion. In a
given 4-digit NAICS industry, our variance decomposition is then:

                                                                                  Nj
                                                                 2                     j                     2
       Vt (mrpknt )  Vt =         jt mrpkjt - mrpkt                  +       jt        nt mrpknjt - mrpkjt .     (1)
                              j                                          j        nj

                                  VtB average between-firm                                 W within firm j
                                                                                         Vjt

                                                                                  VtW average within-firm


The variable mrpknjt denotes the logarithm of the marginal revenue product of capital of plant n
belonging to firm j in year t; mrpkjt the average mrpk in firm j in an industry; and mrpkt the
average mrpk in a given industry. njt is the weight of plant n at time t, jt that of firm j and
j
nt = njt /jt that of plant n just inside firm j . While unweighted dispersion is our benchmark,
we also consider capital-weighted dispersion to account for economic relevance. In the former case,
we have njt = 1/Nt (where Nt is the number of observations), while in the latter njt = knjt /kt
                           j
and accordingly for jt and nt . More details about this decomposition can be found in Appendix
A.5, and the results are displayed in Table 2.
    The main takeaway from our accounting exercise is that for the full sample (Panel A), about 60%
of the dispersion of marginal revenue products of capital and 68% of the dispersion in investment
rates in a typical industry occur within firms, with the remainder accounted for by between-firm
variations.5 The within-firm dispersion of mrpk is economically large: A plant that is one standard
   5
     As Appendix A.3 shows, while multi-plant firms operate only 28% of all plants, they account for roughly 80%
of aggregate economic activity.



                                                             7
                      Table 2: Cross-sectional moments of capital and investment

               Variable           A. Full panel                     B. Homogeneous Products
                                Share of variance                       Share of variance
                           between firms within firms              between firms within firms
               mrpk            0.399          0.601                    0.441          0.559

               i/k              0.321              0.679                0.311             0.689

Note: The data underlying Panel A are our benchmark panel comprising annual plant-level data from the ASM
1972-2009. Moments in Panel B are based on a subsample of homogeneous 7-digit SIC products as defined by Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008). Moments are computed for each industry and years first before being aggregated
by industry and then averaged across years. For details, see Appendix A.4.

                      
deviation (0.702 =       0.601 × 0.9052 ) above the firm's average produces twice the value added with
the same capital stock as a plant that would reflect the firm average.
    One might worry that this result is driven by residual product heterogeneity within 4-digit
NAICS industries. To alleviate this concern, we repeat the decomposition, but this time focus
on plants that produce only one physically homogeneous standardized good. We follow Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) and consider industries that produce almost perfectly homoge-
neous goods such as cement, sugar, coffee beans, etc.6 Even if we focus solely on these highly
homogeneous industries, the within-firm share of dispersion in marginal revenue products of capital
and investment rates displayed in Row (7) amounts to 56% and 69%, respectively. Appendix A.7
includes an array of additional robustness checks.
    In light of the misallocation literature (see Hsieh and Klenow (2009)), our finding that most
dispersion occurs within firms may appear surprising: It seems to suggest the presence of partic-
ularly large frictions within firms, rendering them an inferior allocation mechanism. In the next
subsection, however, we present a simple conceptual framework that shows how the opposite might
be true: Relaxing frictions within the firm can increase the dispersion of marginal revenue products.

2.2    Theoretical motivation: Bad dispersion vs. good dispersion
Hsieh and Klenow's work on distortions and misallocation has been highly influential, spawning a
myriad of studies on both the empirical and modeling fronts. Some have tried to map abstract dis-
tortions into empirically measurable market imperfections, often with the objective of quantifying
potential output gains from eliminating specific imperfections. Others have attempted to clarify the
   6
    More specifically, these "industries" are defined by the following SIC product codes: Sugar (2061011), Block and
Processed Ice (2097011 and 2097051), Gasoline (2911131), Hardwood Flooring (2426111), Concrete (3273000), Whole
Bean and Ground Coffee (2095111 and 2095117 & 2095118 ­ later merged into 2095115 ­ and 2095121), Carbon Black
(2895011 and 2895000), Bread (2051111, later split into 2051121 and 2051122) and Plywood (2435100, later split into
2435101, 2435105, 2435107 and 2435147).


                                                         8
distinction between imperfections and technological constraints (see, among others, Asker, Collard-
Wexler, and De Loecker (2014), David and Venkateswaran (forthcoming) and Haltiwanger, Kulick,
and Syverson (2018)). What is common among all these papers is that reducing frictions spurs
beneficial reallocation, brings down the dispersion of factor revenue products, and increases aggre-
gate output. Crucially, dispersion is always assumed to be inversely related to aggregate output:
Economies with higher dispersion in factor revenue products are thought to be worse off (see Syver-
son (2011) for a summary of the academic consensus and Dabla-Norris, Guo, Haksar, Minsuk Kim,
Wiseman, and Zdzienicka (2015), Cirera and Maloney (2017) and Cusolito and Maloney (2018) for
the importance of that view in global policy making). In other words, dispersion is "bad" because
it is a symptom of misallocation.
   In this section, we show that the opposite can be true: While reducing frictions always improves
factor allocation, it may increase dispersion rather than reducing it.7 In this context, dispersion is
"good" because it reflects better resource allocation. In what follows, we lay out the key aspects of
our framework and analyze the relationship between dispersion and misallocation.

Framework. Consider a firm that invests in N plants subject to two constraints. First, each
plant provides only a limited amount of funds x to finance investment generated by, for example,
past profits. Second, a fixed investment adjustment cost implies that  units of funds are lost for
every plant the firm invests in. Production in each plant is given by
                                      
                                      k                  if no investment
                                 y=                                                                      (2)
                                      (k + i -  )        if investment

where k is the existing capital stock in a plant that can be augmented by investment.8 Returns to
capital are positive and decreasing, which is reflected in 0 <  < 1. The firm uses the total funds
available, N x, for investment activity across its plants in order to maximize the sum of output
subject to the fixed adjustment cost and the technology in Equation (2).
   We now use this simple framework to illustrate the complex relationship between frictions,
misallocation and dispersion.

Bad dispersion. Let us first focus on the role of the fixed investment adjustment cost. If  = 0,
the firm effectively incurs no penalty from investing only small amounts in each plant. As a result,
the optimal course of action is to invest equally across all plants to equate their marginal revenue
products of capital. By definition, dispersion of mrpk is therefore nil. As the friction tightens
( rises), the firm trades off the concavity of returns (pushing it to equalize investment across its
   7
     Indeed, Bai, Jin, and Lu (2018) present a related finding: Reducing trade barriers in China has worsened
misallocation.
   8
     Though we assume the same k across all plants, our logic holds if we assume heterogeneous k.


                                                     9
plants) against the fixed adjustment cost (pushing it to concentrate on a few plants). The optimal
action is to pick a share of plants, denoted by n < 1, in which the firm will invest equal amounts
i = x/n . As a result, the variance of mrpk increases to

                                  n (1 - n ) [ log(1 + i /k )]2 > 0,                               (3)

and firm output is lower.
   In sum, this example displays the standard relationship between dispersion and misallocation:
As the friction is tightened, resource allocation moves further away from the unconstrained optimum
and the dispersion of marginal revenue products of capital rises while output falls. In other words,
more dispersion is bad.

Good dispersion.      We now show that the interpretation of mrpk dispersion is, in reality, more
complex and subtle than the impression given by the previous, standard argument. First, let us
continue with the example of the fixed investment adjustment cost. Consider a starting level of 
so high that the firm decides to not invest at all, i.e., n = 0; the implication is that dispersion
is again equal to zero, as was the case without any cost ( = 0). As  is lowered, investing in a
positive fraction of plants n > 0 becomes optimal. The outcome is a higher level of dispersion
of mrpk , as can be seen from Equation (3), as well as more economic activity and output. In
this case, as the friction is relaxed, resource allocation moves closer to the unconstrained optimum,
and the dispersion of marginal revenue products of capital mrpk rises along with output. In other
words, more dispersion is good.
   Next, we turn our attention to the role of internal capital markets, holding  > 0 fixed. If
frictions within the firm choke its ability to shift financial resources across its plants, effectively
shutting down its internal capital market, only up to x funds can be used for investment in each
plant. To simplify exposition, let's assume that x <  < N x: The implication is that without the
ability to pool funds, the firm cannot invest in any of its plants. Hence, without internal capital
markets, the variance of (log) marginal revenue products is zero. This extreme case is depicted in
Panel (b) of Figure 1.
   What happens when we allow the firm to pool all N x plant-level funds and reallocate them
freely? Equipped with a functional internal capital market, the firm again trades off the concavity
of returns (pushing it to equalize investment across its plants) against the fixed adjustment cost
(pushing it to concentrate on a few plants). The optimal action is to pick a share of plants n > 0
in which the firm will invest equal amounts i = x/n . As a result, the variance of marginal revenue
products increases to a positive value (see Equation (3)). The ex ante homogeneous plants, hit by
the same shock, are now heterogeneous ex post even though the allocation is more efficient. This
case is depicted in Panel (a) of Figure 1.
   In this example, relaxing a friction and allowing for internal capital markets leads to a higher

                                                  10
                               Figure 1: Frictions, output and dispersion
                                        (a)                                 (b)
                                   Low frictions                       High frictions
                                  High dispersion                      Low dispersion




                                                                                           mrpk
                                         E[mrpk]                                 E[mrpk]

                         Dispersion
                          Output


                                                              Output


                                      Dispersion Var(mrpk)



                                                                                           Frictions
                                             Low                                 High




dispersion of marginal products of capital. In this sense, the nature of dispersion is again good.
   More generally, we have shown that the relationship between frictions, misallocation and dis-
persion is non-monotonic.

Broader applications         Even if our conceptual exercise were performed in an investment frame-
work for a multi-plant firm, the underlying logic carries through in a broad range of settings. Hence,
while the productive units in our example were plants, they could alternatively be business divisions,
teams or even workers. The resources being pooled across productive units were financial funds,
yet they could be interpreted as any firm-wide resource such as time, cognitive attention, techni-
cal knowledge or even managerial skills. Finally, the activity and its friction, in our case capital
investment and the fixed adjustment cost, could instead be applied to a wide array of contexts:

   · The introduction of new products subject to non-convex frictions, such as clinical trials for
     new drugs (see DiMasi, Hansen, and Grabowski (2003)) or mandatory emissions regulations
     for new vehicles.

   · Some innovation process that implies overhead costs of research and development as in Cohen
     and Klepper (1992), Cohen and Klepper (1996) and Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) or fixed
     start-up costs for research labs.



                                                             11
     · The decision to enter a new export market, subject to export rules and regulations that may
         render exporting small amounts of goods unprofitable (see Melitz (2003), Das, Roberts, and
         Tybout (2007) and Creusen, Kox, Lejour, and Smeets (2011)).

     · Business restructuring that requires a minimal fixed amount of attention or time from man-
         agers (Caliendo, Monte, and Rossi-Hansberg (2015)).

     · Hiring activity subject to non-convex frictions  such as costs related to job postings and
         interview procedures (Mortensen and Pissarides (1994)).

     In sum, any tax, transaction cost, trade barrier, cost of doing business, or menu cost that is less
than proportionally9 related to an input will have the effect we described.
     It should also be noted that while all of the examples above rely on some non-convex frictions,
they are not a necessary ingredient for our result: the key to generating good dispersion is that the
firm finds it optimal to focus the activity on a subset of units. For example, in our original multi-
plant firm setting, it would suffice to assume locally increasing marginal returns to capital ­ say,
up to a capacity constraint. In this case, eliminating internal capital market frictions would push
the firm to pool resources across its plants and redistribute them toward a few units for investment
purposes, generating more dispersion of mrpk in the process. This means that the scope of our
mechanism is broad, and so is the potential for good dispersion.
     In the next section, we build a quantitative model of an economy in which firms operate several
units and allocate capital across them. Capital is often pinned as the most distorted production
                               ¨
factor (see Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan,  Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez (2017), among others)
in explaining aggregate misallocation. We focus on multi-plant firms, as they account for the lion's
share of economic activity in the U.S. economy. Importantly, that model features a rich set of
frictions, as in Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) and David and Venkateswaran (forthcoming), which
gives rise to the non-monotonic relationship between distortions and dispersion in marginal revenue
products of capital.10 Matching the rich model to establishment-level data from the ASM, we find
that eliminating frictions increases the dispersion of marginal revenue products of capital.


3        A model of the multi-plant firm
In this section and the next, we describe, solve, simulate and analyze a simple model of a multi-plant
firm. Our focus is on the role of within-firm frictions ­ more specifically, on those that regulate
the functioning of internal capital markets ­ in shaping investment decisions and the dispersion of
marginal revenue products of capital across plants within the firm. At one extreme, these frictions
    9
     Proportional distortions, as in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), can be added without changing our argument.
    10
     Brown, Dinlersoz, and Earle (2016) make a similar point, in which the non-convex distortion affects the discrete
entry decision.



                                                         12
are so excessive that firms are merely a collection of disconnected productive units: Decisions are
made on a plant-by-plant basis. At the other extreme, firm management can fully use its frictionless
internal capital market to mitigate or offset the other frictions and constraints that it must cope
with. In particular, the firm optimally alters the size and timing of plant-level investment projects,
which in turn generates more dispersion across its plants.

3.1    The problem of the firm
We focus on the basic problem of a firm that operates two plants n, where n = A, B . We limit our
model to only two plants in an effort to keep the numerical analysis of our model, which features
non-differentiable investment policies, computationally feasible. A larger number of plants would
exponentially increase the size of the state vector of the firm, which must include the capital stock
and technology level of each of its plants, without adding insight into the underlying fundamental
economic mechanisms. We start by describing the technology and constraints at the level of the
individual plant before analyzing the problem of the firm. In what follows, lowercase letters refer to
plant variables, uppercase letters to firm variables and bold uppercase letters to vectors of a firm's
plant variables.

3.2    Technology and frictions at the plant level
The plant operates a Cobb-Douglas production function that combines the beginning-of-period
capital stock, knt , and other variable inputs in order to produce output, ynt . While capital is
fixed throughout the period, we assume that plants can freely choose any other variable inputs in
perfectly competitive markets.11 This means we can substitute out any static first-order condition
for variable inputs and write revenue net of variable factor costs for plant n as

                                                  ynt = eznt knt
                                                              
                                                                 .                                              (4)

znt contains plant (log) total factor productivity and prices of other statically chosen production
factors, while  is the scaled production elasticity of capital. The productivity level of plant n
in firm j consists of a component common to both plants in the firm and an idiosyncratic plant
component; both evolve as follows:

                                             znjt = p znjt-1 + njt                                              (5)
                                              zjt = f zjt-1 + jt .                                              (6)
  11
     Given our Cobb-Douglas production function, flexible factor markets will result in revenue products of flexible
inputs that are completely equalized across plants and firms in the economy. This will not be the case, however,
for marginal revenue products of capital because capital is chosen one period in advance and because of decreasing
returns to scale as well as fixed investment adjustment cost.



                                                        13
                                                            2 and  2 , respectively.
where njt and jt are both iid, mean zero and have variances p     f
    The capital stock of plant n depreciates every period at rate  and grows with investment int ,
so it evolves over time according to the conventional expression

                                          knt+1 = (1 -  )knt + int .

As documented in a number of studies (see Cooper and Haltiwanger (1993), Cooper, Haltiwanger,
and Power (1999), Doms and Dunne (1998) and Caballero and Engel (1999), among others), in-
vestment dynamics at the plant level are characterized by lumpiness: Multiple periods of inactivity
(no or only small amounts of maintenance investment) are followed by "investment spikes."12 The
traditional modeling feature used to reproduce this stylized fact is to introduce a fixed cost of
investing: The firm must pay a certain cost, knt , if investment is greater than zero. Such costs
can arise because investment activity ­ no matter how small or large ­ has a disruptive effect on
production activities in the short run, for example. The parameter  regulates how much revenue
is forgone when the plants needs to shut down production in order to install new capital. As a
result of aggregation, firm-level investment activity will be less lumpy, as documented by Eberly,
Rebelo, and Vincent (2012).
    In addition to this non-convex adjustment cost, we include a traditional quadratic adjustment
cost. This convex adjustment cost captures the notion that larger investment projects become
increasingly disruptive with size.13 The parameter  below captures the importance of this margin.
    To summarize, frictions at the plant level are expressed as:

                                                                             2
                                                   int                 int
                               (int , knt ) =  I       > +                       knt                        (7)
                                                   knt                 knt

where I is an indicator function equal to 1 if the plant investment rate is above ;  is a parameter
regulating the forgone sales if the plant undergoes an investment; and  regulates the impact of
the quadratic adjustment cost. Everything is scaled by the plant's capital stock knt in order to
eliminate size differences.
    Combining equations (4) and (7) above, plant cash flow is given by

                                                   
                                         nt = znt knt - (int , knt ).                                       (8)

3.3    Technology and frictions at the firm level
What sets plants in a multi-unit firm apart from their identical counterparts in single-unit firms?
What are the economic benefits the firm provides to its own plants? While these benefits are
  12
    Investment spikes are usually defined as investment rates exceeding 15% or 20%.
  13
    This formulation is similar to assuming lower profitability during large capital adjustments, which has been
documented by Power (1998) and Sakellaris (2004).


                                                      14
likely numerous, our focus is on the ability of firms to create internal capital markets by pooling
and reallocating internal funds across its plants. This ability allows the firm to relax its external
financing constraint.
   A firm with frictionless internal capital markets collects the cash flow from all of its plants and
decides how to allocate funds to finance investment projects across its plants. This means that firm
cash flow is defined as


                                          t = At + Bt .                                           (9)

While all production and investment activities take place at the level of the individual plant, we
assume that only the firm can organize external finance. In a dynamic model of investment, this
seems the most sensible choice, but recall from the end of Section 2.2 that many other mechanisms
would serve the same purpose and lead to similar results.
   Our assumption that only the firm can organize external finance is realistic and sensible: While
large and complex firms such as General Electric operate hundreds of plants, only the firm issues
bonds, borrows from banks or raises equity. Typically, the firm then channels these funds to
individual plants through its internal capital market. Consistent with this empirical pattern, we
assume that it is the firm that coordinates investment plans across all of its plants, organizes
financing of investment through either internal cash flow or external finance, and allocates funds
to plants where investment is put in place. In the event that desired firm-wide investment exceeds
firm cash flow, the firm attempts to raise external funds, denoted by Et , so that all investment gets
financed:
                                      iAt + iBt = It  t + Et .                                   (10)

   Organizing external finance, however, is an imperfect process. We assume that new equity
issuances, Et , are limited: Firm owners do not tolerate negative dividends beyond a certain fraction
 of the capital stock. This is consistent with the notion that it becomes increasingly costly to issue
larger and larger amounts of equity, as is common in the finance literature. Hennessy and Whited
(2007) and Altinkili¸
                    c and Hansen (2000) estimate the cost of raising external equity to be increasing
and convex. Hennessy and Whited (2007) additionally find that these cost are significantly higher
for small firms. We will capture this finding by making the financial constraint more binding for
small firms.
   One may also interpret our external finance constraint as applying to external debt. Such
borrowing can be limited in various ways by moral hazard problems, as in Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2010). Consider a borrowing firm that can divert a fraction 1/ of the loan for private benefit.
Lenders will then require collateral, often a fraction  of the firm's capital stock, K , which they
could seize in case of bankruptcy. Then, the divertable loan amount can never exceed the collateral.
In this case,  =  equals the maximum leverage the lender is willing to accept. Therefore, our


                                                 15
argument continues to hold if external finance is debt instead of equity.14 Ultimately, what is crucial
is that the firm is constrained in its access to external funds.
    We summarize the external financial constraint by the following function:

                                                       Et  Kt .                                                  (11)

    The cost of investing in a given plant depends on the investment amount in that plant, the
combined investment in the rest of the firm, whether the firm needs to raise external funds, and if
it could be limited the financing constraint. The total cost of investment in Plant A then consists
of the fixed and quadratic adjustment costs (real costs (iAt /kAt ) in Equation (7)) as well as the
financial constraint in Equation (11)). The latter part depends on how much the other plant in the
firm, Plant B , invests, as this dictates how fast and how much the firm needs to borrow. Thus,
investment in one plant imposes an externality on investment activity in the rest of the firm, because
it depletes internal funds and imposes a financial cost that is shared by the entire firm.

3.4    Firm value and firm policy
We define the vectors of technology levels and capital stocks within the firm as Zt = {zAt , zBt }
and Kt = {kAt , kBt }, respectively. Given the plant-level fixed adjustment cost, the firm's state
consists of the distribution of capital stocks, Kt , and technology levels, Zt , across plants within
the firm. The firm chooses investment in either Plant A or B in order to maximize firm value,
which corresponds to the net present value of discounted future gross profits net of investment and
borrowing costs. When deciding the investment level of each plant, the firm takes into account
the various adjustment costs and whether borrowing is required to finance the desired level of
investment. The firm's problem can be written in recursive form as

                       V ICM (Zt , Kt ) =     max          t - It +  EV (Zt+1 , Kt+1 )
                                            iAt ,iBt ,Et
                                                    
                                            s.t.   knt = (1 -  ) knt + int       n = A, B
                                                    Et  Kt .
                                                     It  t + Et .

    In the above problem, the superscript "ICM" on the value of the firm indicates that it can fully
leverage its internal capital market. This has two important advantages. First, the firm can pool
the cash flows generated by its two plants in order to finance investment projects where it sees fit.
Second, it can combine plant-level capital stocks to increase its capacity to access external funds.
  14
     For computational reasons, we do not allow for savings by the firm except through the accumulation of capital.
While this would represent an interesting extension, we argue there is no reason to believe that it would meaningfully
alter our conclusions below.



                                                            16
    In the quantitative analysis that comes next, we will contrast this setup with one in which
the firm is unable to pool plant-level resources. This could be due to a number of frictions and
constraints. Stein (1997) and Scharfstein and Stein (2000), for example, emphasize how individual
divisions within a firm compete for corporate resources in order to build "local empires," while
Giroud (2013) has quantified the impact of imperfect information flow within a firm on the invest-
ment efficiency at the level of individual plants. When such frictions within a firm become extreme,
internal capital markets cease to function, and the firm effectively operates its plants as standalone
units: Maximizing firm-level profits then boils down to separately maximizing the value of each
plant in isolation. Equations (10) and (11) now apply for each plant individually, and the value
function of the firm becomes

        V No ICM (Zt , Kt ) =        max             t - It +  EV (Zt+1 , Kt+1 )
                                iAt ,iBt ,eAt ,eBt
                                              
                                     s.t.    knt = (1 -  ) knt + int               n = A, B
                                             ent  knt                              n = A, B
                                              int  nt + ent                        n = A, B.

    In the next section, we study quantitatively the consequences of such a shutdown in internal
capital markets.


4     Quantitative analysis
In what follows, we first perform a numerical analysis of the model of the previous section to
illustrate quantitatively our main point: that eliminating a friction ­ in this case, the constraints
to leveraging internal capital markets ­ can lead to both a more efficient allocation of resources and
a rise in the dispersion of marginal products. Second, we provide empirical evidence that supports
the main model mechanism.

4.1   Calibration
Table 3 summarizes the parameter values used to calibrate our model for the quantitative analysis.
Most values are based on moments from the ASM dataset and are in line with calibrated parameters
generally used in the investment literature.
    To inform us about the production function elasticity, , we extend the structural framework
of Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) to accommodate multi-plant firms and re-estimate plant-level
revenue functions. Our GMM estimate puts  at 0.627, which is fairly close to the value they find.
The parameters governing persistence, p and f , and volatility,  p and  f , of the plant and firm
shock processes are chosen to match the persistence and volatility of mrpk at the plant and firm


                                                           17
                                          Table 3: Model Calibration

       Parameter    Meaning                          Value     Target/Source
                    Discount rate                    0.95      Long-run real interest rate
                    Production elasticity            0.627     estimated in ASM
       p            TFP persistence plant            0.60      serial correlation of mrpk p : 0.25 in ASM
       f            TFP persistence firm              0.85     serial correlation of mrpk f : 0.31 in ASM
       p            TFP shock plant                   0.25     volatility of mrpk p : 0.33 in ASM
       f            TFP shock firm                   0.24      volatility of mrpk f : 0.26 in ASM
                    Depreciation rate                0.067     Mean investment rate in ASM
                    Fixed inv. adj. cost             0.039     Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006)
                    Quadratic inv. adj. cost         0.049     Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006)
                    External finance capacity         0.30     Li, Whited, and Wu (2016)


levels in two-plant firms in the ASM.
    The depreciation rate  is set to match the long-run investment rate in our ASM data. For
the fixed and convex investment adjustment cost parameters,  and  , we rely on the structural
estimates of Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), which are somewhat smaller than the analogous values
estimated by Asker, Collard-Wexler, and De Loecker (2014). Regarding the capacity for external
finance, our benchmark case relies on  = 0.3, while we will be experimenting with other values
as well to illustrate the key driver of within-firm capital allocation. This value is in line with the
evidence of Li, Whited, and Wu (2016), who estimate a dynamic model of the firm with a similar
external financing constraint. Their estimates put  between 0.22 and 0.32 across manufacturing
industries.15

4.2     Frictions, allocation and good dispersion
Before analyzing the forces at play inside the model, we go straight to the main question of the
paper: Does the model generate a quantitatively relevant increase in both dispersion and output
once the firm is allowed to pool the cash flows and capacities for external finance (capital stock)
from its two plants? Can relaxing a friction be welfare-improving, yet at the same time generate
more dispersion in marginal revenue products?
    To answer these questions, we compare quantitatively two distinct economies. The first one is
composed of perfectly integrated two-plant firms, as described earlier: A firm can pool the cash
flows and capacity for external finance from its two plants, and hence leverage its internal capital
market (ICM). This is what we refer to as the "ICM" economy.
  15
     In the case of Li, Whited, and Wu (2016), it is the non-depreciated value of the capital stock that is collater-
alizable. Also, while Rampini and Viswanathan (2013) and D'Acunto, Liu, Pflueger, and Weber (2016) also provide
information on leverage, their approach is not model-based, which makes it difficult to transpose their findings into
our framework.



                                                         18
   The second economy is composed of firms that face internal frictions and constraints that
preclude their ability to pool resources (funds and external finance capacity) across their plants
and take advantage of internal capital markets. In other words, "firms" are empty concepts in that
economy, as plants effectively function as standalone units that are not part of an integrated firm.
Consequently, a plant that is in need of funds to finance its investment activity must effectively
obtain external financing on its own. Otherwise, it faces the exact same constraints and frictions
as the plants in multi-unit firms. This environment is referred to as the "No ICM" economy.
   In essence, the difference between the ICM and No ICM economies is that in the latter, we create
a "wall" between plants that bars them from pooling financial resources when access to external
financial markets is constrained. We allow plants to raise funds, but in doing so they are limited by
their own capital stock. This exercise allows us to specifically isolate the role of the firm in creating
internal capital markets.
   In each case, the problem of a representative firm is solved using a value function iteration
procedure that is described in detail in Appendix C. Then, we simulate an economy composed of
1,000 two-plant firms for 1,000 periods to investigate two questions. First, do two-plant firms with
internal capital markets produce more dispersion in marginal revenue products than firms without
any internal ability to pool resources? Second, how much more aggregate output can the economy
with internal capital markets produce? Naturally, two-plant firms with internal capital markets
cannot do worse, since they convexify the choice set and can always reproduce the allocation of the
single-plant firm economy. Our objective is to determine how large these gains can be.
   Figure 2 provides answers to these questions. It displays dispersion measures and aggregate
values for both economies, in which we normalize the values for the economy without internal
capital markets to unity to facilitate the presentation and comparisons.
   The left panel shows the aggregate values for output, investment, and capital in both economies.
As expected, allowing internal capital markets to play their role leads to higher aggregate values:
Once firms are able to pool their plants' financial resources and capital stocks, aggregate capital
and investment are about 4% higher, while output rises by just under 3%. Hence, not surprisingly,
the elimination of this friction is welfare improving.
   The findings in the right panel are more surprising. The first set of bars indicates that this
extra aggregate output was generated by the ICM economy despite the fact that dispersion of
the marginal revenue product of capital is 32% higher than when internal capital markets are not
available. The difference is even more striking for investment: The economy-wide dispersion of
investment rates is almost three times larger in the ICM version of the simulation.
   In sum, we showed that a more efficient allocation can be accompanied by a higher dispersion
of marginal revenue products. The difference between the blue and white bars in the right panel
of Figure 2 thus reflects good dispersion.




                                                   19
        Figure 2: Quantitative effects in the multi-plant-firm vs. single-plant-firm economy




Note: The figure displays dispersion and aggregate values in an economy composed of firms that cannot pool resources
across plants (No ICM, in white), as well as in an economy with internal capital markets (ICM, in black). The No
ICM values are normalized to 1 to ease the presentation and comparisons. The left panel shows aggregate output,
investment and capital. The right panel displays the dispersion of marginal revenue products of capital and investment
rates.


4.3    Why do firms create more dispersion? The mechanism
Next, we analyze the predictions of our quantitative model to gain better intuition about the joint
dynamics of marginal revenue products of capital and the allocation of capital within the firm.
Investigating these micro-level dynamics is helpful for understanding the mechanisms at the heart
of the model. Our focus is on the interaction between the firm-level external financing constraint and
the investment fixed cost, two frictions that are at the heart of the relationship between dispersion
and allocation that we found in Section 4.2.

Internal capital markets and good dispersion.                   Figure 3 shows three moments we saw earlier,
but this time for different values of the financial friction parameter . This parameter governs
the value of internal capital markets to firms. When  = , the firm's ability to pool internal
funds is worthless, as each plant can raise unlimited external finance on its own. Only when that
external finance becomes limited ( < ) does a firm's internal capital market become valuable,
and the difference between the economies with and without internal capital markets plays out. In
each panel, we plot the results for economies with (ICM) and without (No ICM) internal capital
markets. All moments are normalized to 1 in the scenario in which the external financing constraint
is not binding ( = ). Unsurprisingly, the economies with and without internal capital markets
coincide when  =  and firms do not matter.
    The top and middle panels confirm our finding from the previous section: For a given value of
, economy-wide dispersion of both the expected marginal revenue products of capital, Et [mrpknt ],


                                                         20
      Figure 3: Quantitative effects of financial constraints on the multi-plant firm economy

                          1.3

                          1.2

                          1.1

                           1

                          0.9

                          0.8

                          0.7
                                                 0.6     0.5     0.4     0.3      0.2




                          1.75

                           1.5

                          1.25

                                1

                          0.75

                           0.5

                          0.25
                                                 0.6     0.5     0.4      0.3     0.2




                          1.02

                                1

                          0.98

                          0.96

                          0.94

                          0.92

                           0.9
                                                 0.6     0.5     0.4      0.3     0.2




Note: This figure plots various dispersion moments and aggregate output as a function of the capacity for external
finance  in economies with internal capital markets (ICM) and without (No ICM).




                                                       21
and the investment rate, int /knt , is higher in the least-constrained environment that allows for
internal capital markets (ICM) than when plants are constrained to function as standalone units
(No ICM). This higher dispersion is accompanied by a higher level of output, as can be seen in the
bottom panel of Figure 3.

Financial frictions and good dispersion. The simulation results of Figure 3 also indicate that
the ICM friction is not the only margin along which the standard negative relationship between
dispersion and output is reversed. As we tighten the external financing constraint by lowering the
value of , the bottom panel indicates that aggregate output falls considerably in both economies.
As expected, the drop is much more dramatic when internal capital markets are not functional:
If the typical firm cannot pool cash flows from its productive units, investment in capital and
production suffer heavily as its access to external funds becomes more limited. Yet the top panel
shows that the dispersion of mrpk falls for this No ICM economy, despite the more stringent
financial friction. In other words, there is a second dimension along which we can observe good
dispersion : When the financial constraint is less restrictive (higher value of , toward the left in
the figure), dispersion increases, even though the effect is not as dramatic as along the ICM friction
dimension (dark blue vs. white bars).

Within-firm investment dynamics.           We obtain these non-standard relationships between dis-
persion and misallocation despite the fact that our model is quite standard. What is the mechanism
that lies behind this result? The left panel of Figure 4 provides a hint: for the economy with in-
ternal capital markets, changes in the financing friction alter within-firm investment dynamics
significantly. In this economy, we see that as the financing constraint increasingly limits the ability
of the firm to borrow (i.e.,  falls), the correlation in investment activity across plants within the
firm drops dramatically from its benchmark value of +0.48 in the unconstrained case. In fact, for
low enough values of , the cross-plant investment correlation turns negative, reaching a trough
of -0.12 with our parameterization. Given that plant-level TFP has a common firm component,
zjt , one would expect investment to comove positively as well. What force is driving plant-level
investment apart?
   The right panel of Figure 4 illustrates the mechanism that leads to this drop in correlation
and rise in dispersion. Here, we plot two additional moments. The first represents the probability
of observing synchronized investment spikes within the firm, i.e., investment rates above 15% in
both plants at the same time. As the external financing constraint is tightened, the firm cannot
allocate large amounts of new capital to both plants within the same period, even following a
positive firm-level shock that increases internal funds. Conceivably, an option for the firm would
be to invest smaller amounts in both plants to restrain how much it needs to borrow on capital
markets. In the presence of investment fixed costs, however, the firm opts instead to alternate


                                                  22
         Figure 4: Quantitative effects of financial constraints on the multi-plant firm economy

        0.5                                                    0.06

        0.4                                                    0.05
        0.3
                                                               0.04
        0.2
                                                               0.03
        0.1
                                                               0.02
         0

    -0.1                                                       0.01

    -0.2                                                          0
               0.7    0.6    0.5     0.4    0.3     0.2                   0.7    0.6     0.5    0.4     0.3    0.2




Note: This figure plots the correlation of investment rates across plants within the typical firm for various values of
the external financing constraint , as well as the probabilities of observing rotating and synchronized investment
spikes. All results are for the economy with internal capital markets (ICM).


investment activity across its plants, as it is unable to gather the internal and external funds to
finance investment projects in both units simultaneously. For example, in the event of a large
positive firm-level shock, the firm allocates capital first to the plant with the highest (expected)
return on capital, before doing the same for its second plant in the following period. Conversely, the
frequency of "rotating investment spikes," i.e., an investment spike in one plant followed by a spike
in the other plant the next period, rises as external financing becomes more limited. This process
of staggering investment spikes over time, in turn, creates higher within-firm and economy-wide
dispersion of not only investment rates but also mrpk . In an economy in which firms and plants
are constantly buffeted by shocks, this effect occurs frequently: We find a very similar pattern if
we instead compute the dispersion of 5-year moving averages of logged expected mrpk .
    Conversely, in an economy without internal capital markets, the firm cannot pool resources to
implement a staggered-investment strategy. As an illustration, consider that both plants are hit by
the same firm- and plant-level positive shocks. In the face of these shocks, the plants, effectively
functioning as standalone units with their own capacity for external finance and internal funds,
will find it optimal to either invest or not. In both cases, there is no gain from desynchronizing
investment activity across plants, and as a result dispersion is lower than in the economy with
internal capital markets.
    In sum, the presence of an external financial constraint pushes the multi-plant firm to leverage
its internal capital market. Doing so requires rotating investment spikes across its plants.16 This
process not only leads to investment activity across individual plants within a firm that looks
   16
    Besley, Coate, and Joury (1993) study Rotating Savings and Credit Associations (ROSCA), a financial institution
mostly found in developing economies that relies on a similar mechanism.



                                                          23
staggered and less correlated, but also creates higher within-firm and economy-wide dispersion in
mrpk and investment rates.
    Again, it is worth emphasizing that this increased dispersion is the optimal response of the firm
to the constraints it faces rather than a consequence of inefficient distortions. The presence of such
good dispersion is due to the interaction of the internal capital markets with two crucial frictions:
the fixed investment adjustment cost  and the capacity for external finance . For example, in
the absence of any external financing constraint, the firm would have unlimited access to financial
resources and would invest to equalize mrpk across its plants. In other words, absent distortions
a la Hsieh and Klenow (2009), any dispersion in mrpk would be detrimental and merely reflect
`
the presence of the technological fixed investment adjustment cost  , as in Asker, Collard-Wexler,
and De Loecker (2014).17 Conversely, without the presence of fixed adjustment costs, a financially
constrained firm would invest suboptimally low amounts, but would still allocate investment to
equalize marginal revenue products across its plants.

Multi-plant firms and investment flow adjustment costs.                           Finally, it is worth briefly dis-
cussing the link between the mechanism at the core of our multi-plant firm model and the investment
flow adjustment cost of the form (It /It-1 )2 that is commonly used in DSGE macro models. While
this reduced-form friction has been found to fit the aggregate dynamics of investment much better
than other types of adjustment costs (see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005)), the literature
offers little in the way of micro-foundations to rationalize its use (an exception is Lucca (2007)).
Our model of a multi-plant firm provides a natural interpretation: The optimal capital allocation it
generates can reconcile the lumpy investment dynamics at the plant level (Cooper and Haltiwanger
(2006)) with the finding of Eberly, Rebelo, and Vincent (2012) that investment for larger firms is
smooth and compatible with an investment flow adjustment cost.18

4.4     Supporting evidence for the mechanism
We now turn our attention to the data and provide empirical support for the mechanisms that are
central to the model. As in Section 2.1, our source is the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM), an
annual Census dataset covering manufacturing plants and described in detail in Appendix A.2. To
remain as close as possible to the model environment, we focus in this exercise on plants belonging
to firms that operate exactly two plants.
    As we saw in Figure 4, central to the model predictions is the effect of the external financing
   17
      Similar results could be obtained in the case of a constraint that would see the interest rate paid by the firm
increase with the size of its borrowing. Under such conditions, the firm would again wish to stagger investment
projects in order to minimize the cost of borrowing.
   18
      In our model, investment at the firm level is smoother than at the plant level. Hence, owners of multi-plant firms
will not be exposed to volatile consumption, thus alleviating the concern of Thomas (2002) that general equilibrium
forces would render plant-level investment spikes irrelevant for aggregate dynamics.



                                                          24
constraint on within-firm investment dynamics and, in turn, within-firm dispersion. We now aim
at investigating whether the pattern in the right panel of Figure 4 is borne out in the data. We
study how a firm responds to a firm-wide technology shock, defined analogous to Equation (6),
that boosts both plants' productivity. In the previous section, we showed that such a firm-wide
technology shock should lead to synchronized investment spikes if the firm has a large capacity for
external finance and a functional internal capital market. On the other hand, the model predicts
that a firm constrained in external financing but with a functioning internal capital market will
react to the firm-wide shock by staggering investment spikes in order to circumvent the financial
friction. Due to the lack of financial data in the Census, we proxy a firm's capacity for external
finance ­ and therefore the tightness of the financial constraint ­ by its aggregate capital stock, as
was the case in the model.
   We first estimate the likelihood of synchronized investment spikes after a firm-wide technology
shock using the following probit model:

                                            sync
                                      P r(Yjt    = 1|Xjt ) =  Xjt                                (12)

where Xjt is a vector of controls that includes the firm's level of the productivity shock, jt . The
                 sync
dummy variable Yjt    is defined as follows:
                                          
                                          1        iAt                iBt
                               sync           if   kAt   > 0.15 and   kBt   > 0.15
                             Yjt      =
                                          0   otherwise.

   We focus on the firm's investment response to a firm shock, because this provides the cleanest
example of the changing investment patterns as the financial constraint tightens. We estimate
Equation (12) separately for 10 size deciles of two-plant firms, where size is defined as the value of
the capital stock. We then evaluate the marginal likelihood of a synchronized investment spike in the
wake of a firm-wide technology shock, i.e., a shock experienced by both plants. To ease disclosure
requirements, we smooth the results of these deciles using a cross-sectional rolling-window average
estimate of the five adjacent deciles. Normalizing the probability of a "synchronized investment
spike" to unity for the least financially constrained firms, we plot the normalized probabilities in
the left panel of Figure 5 (line with hollow diamonds). It shows that the most financially constrained
firms are only 80% as likely as the least constrained firms to respond to a firm-wide technology
shock with an investment spike in both plants.
   In a similar vein, we estimate probit models in which we regress a dummy variable equal to one
if the firm experiences a "rotating investment spike," that is, if both plants feature an investment
spike in the wake of a firm productivity shock, but in subsequent periods instead of concurrently.
Specifically, we estimate
                                        rotate
                                  P r(Yjt      = 1|Xjt ) =  Xjt  ,                               (13)

                                                         25
           Figure 5: Dispersion and the nature of investment spikes after firm TFP shocks

              Probability of investment spikes                                        Dispersion
    2.25                                                           2.4
                                                                            C V (mrpk)
      2
                                                                            C V ( i/k )
                                                                  2.05
    1.75

     1.5                                                           1.7
                               Pr(Synchr. Spikes)
    1.25                       Pr(Rotating Spikes)
                                                                  1.35
      1

    0.75                                                            1
   less constr.                               more constr.        less constr.                            more constr.


Note: Left panel: Normalized probabilities of "synchronized investment spikes" and "rotating investment spikes" after
firm technology shocks by the size of the capital stock. Right panel: Dispersion of marginal revenue products of
capital and investment rates by the size of the capital stock.


where Xjt is a vector of controls that includes the firm's level of the productivity shock, jt , and
                     rotate is defined as follows:
the dummy variable Yjt
                                                                          iAt+1                iBt+1
                                   iAt                iBt
                       
                        1     if   kAt   > 0.15 and   kBt   < 0.15 and    kAt+1   < 0.15 and   kBt+1   > 0.15
                       
             rotate                iAt                iBt                 iAt+1                iBt+1
           Yjt        = 1     if   kAt   < 0.15 and   kBt   > 0.15 and    kAt+1   > 0.15 and   kBt+1   < 0.15
                       
                        0     otherwise.

Again, we evaluate the marginal probabilities, smooth them across deciles and normalize the prob-
ability in the least constrained group to unity. The results are plotted in the left panel of Figure 5
(line with solid squares). In line with model predictions, the firms that are the most constrained in
external financial markets are more likely to respond to firm shocks by rotating investment spikes.
That is, the typical firm contemporaneously invests in only one plant, then invests in the other plant
in the subsequent period. The relationship is economically significant: The most constrained firms
are twice as likely to experience a rotating investment spike as financially unconstrained firms.19
All in all, we view this evidence as strong support for the relevance of the key model mechanism.
The empirical investment patterns documented in the left panel of Figure 5 mirror those produced
by the model and displayed in the right panel of Figure 4.
    In the top and middle panels of Figure 3, we saw that the within-firm dispersion of the marginal
revenue product of capital and investment rate for ICM firms is generally rising as access to external
    19
       This empirical pattern of plants in financially constrained U.S. manufacturing firms is more nuanced than what
Midrigan and Xu (2014) find. This is likely due to the fact that data limitations force them to focus on short panels.
It is therefore possible that these temporal patterns in investment spikes are confounded with plant fixed effects.



                                                             26
funds becomes more limited. This bad dispersion came about because firms with a large capital
stock should have an easier time equating marginal products across plants instead of having to
rely heavily on internal capital markets by alternating capital expenditures. We compute the
two dispersion measures by decile of capital stock and divide by the mean level in each decile to
account for level differences. Unlike the standard deviation, the resulting coefficient of variation is
dimensionless and can be easily compared across deciles. Again, we smooth out the results across
deciles and plot the results in the right panel of Figure 5.
     As shown in the right panel of Figure 5, we find empirical support for this prediction. First,
investment dispersion monotonically increases in our proxy for external financing constraints: The
most constrained firms have investment dispersion within firms that is about 1.7 times larger than
that for the least constrained firms. The difference in marginal revenue products of capital is even
stronger: The most constrained firms are about 2.5 times as dispersed as the least constrained
firms.
     To summarize, we showed in earlier sections that a higher dispersion of marginal revenue prod-
ucts of capital can be an outcome of constrained efficient behavior by multi-plant firms, instead
of a sign of resource misallocation. In other words, if frictions do not impede its ability to pool
resources across plants, the firm leverages its internal capital markets in order to circumvent ex-
ternal financial constraints. It does so by staggering investment activity, in the process optimally
creating additional dispersion of marginal revenue products across its plants. We find evidence of
this mechanism in the data.


5        Revisiting Hsieh/Klenow with internal capital markets
Next, we investigate the potential implications of good dispersion for quantifying aggregate losses
from misallocation in emerging economies. In their seminal work, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) estimate
that lowering distortions in the Chinese and Indian manufacturing sectors to match dispersion in
revenue total factor productivity found in the U.S. would lead to aggregate TFP gains of 39% for
China and 47% for India.20 While these are already sizable numbers, our findings suggest that they
may in fact be lower bounds on potential gains.
     The reason lies in differences in the organizational complexity of firms in developed economies
such as the United States relative to emerging economies such as China and India. The vast majority
of economic activity in the former group is accounted for by multi-plant firms (see Table A1). As
we showed with the help of our model, internal capital markets in these multi-plant firms generate
good dispersion, which we quantified as about a quarter of total dispersion for U.S. manufacturing.
Developing economies, on the other hand, are largely populated by single-plant firms.21 With a
    20
      To compute this number, we take the average gain across the three years analyzed by Hsieh and Klenow (2009).
See their Table VI for details.
   21
      For example, very few plants in the Indian manufacturing data report another plant in the same firm. We are


                                                       27
limited role for internal capital markets, dispersion in marginal revenue products is predominantly
caused by distortions or other frictions and thus reflect bad dispersion. Therefore, the differences
in marginal revenue product dispersion due to distortions (bad dispersion ) between developed and
emerging economies should in fact be even greater than those found by Hsieh and Klenow (2009).
    To summarize, the potential gains from eliminating misallocation through resource reallocation
are twofold: First, reducing distortions increases output as shown by Hsieh and Klenow (2009);
and second, introducing multi-plant firms with internal capital markets also renders the economy
more efficient, even if it generates more dispersion. This second efficiency gain has been overlooked
so far. In the preliminary exercise that follows, we show that its magnitude is likely not trivial.
    Hsieh and Klenow (2009) use differences in T F P R dispersion to infer potential aggregate TFP
and output gains from eliminating inefficiencies. To maintain consistency with that framework,
we adopt their main assumptions of constant returns to scale, monopolistic competition, and a
joint log-normal distribution of physical and revenue total factor productivity, denoted by T F P Q
and T F P R, respectively. Although our model was silent on the potential causes for dispersion in
marginal revenue products of labor, we assume further that the variance of mrpl in the two-plant-
firm economy relative to the one-plant-firm economy behaves similarly to that of mrpk , and that
its covariance with mrpk is unchanged.22 Under these assumptions, aggregate (or sectoral) TFP
can be decomposed into an efficiency and dispersion term, as in Equation (16) of Hsieh and Klenow
(2009). Absent further sectoral information on the two terms and the capital share ( in their
notation), as well as the sectoral weights in aggregate production (s in their notation), we abstract
from differences in these terms and parameters that are specific to the country and sector. Using
their Equation (16), we can then write the conventionally computed output gain from reducing
misallocation in emerging economies (EM ) down to the level of the U.S. economy (U S ) as

                                                          -1
                              1                       i An,U S       
   log(1+conv. output gain) =    log                      -1     -     V (tf prn,U S ) - V (tf prn,EM )      (14)
                              -1                     n An,EM
                                                                     2

where "conv. output gain" is the output gain in percent;  = 3 the elasticity of substitution
between product varieties within industries; An is the technological efficiency (T F P Q) of plant n;
and V (tf prn ) is the variance of log revenue total factor productivity. In the next two subsections,
we generate the counterfactual variances of tf pr that would arise if emerging economies had the
same multi-plant firm structure as the United States. By plugging this information into Equation
(14), we can ultimately quantify additional aggregate TFP gains from internal capital markets. We
start with the case of India.
grateful to Pete Klenow and Cian Ruane for making that information available to us.
   22
      As a conservative robustness check, we consider below the quantitative implications of assuming no change in
mrpl dispersion between the two economies.




                                                       28
5.1   Quantifying the gains from internal capital markets in India
To account for the coexistence of multi- and single-plant firms, we write the total dispersion of tf pr
across Indian plants as follows:

        V (tf prn ) =       n (tf prn - tf pr )2
                        n
                                                                                    M             S 2
                   =  M V (tf prn
                                M
                                  ) + (1 -  M )V (tf prn
                                                       S
                                                         ) +  M (1 -  M ) tf pr         - tf pr

where the superscript index M denotes the set of plants belonging to multi-plant firms;  M their
                              M
share in the economy; tf pr       their average level of revenue total factor productivity; and V (tf prM )
their dispersion. The superscript index S indicates the analogue variables for standalone plants.
   Our counterfactual exercise consists in computing V (tf pr ) in India under the assumption that
the fraction of plants belonging to multi-plant firms,  F , which is 8.9% in India, is the same as in
the U.S., which is 21.9%. We know from our quantitative exercise that dispersion across plants in
multi-plant firms is 32.7% higher than across standalone plants. As a result, the effect will be to
raise total dispersion in India, an additional variance that reflects good dispersion. Quantitatively,
this is given by

                              S    S                             S
            V (tf prn,IN ) = (IN - U S ) × (1.327 - 1) × V (tf prIN )
                                                                 S                    S
                              = (0.92 - 0.719) × 0.327 × V (tf prIN )  6.9% × V (tf prIN ).

Plugging this number into Equation (14), we quantify the additional output gain as follows:

                                                  -1
                               1              i An,U S 
log(1+true output gain) =         log             -1     V (tf prn,IN ) + V (tfpr n,IN ) - V (tf prn,U S )
                                                          +
                               -1             j An,IN
                                                       2
                                                         
                            = log(1+conv. output gain) + × 0.069 × 0.469
                                                         2
                            = 47% + 4.9% = 51.9%

   The implication is that internal capital markets raise the aggregate TFP and output gains
by an additional tenth of what Hsieh and Klenow (2009) computed. In addition to that, if the
typical Indian multi-plant firm operates fewer plants than its U.S. counterpart, then this number
seems to be a lower bound on the gains of internal capital markets, thus limiting the scope for
good dispersion. Additionally, we note that our quantitative analysis was computed in a framework
with fixed adjustment costs; this mitigates the argument raised by Asker, Collard-Wexler, and
De Loecker (2014) that fixed adjustment costs can explain a large portion of the bad dispersion
documented by Hsieh and Klenow (2009).



                                                     29
5.2    Quantifying the gains from internal capital markets in China
We cannot employ the same methodology to compute the benefits from good dispersion in China,
because the data are sampled at the firm level. We can, however, still compute the aggregate gains
from a comparable measure of dispersion by focusing on the portion that occurs between firms j .
While this means that we must omit the within-firm portion, it allows us to carry out the analysis of
Hsieh and Klenow (2009) at a comparable level of aggregation. In short, unlike the India exercise,
we will be comparing bad dispersion in the U.S. to bad dispersion in China.
    We showed in Section 2.1 that between-firm dispersion was 39.9% of overall dispersion in U.S.
manufacturing. Consequently, we adjust the U.S. variance in Equation (14) as follows:

                                                            -1
                                 1                      i Aj,U S
                                                               
       log(1+true output gain) =    log                     -1     -
                                                                   V (tf prj,U S ) - V (tf prj,CHI )
                                 -1                    j Aj,CHI
                                                               2
                                                                 
                                   = log(1+conv. output gain) + × 0.601 × V (tf prn,U S )
                                                                 2
                                   = 39% + 14.8% = 53.8%

This calculation implies that the aggregate TFP gains in China are more than one-third larger than
previously thought.
    While the above exercises provide a useful starting point to think about the role of good dis-
persion, they remain preliminary, in part due to data limitations. For example, a more detailed
analysis would consider the exact empirical distribution of plants per firm in each economy, differ-
ences in production functions, the number of firms and plants in each sector, and how both T F P R
and T F P Q are distributed. In addition, one strong assumption we made is that V (mrpl) behaves
similarly to V (mrpk ) in the two-plant-firm and single-plant-firm economies. While they likely exist
in the real world, fixed adjustment costs of labor are arguably of lesser importance than those
impeding the allocation of capital. As a result, our assumption that V (mrpl) is affected similar to
V (mrpk ) by the presence of firm-level internal markets may be too strong, and the extra output
gains relative to Hsieh and Klenow (2009) may not be as large.23 Yet despite its limitations, our
development accounting exercise highlights the importance of taking into account the within-firm
dimension for aggregate outcomes.
  23
     According to the expression of T F P R on p.1410 in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), our additional output gains would
only be an s portion of what we computed in the benchmark case above. This still remains a significant adjustment,
highlighting the potential impact of our mechanism on exercises that compute the gains from reducing distortions in
emerging economies.




                                                        30
6    Conclusion
This paper shows that dispersion in marginal revenue products of capital need not indicate distor-
tions. Motivated by evidence that dispersion mostly occurs within firms rather than across firms,
we build a model of a firm operating several plants. Such firms have at their disposal an inter-
nal capital market that helps ease external financial constraints, support investment activity and
generate extra output. Most importantly, economies with multi-plant firms may well exhibit more
dispersion in marginal revenue products of capital than economies with single-plant firms, but still
produce more aggregate output with the same technologies. An implication is that output gains
from capital reallocation may be higher than previously thought in emerging economies, where
single-plant firms are relatively more prevalent.


References
Andrew B. Abel and Janice C. Eberly. A unified model of investment under uncertainty. American
 Economic Review, 84(5):1369­1384, December 1994. (Cited on page 3.)

Oya Altinkili¸
             c and Robert S. Hansen. Are there economies of scale in underwriting fees? evidence
 of rising external financing costs. Review of Financial Studies, 13(1):191­218, January 2000.
 (Cited on page 15.)

John Asker, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Jan De Loecker.         Dynamic inputs and resource
  (mis)allocation. Journal of Political Economy, 122(5), October 2014. (Cited on pages 5, 9,
  18, 24, and 29.)

Bee Yan Aw, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Y. Xu. R&D investment, exporting, and productivity
  dynamics. American Economic Review, 102(4):1312­1344, June 2011. (Cited on page 11.)

 udiger Bachmann and Christian Bayer. Investment dispersion and the business cycle. American
R¨
 Economic Review, 104(4):1392­1416, April 2014. (Cited on page 46.)

Yan Bai, Keyu Jin, and Dan Lu. Misallocation under trade liberalization. Working Paper, 2018.
  (Cited on page 9.)

Eric J. Bartelsmann, John C. Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. Cross-country differences in
  productivity: The role of allocation and selection. American Economic Review, 103(1):305­334,
  February 2013. (Cited on page 41.)

Christian Bayer, Ariel M. Mecikovsky, and Matthias Meier. Productivity dispersions: Could it
  simply be technology choice? Working Paper, 2015. (Cited on page 4.)

Timothy Besley, Stephen Coate, and Glenn Joury. The economics of rotating savings and credit
  associations. American Economic Review, 83(4):792­810, September 1993. (Cited on page 23.)

Nicholas Bloom. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica, 77(3):623­685, May 2009. (Cited
  on page 48.)


                                                    31
Nicholas Bloom, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen Terry. Really
  uncertain business cycles. Econometrica, 86(3):1031­1065, May 2018. (Cited on pages 46, 47,
  and 48.)

J. David Brown, Emin Dinlersoz, and John S. Earle. Does higher productivity dispersion imply
   greater misallocation? a theoretical and empirical analysis. Census Discussion Paper CES-WP-
   16-42, September 2016. (Cited on page 12.)

Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. Finance and development: A tale of
  two sectors. American Economic Review, 101(5):1964­2002, August 2011. (Cited on page 4.)

Ricardo J. Caballero. Aggregate investment. In John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, editors,
  Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 1, Part B, chapter 12, pages 813­862. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
  December 1999. (Cited on page 3.)

Ricardo J. Caballero and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel. Explaining investment dynamics in U.S. man-
  ufacturing: A generalized (S,s ) approach. Econometrica, 67(4):783­826, July 1999. (Cited on
  page 14.)

Ricardo J. Caballero, Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, and John C. Haltiwanger. Plant-level adjustment
  and aggregate dynamics. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995(2):1­54, 1995. (Cited on
  page 3.)

Lorenzo Caliendo, Ferdinando Monte, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. The anatomy of French pro-
  duction hierarchies. Journal of Political Economy, 123(4):809­852, August 2015. (Cited on
  page 12.)

Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. Nominal rigidities and the dy-
  namic effects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of Political Economy, 113(1):1­45, February
  2005. (Cited on page 24.)

Lawrence J. Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. Risk shocks. American Economic
  Review, 104(1):27­65, January 2014. (Cited on pages 47 and 48.)

Xavier Cirera and William F. Maloney. The Innovation Paradox: Developing-Country Capabilities
  and the Unrealized Promise of Technological Catch-Up. The World Bank, Washington, DC, 2017.
  (Cited on page 9.)

Wesley M. Cohen and Steven Klepper. The anatomy of industry R&D intensity distributions.
 American Economic Review, 82(4):773­799, September 1992. (Cited on page 11.)

Wesley M. Cohen and Steven Klepper. A reprise of size and R&D. Economic Journal, 106(437):
 925­951, July 1996. (Cited on page 11.)

Russell Cooper and John C. Haltiwanger. The aggregate implications of machine replacement:
 Theory and evidence. American Economic Review, 83(3):181­186, June 1993. (Cited on page 14.)

Russell Cooper and John C. Haltiwanger. On the nature of capital adjustment costs. Review of
 Economic Studies, 73(3):611­633, July 2006. (Cited on pages 3, 12, 17, 18, and 24.)


                                               32
Russell Cooper, John C. Haltiwanger, and Laura Power. Machine replacement and the business
 cycle: Lumps and bumps. American Economic Review, 89(4):921­946, September 1999. (Cited
 on page 14.)

Russell W. Cooper and Immo Schott. Capital reallocation and aggregate productivity. Working
 Paper, August 2018. (Cited on page 46.)

Harold Creusen, Henk Kox, Arjan Lejour, and Roger Smeets. Exploring the margins of Dutch ex-
  ports: A firm-level analysis. De Economist, 159(4):413­434, December 2011. (Cited on page 12.)

Ana Paula Cusolito and William F. Maloney. Productivity Revisited: Shifting Paradigms in Analysis
 and Policy. World Bank, Washington, D.C., 2018. (Cited on page 9.)

Era Dabla-Norris, Si Guo, Vikram Haksar, Kalpana Kochhar Minsuk Kim, Kevin Wiseman, and
  Aleksandra Zdzienicka. The new normal: A sector-level perspective on growth and productivity
  trends in advanced economies. IMS Staff Discussion Note, March 2015. (Cited on page 9.)

Francesco D'Acunto, Ryan Liu, Carolin Pflueger, and Michael Weber. Flexible prices and leverage.
  Working Paper, 2016. (Cited on page 18.)

Sanghamitra Das, Mark J. Roberts, and James R. Tybout. Market entry costs, producer hetero-
  geneity, and export dynamics. Econometrica, 75(3):837­873, May 2007. (Cited on page 12.)

Joel M. David and Venky Venkateswaran. The sources of capital misallocation. American Economic
  Review, forthcoming. (Cited on pages 9 and 12.)

Joseph A. DiMasi, Ronald W. Hansen, and Henry G. Grabowski. The price of innovation: New
  estimates of drug development costs. Journal of Health Economics, 22(2):151­185, March 2003.
  (Cited on page 11.)

Mark Doms and Timothy Dunne. Capital adjustment patterns in manufacturing plants. Review of
 Economic Dynamics, 1(2):409­429, April 1998. (Cited on pages 3 and 14.)

Janice Eberly, Sergio Rebelo, and Nicolas Vincent. What explains the lagged investment effect?
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(4):370­380, May 2012. (Cited on pages 14 and 24.)

Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Tyler Muir. Aggregate external financing and savings waves. Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 84:116­133, December 2016. (Cited on page 3.)

Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Dimitris Papanikolaou. Organization capital and the cross-section of ex-
 pected returns. Journal of Finance, 68(4):1365­1406, August 2013. (Cited on page 4.)

Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Adriano A. Rampini. Capital reallocation and liquidity. Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 53(3):369­399, April 2006. (Cited on pages 46 and 47.)

Steven M. Fazzari, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. Financing constraints and corporate
  investment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988(1):141­206, 1988. (Cited on page 3.)

Lucia Foster, John C. Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. Reallocation, firm turnover, and efficiency:
  Selection on productivity or profitability? American Economic Review, 98(1):394­425, March
  2008. (Cited on pages 8, 45, and 46.)

                                               33
Xavier Gabaix. The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica, 79(3):733­772, May
  2011. (Cited on page 47.)

Mark Gertler and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle
 analysis. In Benjamin M. Friedman and Mark Woodford, editors, Handbook of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, volume 3A, chapter 11, pages 547­599. Elsevier, Amsterdam, December 2010. (Cited on
 page 15.)

Robert Gertner, David Scharfstein, and Jeremy Stein. Internal versus external capital markets.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4):1211­1230, November 1994. (Cited on page 4.)

Simon Gilchrist and Charles P. Himmelberg. The role of cash flow in reduced-form investment
  equations. Journal of Monetary Economics, 36(3):541­572, December 1995. (Cited on page 3.)

Xavier Giroud. Proximity and investment: Evidence from plant-level data. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 128(2):861­915, May 2013. (Cited on pages 4 and 17.)

Xavier Giroud and Holger M. M¨ uller. Capital and labor reallocation within firms. Journal of
  Finance, 70(4):1767­1804, August 2015. (Cited on page 4.)

Xavier Giroud and Holger M. M¨
                             uller. Firms' internal networks and local economic shocks. American
  Economic Review, forthcoming. (Cited on page 5.)

  ao F. Gomes. Financing investment. American Economic Review, 91(5):1263­1285, December
Jo~
  2001. (Cited on page 3.)

Gita Gopinath, S                  ¨
                 ¸ ebnem Kalemli-Ozcan,   Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez.
  Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe. Working Paper, 132(4):1915­1967, Novem-
  ber 2017. (Cited on pages 12, 39, and 47.)

    cois Gourio and Anil K. Kashyap. Investment spikes: New facts and a general equilibrium
Fran¸
  exploration. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54:1­22, September 2007. (Cited on page 3.)

John Haltiwanger, Robert Kulick, and Chad Syverson. Misallocation measures: The distortion that
  ate the residual. NBER Working Paper No. 24199, October 2018. (Cited on page 9.)

Christopher A. Hennessy and Toni M. Whited. How costly is external financing? evidence from a
  structural estimation. Journal of Finance, 62(4):1705­1745, August 2007. (Cited on page 15.)

Chang-Tai Hsieh and Peter J. Klenow. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), November 2009. (Cited on pages 2, 4, 5, 8, 12, 24, 27,
  28, 29, and 30.)

Matthias Kehrig. The cyclical nature of the productivity distribution. Working Paper, 2015. (Cited
 on pages 38, 39, 46, 47, and 48.)

Truman L. Kelley. Fundamentals of Statistics.       Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mas-
  sachusetts, 1947. (Cited on pages 6 and 39.)

Maurice G. Kendall and Alan Stuart. Advanced Theory of Statistics, volume 1. Oxford University
 Press, New York, 5th edition, 1987. (Cited on page 39.)

                                               34
Aubhik Khan and Julia K. Thomas. Credit shocks and aggregate fluctuations in an economy
 with production heterogeneity. Journal of Political Economy, 121(6):1055­1107, December 2013.
 (Cited on pages 3 and 4.)

Owen A. Lamont. Cash flow and investment: Evidence from internal capital markets. Journal of
 Finance, 52(1):83­109, March 1997. (Cited on page 4.)

Andrea Lanteri. The market for used capital: Endogenous irreversibility and reallocation over the
 business cycle. Working Paper, 2016. (Cited on page 48.)

Shaojin Li, Toni M. Whited, and Yufeng Wu. Collateral, taxes, and leverage. Review of Financial
  Studies, 29(6):1453­1500, June 2016. (Cited on page 18.)

David O. Lucca. Resuscitating time-to-build. Working Paper, 2007. (Cited on page 24.)

Andrey Malenko. Optimal design of internal capital markets. Working Paper, February 2016.
 (Cited on page 4.)

Gregor Matvos and Amit Seru. Resource allocation within firms and financial market dislocation:
  Evidence from diversified conglomerates. Review of Financial Studies, 27(4):1143­1189, April
  2014. (Cited on page 4.)

Marc J. Melitz. The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry pro-
 ductivity. Econometrica, 71(6):1695­1725, November 2003. (Cited on page 12.)

Virgiliu Midrigan and Daniel Y. Xu. Finance and misallocation: Evidence from plant-level data.
  American Economic Review, 104(2):422­458, February 2014. (Cited on pages 4 and 26.)

Benjamin Moll. Productivity losses from financial frictions: Can self-financing undo capital misal-
  location? American Economic Review, 104(10):3186­3221, October 2014. (Cited on page 4.)

Dale T. Mortensen and Christopher A. Pissarides. Job creation and job destruction in the theory
 of unemployment. Review of Economic Studies, 61(3):397­415, July 1994. (Cited on page 12.)

Ezra Oberfield and Devesh Raval. Micro data and macro technology. NBER Working Paper No.
  20452, 2014. (Cited on page 43.)

Laura Power. The missing link: Technology, investment, and productivity. Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 80(2):300­313, May 1998. (Cited on page 14.)

Adriano A. Rampini and S. Viswanathan. Collateral and capital structure. Journal of Financial
 Economics, 109(2):466­492, August 2013. (Cited on page 18.)

Plutarchos Sakellaris. Patterns of plant adjustment. Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(2):425­
  450, March 2004. (Cited on page 14.)

David S. Scharfstein and Jeremy C. Stein. The dark side of internal capital markets: Divisional
  rent-seeking and inefficient investment. Journal of Finance, 55(6):2537­2564, December 2000.
  (Cited on pages 4 and 17.)



                                                35
Antoinette Schoar. Effects of corporate diversification on productivity. Journal of Finance, 57(6):
 2379­2403, 2002. (Cited on page 4.)

Jae Song, David J. Price, Fatih Guvenen, and Nicholas Bloom. Firming up inequality. Working
  Paper, 2015. (Cited on pages 38 and 41.)

Jeremy C. Stein. Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate resources. Journal of
  Finance, 52(1):111­133, March 1997. (Cited on pages 4 and 17.)

Chad Syverson. What determines productivity? Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2):326­365,
  June 2011. (Cited on page 9.)

Julia K. Thomas. Is lumpy investment relevant for the business cycle? Journal of Political Economy,
  110(3):508­534, June 2002. (Cited on page 24.)
       c´
Pavel Sev ik. Financial frictions, internal capital markets, and the organization of production.
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 18(3):502­522, July 2015. (Cited on page 5.)




                                                36
                                           Appendix
                                   -- for online publication --


A     Additional empirical findings
A.1    Investment and equalizing M RP K
The assumption that investment should ideally be undertaken to equalize marginal revenue products
of capital rests on some assumptions that we work out in this appendix. In a standard frictionless
economy with decreasing returns to scale, agents should choose investment to equate the expected
capital return. To understand how equating capital returns relates to equating marginal revenue
products, consider the expression of the expected capital return. This return is defined as the
proceeds of one unit of capital at the end of next period ­ the value of undepreciated capital plus
its marginal revenue product ­ divided by the cost of next period's capital in the current period.
Defining industry output as the num´    eraire, we denote the price of next period's capital k  in terms
                                   
of this period's num´ eraire by Ptk , the industry-wide depreciation rate by t , the marginal revenue
product of capital in plant n and year t by M RP Knt , real value added by ynt , and the capital stock
by knt . Then the expected gross return, ERnt+1 , in a given year and industry is

                                            Ptk
                                              +1 (1 - t ) + M RP Knt+1
                               ERnt+1 = E                              .
                                                         Ptk
                                                                           
We assume all units in an industry face the same price of capital, Ptk , and the same depreciation
rate t . Then the only source of heterogeneity in returns stems from differences in expected marginal
revenue products of capital, M RP Knt+1 . In a large set of models with Cobb-Douglas technology,
                                                                                y
this object is proportional to the expected average product of capital, E kt+1 . Since we do not
                                                                                  t+1
measure the expected marginal revenue product of capital, we approximate it by the realized
marginal revenue product of capital. This is a good approximation if capital is chosen one period in
advance, all other inputs are chosen statically, and total factor productivity is sufficiently persistent.
Only unexpected innovations to profitability will then render the realized and the expected marginal
revenue product of capital different. All of these assumptions are plausible and widely used in
the macroeconomic and investment literature. From now on we study the logarithm of marginal
revenue products of capital which is denoted by lower-case letters: mrpknt  log(M RP Knt ).
Given our above assumptions, we measure dispersion in marginal revenue products of capital as
Vt (mrpknt ) = Vt (log(ynt /knt )).

A.2    Data
We mainly use confidential data on manufacturing establishments collected by the U.S. Census
Bureau that comprise the 1972-2009 Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM), the Census of Manu-
factures (CMF) from 1972-2007, and the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) from 1976-2009.
These data inform us about age, output, capital stocks, investment expenditures, and other inputs
at the level of the individual establishment. In the manufacturing sector, the CMF defines an
"establishment" as a business location where the principal activity is production; we hence think of


                                                   37
an "establishment" as a production plant. The CMF also contains information about the ownership
of each plant (denoted by the variable FIRMID), which allows us to construct the hierarchical plant
structure of "firms" necessary for our main object of interest, the within-firm and between-firm
component of heterogeneity in returns, productivity and reallocation.
    From the CMF and the ASM, we construct a large dataset of plants in the U.S. manufacturing
sector. In order to obtain a consistent longitudinal panel, we limit attention to the ASM and the
ASM portion of the CMF data (identified by establishment type ET=0). We prefer the ASM over
the CMF as our benchmark dataset because we want to test the dynamic implications of our model
of investment in multi-plant firms at the highest possible frequency. Many aspects of our mechanism
would disappear at the quinquennial frequency of the CMF. By focusing on the ASM portion in
all years, we automatically eliminate all administrative observations (identified by AR=1), which
are imputed mainly off industry means and would thus corrupt moments of the distribution we are
interested in. Our resulting panel spans the years 1972-2009, which allows us to study the long-run
features of the dispersion of marginal revenue products of capital and reallocation. Every year, we
observe about 55,000 plants which total to 2.1 million observations.
    We combine the Census data with industry-level data from several publicly available sources:
input and output price deflators from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (NBER-
CES), various asset data from the the Capital Tables published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS), and the Fixed Asset Tables published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Unless
otherwise noted, all datasets are at annual frequency. Most of the information contained in the
non-Census datasets (BEA, BLS, NBER-CES) other than manufacturing data, are only needed to
estimate productivity and the replacement value of capital at current market conditions.
    For each plant in these data, we construct real value added, the real capital stock, and real
investment. To obtain real value added, ynt , we first compute nominal value added as sales less
intermediate and energy inputs, correct for inventory changes and resales,24 and deflate the re-
sulting measure by the 6-digit NAICS shipment price deflator from the NBER-CES manufacturing
database. The real capital stock, knt , is the sum of structure and equipment capital each of which
are expressed as real replacement values at current market conditions. These replacement values are
computed individually for structure and equipment capital with the perpetual inventory method,
using investment expenditures and depreciation rates. When a plant is observed for the first time,
we initialize its capital stock at its book value, which is transformed as follows. First, we convert
nominal book values into nominal market values and then deflate this measure using the BLS's price
deflators for capital goods at the 3-digit NAICS industry level.25 Like capital, we compute real
investment, int , as the sum of real structure and equipment investment by deflating the respective
nominal investment expenditures by the 3-digit NAICS industry investment price deflators from
the BLS. Our capital measure denotes beginning-of-year stock values, while our investment and
value added measures refer to flow values during the year. To avoid outliers driving our results
about dispersion and the investment-productivity link, we drop the 1% tails of the productivity
and investment rate distributions in a given 4-digit NAICS industry.
    A firm is defined as all manufacturing plants within the same FIRMID26 in a given year and
  24
      Resales are goods purchased from another producer and resold in an unchanged condition. Correcting for them
means we assess productivity of the plant as a producer rather than its productivity as a trader.
   25
      For more details about the primary data and the transformation needed to obtain measures of the real capital
stock and estimate productivity, see the description in the appendix to Kehrig (2015).
   26
      Song, Price, Guvenen, and Bloom (2015) identify firms off the EIN, the employer identification number, which



                                                       38
4-digit NAICS industry. The FIRMID defines the collection of plants under common ownership
or control. All plants of subsidiary firms are included as part of the owning or controlling firm.
If the same firm is active in several industries, we define each subset of plants belonging to the
same industry as separate firms. Our within-firm dispersion measures are hence an understatement
because we ignore the between-industry component of within-firm dispersion.

A.3     The economic importance of multi-plant firms
Our between-firm/within-firm analysis is economically relevant if a significant portion of aggregate
economic activity is accounted for by multi-plant firms. Table A1 shows that while single-plant
firms dominate in numbers, multi-plant firms operate the majority of the capital stock, produce
most output, and generate most investment. In fact, firms that consist of 20 or more plants operate
almost one-half of all the capital stock in U.S. manufacturing.

                   Table A1: Economic activity by firm type in U.S. manufacturing

                                                               Share of ...
                                           plants    value added capital stock          investment
               Single-plant firms          0.719        0.220         0.178                0.215
               Multi-plant firms           0.281        0.780         0.822                0.785

               Firms with at least...
               ... 10 plants               0.131         0.513            0.602            0.548
               ... 20 plants               0.095         0.398            0.470            0.421
               ... 40 plants               0.060         0.252            0.296            0.261

Note: The sample underlying this table comprises all establishments in the Census of Manufactures 1972-2007 less
administrative records. The share of each variable in multi-plant vs. single-plant firms is computed for each Census
year and then averaged across Census years. Non-manufacturing operations of firms are ignored.



A.4     Empirics of cross-sectional moments
This appendix details how the cross-sectional moments underlying Table 2, Panel B were computed.
First, we compute cross-plant moments Mit and their standard errors in a given industry i and
year t. Mit stands for the cross-sectional standard deviation, inter-decile range, skewness, Kelley
skewness, and excess kurtosis. We adopt the formulae for the first four moments, the inter-quantile
range and their standard errors from Kendall and Stuart (1987). Kelley skewness is a quantile-based
measure of skewness whose predecessor was proposed by Kelley (1947).
    Every cross-sectional moment is computed by industry and by year. To get long-run industry-
specific moments, we first aggregate over years in order to exclude any industry-specific trends. As
                                      ¨
do Kehrig (2015), Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan,    Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez (2017), we note
an upward trend in dispersion and ­ to a lesser extent ­ in skewness and a downward trend in
comes from tax records. Since we are interested in organizational control rather than tax liability and because the
same FIRMID may operate hundreds of EINs for tax purposes, we prefer FIRMID to indicate firms.



                                                        39
kurtosis. Notice that the cross-plant standard deviation increases about 10 log points per decade;
both between-firm and within-firm dispersion increases evenly, so there is no discernible trend in
the within-firm share of the overall industry variance. The cross-plant skewness becomes more
positive over time: Kelley skewness increases from around zero (unskewed) to 0.25 (right tail about
1.66 times as wide at the bottom tail) in 2007. We compute the typical cross-sectional moment in
a given NAICS-4 industry in 1990 that corresponds to the middle of our sample.
    Then, we aggregate across industries using that industry's average share in value added: Mt =
                                                                                                  2
   i it Mit . Standard errors are computed according to this aggregation: SEM =
                                                                                       i (it SEM ) .                 t                            it
This yields the moments within the average industry in the middle of our sample.

A.5         Empirics of between-firm and within-firm moments
In this section, we detail how we compute the within-firm and between-firm dispersion in marginal
revenue products of capital and capital reallocation that underlie Table 2 and the robustness exer-
cises in Section A.7.
    First, we decompose the overall variance in marginal revenue products of capital into three
components: one between industries (reflecting differences in measurement and the definition of
capital and value added), one between firms in a given industry, and one across plants within a
firm and industry. We define firms that operate plants in separate industries as different firms, thus
biasing the true within-firm component of dispersion downward.

                                      2
 Vt =       njit mrpknjit - mrpkt
        n
                                                                                                         Nj
                                                                             2                                  ji                            2
   =        it (mrpkit - mrpkt )2 +       it         i
                                                     jt mrpkjit - mrpkit         +       it         i
                                                                                                    jt          nt mrpknjit - mrpkjit             (A1)
        i                             i        j i                                   i        j i        nj,i

              Ind                                B between firms within ind. i                             W
            Vt    between-industry             Vit                                                        Vjit within firm j and industry i

                                             B                                                         W
                                           Vt  average between-firm                                  Vt  average within-firm


where n indicates the plant, j the firm, i the 4-digit NAICS industry and t the year. mrpknjit
denotes the marginal revenue product of capital of plant n belonging to firm j and industry i in
year t, mrpkjit the average return in firm j in industry i, mrpkit the average return in industry i,
and mrpkt the average level of returns in the economy.
    An industry's level of marginal revenue product of capital is determined by the level of Ptk
and the asset bundle it typically reflects in that industry. This and other industry specificities in
measurement will artificially drive V Ind ­ an object we ignore for its lack of economic meaning.
In our empirical analysis in Section 2.1, we focus only on the ViB and ViW of firms with at least
two plants, because it is meaningful to compare them and how much of the dispersion in marginal
revenue products of capital within an industry originates within firms as opposed to between firms
                                 VW
in that same industry: Wi  V Wii+V B . When computing an "aggregate" number for W , we compute
                                     i
the average of industry ratios, which is weighted by i , i.e., that industry's share in plants or capital,
depending on whether we are looking at unweighted or capital-weighted dispersion.
    Although investment rates do not suffer from industry-specific measurement issues, such as
the marginal revenue product of capital, we proceed in a similar way to assess between-firm and
within-firm investment-rate dispersion.


                                                                    40
A.6     Robustness
A.6.1    Accounting for measurement error
In Section A.7 we dealt with some measurement error. If plant-level variables are measured with
noise, then firm-level averages will be measured more precisely and artificially inflate the within-
firm variance. Time aggregation should filter out this type of measurement error. Because time
aggregation cannot deal with persistent measurement error, we now consider that type. To do that,
we consider marginal revenue products of capital that are computed using separate measures of
capital and values added. Our alternative measures come from different datasets or are separately
measured variables in our baseline dataset. We have:

   · K T AB -- we use appropriately deflated values of variable TAB instead of the perpetual inven-
     tory method;

   · Y IRS -- we use administrative data on sales from the IRS instead of TVS from CMF/ASM;

   · Y P CU -- we use collected data on actual production from the Plant Capacity Utilization
     Survey (PCU) instead of TVS.

These alternative measures should be correlated with our original measures of K and Y in the
ASM (since they measure the same underlying object), but they should still be different due to
different coverage or handling by the statistical agency. We recompute marginal revenue products
of capital using the three alternative measures and redo the cross-sectional within-firm between-firm
decomposition on these alternative measures. If the dominance of within-firm share is true, then
this should show up in all of these measures. Song, Price, Guvenen, and Bloom (2015) follow a
similar procedure.
    Since using these alternative measures limits our sample at times, we also recompute the within-
firm/between-firm decomposition using our original data so that we are comparing moments for the
same underlying sample, for which we have both our benchmark measure as well as the alternative.
It turns out that the differences in the within-firm share are marginal and almost always lie in
the 95% error bands of the other measure. Only when using value added from the PCU does the
benchmark differ from the alternative, which yields an even higher within-firm share. Error bands
constructed from averaging across 86 NAICS-4 industries. We conclude from this exercise that our
main result of the within-firm dispersion accounting for the largest portion in overall dispersion
does not go away when using alternative measures of output and capital.

A.6.2    Marginal vs. average revenue products
Our empirical work in Section 2.1 aimed at measuring marginal revenue products of capital, which
are the relevant measure of what should be equalized across production units. But in the data,
one can measure only average revenue products of capital; as in the literature, we approximate
the dispersion of marginal revenue products with average revenue products. This approximation is
usually justified with a Cobb-Douglas production function, since in this framework average revenue
products are proportional to marginal ones. But they are not if technology is not multiplicative
or if it is Cobb-Douglas with overhead inputs. Bartelsmann, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2013)
document that overheads in production are quite powerful in explaining differences between micro
production units, and they find significant aggregate consequences. Most overhead inputs are likely

                                                 41
                              Table A2: Accounting for measurement error

                                                                                           bench              alt
                                                               y bench            VW                 VW
                              Alt. Measure       Corr log      k       ,        V W +V B           V W +V B
                                                               y alt
                                                         log   k
     I: CMF 1972-2007         K T AB                     0.979                     0.563             0.556
                                                                                  (0.008)           (0.005)

    II: CMF 2002-2007         Y IRS                      0.990                     0.538             0.542
                                                                                  (0.005)           (0.005)

    III: ASM 1974-2007        Y P CU                     0.494                     0.581             0.626
                                                                                  (0.015)           (0.017)

Note: This table displays the within-firm share of overall dispersion for alternative measures of value added Y ­
collected either from tax records or separately measured in the Plant Capacity Utilization Survey (PCU) ­ and
capital K (real replacement value at current market prices directly computed from book values instead of from
the perpetual inventory method). Correlation of the computed marginal revenue products of capital measures are
positive, some are high, and the within-firm share of overall marginal revenue products of capital dispersion is not
statistically different at the 95% level except when using value added from the PCU, which yields an even higher
within-firm share. Error bands constructed from averaging across 86 NAICS-4 industries.


at the headquarters level of a firm rather than the plant level. Though this casts some doubt that
all our results could be driven by constant inputs, we cannot dismiss this possibility.

Overheads Any constant input requirements at the plant level are hard to identify empirically.
We therefore carry out a quantitative exercise to examine how large overheads would have to
be in order to explain all or a portion of the empirically observed dispersion. Suppose the true
technology is yn = zn (kn - k ) . In that case, the average revenue product of capital can be written
as arpkn = mrpkn - log  + log 1 - k/kn . Further suppose that marginal revenue products ­
which we cannot measure ­ are completely equalized. Then the entire variance of average revenue
products would reflect the differential share of overheads across firms of different capital size:

                                                                     k
                                       V (arpkn ) = V     log 1 -           .                                  (A2)
                                                                     kn

We simulate a firm-size distribution realistically, assuming that capital ­ unlike employment ­ is
distributed log-normally. We consider how large the right-hand-side variance in Equation (A2) is
for different levels of k .
    Figure A1 plots the RHS of Equation (A2) as a function of E k/kn . Naturally, when k = 0,
this variance will be zero and the observed variance of average revenue products must be caused
by the variance of marginal revenue products. This does not change much for low and moderate
levels of overheads. Even if half of all inputs are overhead, less than one-tenth of the empirically
observed variance in average revenue products can be explained by overhead. Clearly, this amount
of overhead inputs at the level of the plant is unreasonable. Only if the average share of overhead


                                                        42
          Figure A1: How much overheads is necessary to explain the observed V (arpk )?


                                        1


                                       0.8


                         V (ar p k )   0.6
                                                     Actual
                                                     Counterfactual
                                       0.4


                                       0.2


                                        0
                                             0      0.1     0.2       0.3        0.4   0.5     0.6   0.7
                                                          Share of overhead in total capital


Note: Simulation of the right-hand-side of Equation (A2) against the share of overhead in total inputs.


in total inputs approaches 70% can the observed variance be explained by overhead. We conclude
that overhead may only play a limited role in explaining the long-run dispersion of average revenue
products of capital.

Non-unitary elasticity of substitution Another empirically plausible alternative to a simple
Cobb-Douglas production function would be a constant elasticity of substitution production func-
                                                                   
                                        -1                   -1    -1
tion. Suppose yn = kn                   
                                                 + (1 - )xn  
                                                                        where  is the elasticity of substitution and xn the
variable inputs of plant n. In that case, the average revenue product of capital can be written as
arpkn =  [mrpkn - log ] and the variance of average and marginal revenue products as

                                                          V (arpkn ) =  2 V (mrpkn ).                                 (A3)

The true dispersion of marginal revenue products could then be much lower if the elasticity of
substitution is larger than unity. However, Oberfield and Raval (2014), who estimate the elasticity
of substitution at the plant level, put that number significantly smaller than 1, suggesting that the
empirically measured dispersion of average revenue products would be a lower bound on that of
marginal revenue products. We conclude that a non-unitary elasticity of substitution would most
plausibly measure only a portion of the true dispersion of marginal revenue products.

A.7     Further dimensions of within-firm dispersion
In the previous section, we documented that most dispersion in marginal revenue products of
capital and investment rates originates within firms rather than between firms. We now study the
between-firm/within-firm decomposition for a number of subsamples. The objective is to confirm
the robustness of our main empirical result and identify possible causes behind the importance of


                                                                            43
within-firm dispersion. The details of these exercises can be found in Appendix A.6.1. Table A3
provides an overview of our robustness checks.

                     Table A3: Dispersion of mrpk within and between firms

               Sample                    Share of V (mrpk )              Share of V (i/k )
                                      b/w plants b/w firms           b/w plants b/w firms
                                      within firms                   within firms
        (1)    Full panel                0.601        0.399             0.679         0.321
        (2)    Census sample             0.566        0.434             0.663         0.337
        (3)    Mid-age plants            0.595        0.405             0.685         0.315
        (4)    Balanced panel            0.809        0.191             0.895         0.105
        (5)    5-year averages           0.554        0.446             0.656         0.344
        (6)    5-plant firms             0.668        0.332             0.786         0.214
        (7)    Homog. Industries         0.559        0.441             0.689         0.311
        (8)    y is physical output      0.625        0.376
        (9)    K -weighted               0.540        0.460             0.680         0.320
        (10)   Equipment                 0.591        0.409             0.631         0.369
        (11)   Private firms             0.713        0.287             0.795         0.205


    The first row in Table A3 reiterates the baseline result of within-firm vs. between-firm dispersion
of both marginal revenue products of capital (navy blue on the left) and investment rates (light
blue on the right): About 60% of the variance of mrpk and 68% of the variance in i/k arise within
firms.

Ruling out ASM sampling specificities We use the ASM as our benchmark panel. This panel
is known to overrepresent large plants, which in turn are more likely to be part of a multi-plant firm.
Since we do not know whether within-firm dispersion is larger in firms with few or many plants, we
repeat our between-firm/within-firm decomposition for the entire Census of Manufactures (every
five years). This allows us to study the full sample of manufacturing plants in the economy. Row (2)
illustrates our findings: While the within-firm share of dispersion is slightly lower, it still remains
dominant at 57% and 66% for mrpk and i/k , respectively.

Ruling out life-cycle dynamics Next, we examine whether our result is driven by entry, exit,
or other life-cycle dynamics. Young, presumably more productive plants will be characterized by
higher revenue products and will hence attract higher investment rates. The opposite may be true
of older plants the firm keeps operational until the capital stock depreciates away. We therefore
redo the decomposition using only "mid-age firms," which we define as plants that are at least three
years old and at least three years away from exit. As Row (3) shows, the within-firm share of
dispersion in both variables is almost unchanged, and the same is true when we consider a five-
year distance to entry and exit. If we turn to a strongly balanced panel (Row (4)), the share of
within-firm dispersion is even larger.



                                                  44
Ruling out measurement error In our next robustness check, we want to address the possibility
that the high within-firm share primarily reflects measurement error at the plant level. Indeed,
transitory plant-level noise would "wash out" at the firm level, and thus artificially increase the
within-firm share of dispersion. To rule out that this effect drives our result, we construct rolling 5-
year windows of averaged mrpk and i/k for each plant. This time aggregation should filter out most
high-frequency noise at the plant level. Performing the between-firm/within-firm decomposition on
this averaged data shows that the importance of the within-firm share of dispersion persists. As
shown in Row (5) of Table A3, the within-firm share of overall dispersion in an industry is now 55%
and 66%, respectively. This suggests that the presence of plant-level measurement error is unlikely
to be driving our findings. Further investigations of measurement error can be found in Appendix
A.6.1.

Ruling out mechanical aggregation In a world composed of many plants owned and operated
by a single firm, the within-firm share of dispersion would be 100% by definition. As such, one
could worry that the large share of dispersion occurring within the firm is driven by large entities.
This is unlikely, since in our benchmark decomposition each firm receives equal weight, irrespective
of its size. Because in our sample small 2-plant and 3-plant firms are much more numerous than
large, complex firms, this bias probably does not play a large role. Still, in order to determine
whether this mechanical aggregation could be an issue, we recompute the between-/within-firm
decomposition for the set of firms that operate exactly five plants.27 Row (6) shows that for this
set of firms, the within-firm share of dispersion is indeed higher than for the whole manufacturing
sector (67% for mrpk and 79% for i/k ), but not dramatically so. This suggests that our main result
is not merely driven by the statistical importance of large firms.

Ruling out multi-product-firm bias Even though our benchmark definition of an industry
is fairly fine, products within 4-digit NAICS industries are still heterogeneous. This could poten-
tially lead to spurious differences of marginal revenue products of capital arising from differences
in product composition within 4-digit NAICS industries. Whether such within-industry product
differences are most likely to occur between or within firms is ambiguous. For robustness purposes,
we repeat the decomposition but this time focus on plants that produce only one homogeneous
standardized good. We follow Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) and consider industries
that produce almost perfectly homogeneous goods such as cement, sugar, coffee beans, etc.28 Natu-
rally, we expect the within-firm share of dispersion to be smaller then in our benchmark, since many
firms within a given 4-digit NAICS industry are spread out across several of these narrowly-defined
product codes. But even in these homogeneous industries, the within-firm share of dispersion in
marginal revenue products of capital and investment rates displayed in Row (7) amounts to 56%
and 69%, respectively.
  27
      According to our more restrictive definition of a firm as all plants operated by the same firm within a 4-digit
NAICS industry, half of the capital stock is operated by firms with five plants or more.
   28
      More specifically, these industries are defined as the following SIC product codes: Sugar (2061011), Block and
Processed Ice (2097011 and 2097051), Gasoline (2911131), Hardwood flooring (2426111), Concrete (3273000), Whole
Bean and Ground Coffee (2095111 and 2095117 & 2095118 ­ later merged into 2095115 ­ and 2095121), Carbon Black
(2895011 and 2895000), Bread (2051111, later split into 2051121 and 2051122) and Plywood (2435100, later split into
2435101, 2435105, 2435107, and 2435147).




                                                         45
Ruling out markups Limiting our attention to homogeneous goods has another advantage:
It allows us to derive real value added in two ways. In addition to the standard approach of
deflating sales, we can also use the measured physical quantity of production, a meaningful object
for these homogeneous product groups. This makes it possible to study how much of dispersion in
capital revenue products reflects price differences ­ due to differential markups or transfer prices ­
rather than physical productivity differences. Row (8) shows that the within-firm share of marginal
revenue products of capital is slightly higher, at 63%, when using physical output to compute
y rather than deflated sales. This suggests that if anything, prices impact the within-firm and
between-firm variances in a way that stacks the odds against our main empirical finding. It is also
consistent with the fact that plant-level prices and physical productivity are negatively correlated,
as documented by Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008).

Demonstrating economic relevance Next, we wish to confirm that our findings are of eco-
nomic relevance. Instead of decomposing the unweighted variance, we now consider capital weights
for the  's in Equation (1) and redo the decomposition of the dispersion in mrpk and i/k . Row
(9) shows that while the within-firm share of capital-weighted dispersion is slightly lower, it still
remains dominant at 54% and 68%, respectively.

Examining different capital types In Row (10), we display our decomposition results when
focusing only on equipment capital when computing both revenue products and investment rates.
Arguably, equipment can be more easily reallocated across production units than structures, which
would lower dispersion. Again, results of the unweighted between-firm/within-firm decomposition
are almost unchanged at 59% and 63%, respectively.
    These exercises have confirmed that the importance of the within-firm share of dispersion in
revenue products of capital and investment rates is robust to changing the sampling frame in order
to account for measurement and aggregation problems, life-cycle dynamics, multi-product firms,
markups and transfer prices, the predominance of multi-plant firms with little capital, the type of
capital, or the sampling of the ASM. In many cases, the within-firm share of overall dispersion is
even higher, suggesting that our baseline results may in fact represent lower bounds on the actual
within-firm share of dispersion.

A.8    Cyclicality of dispersion between and within firms
So far, we have focused on time-series averages of between-firm and within-firm dispersion in
marginal revenue products and investment rates. At the aggregate level, cyclical movements in
either dispersion measure are well known: The countercyclical nature of productivity dispersion
has been documented empirically using marginal revenue products of capital in Compustat data
by Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006), TFP levels by Kehrig (2015), and TFP innovations by Bloom,
Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry (2018), while Bachmann and Bayer (2014) have
shown that the dispersion in investment rates is procyclical. These findings have important im-
plications for the literatures on Schumpeterian creative destruction, misallocation, development or
uncertainty-driven business cycles. For example, Cooper and Schott (2018) study the effects of cycli-
cal capital reallocation on aggregate productivity. Yet to our knowledge, no one has investigated
separately the cyclicality of dispersion within firms. We close this gap by studying the time-series
properties of the various components of dispersion. We first compute detrended measures of the


                                                 46
between-firm and within-firm variance,29 which we then use for time-series analysis. In addition,
we study the cyclical properties of the lower and upper portions of the distribution as measured by
the distance between the 90th percentile and the median as well as that between the median and
the 10th percentile. Table A4 displays properties of the long-run averages, autocorrelations, and
time-series standard deviations for each measure.

                    Table A4: Dynamic properties of the mrpk and i/k distributions

                             V B (mrpk )                  V W (mrpk )            V B (i/k )        V W (i/k )
        A.1 Dispersion: Time-series moments
        Average                 0.315                          0.476               0.016             0.037
        Autocorrelation         0.732                          0.657               0.667             0.679
        Volatility              0.042                          0.084               0.006             0.016

        A.2 Dispersion: Cyclicality
        Corr(Ytmf   g
                 +1 , ...)       -0.252                   -0.147                  0.306              0.330
                 mf g
        Corr(Yt       , ...)     -0.582                   -0.304                  0.389              0.394
                 mf g
        Corr(Yt-1 , ...)         -0.413                   -0.229                  0.222              0.241
                             mrpk - mrpk 10
                                 50                   mrpk - mrpk 50
                                                          90                  i/k - i/k 10
                                                                                 50              i/k - i/k 50
                                                                                                    90

        B. Skewness: Cyclicality
        Corr(Ytmf   g
                 +1 , ...)       -0.026                        -0.071             -0.155             0.079
                 mf g
        Corr(Yt       , ...)     -0.293                        -0.152              0.148             0.197
                 mf g
        Corr(Yt-1 , ...)         -0.226                        -0.109              0.225             0.244

Note: The table reports time-series moments of between-firm and within-firm variance for both marginal revenue
products of capital and capital reallocation. "Average" denotes the long-run average of each variance term; "Au-
tocorrelation" the annual persistence, Corr(Vt , Vt-1 ); "Volatility" the time-series standard deviation, StD(Vt ); and
cyclicality is with respect to the growth rate of aggregate manufacturing value added, denoted by Ytmf g .


    Consistent with the evidence from Section 2.1, Panel A.1 in Table A4 shows that the within-firm
portion of the variance in mrpk is larger than that between firms. When studying fluctuations of the
two variances over time, we find that the volatility of the within-firm portion is also twice as strong
as that of the between-firm portion. This is true even if one compares the time-series coefficient of
variations instead of the time-series standard deviation, and similar patterns are observed in the
between-firm and within-firm dispersion of investment rates.
    As can be seen from Panel A.2. of Table A4, both V B (mrpk ) and V W (mrpk ) are countercyclical.
This result could have important implications for the uncertainty literature. If one interprets
dispersion as a cause of cycles, as do Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry
(2018) and Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014), then our within-firm result suggests that cycles
manifest themselves within as well as between firms. This means that looking at the granular level
of the firm, as Gabaix (2011) and Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) do, may underestimate the role of
dispersion for aggregate fluctuations. Since fluctuations in heterogeneity at the subgranular level
   29                                         ¨
    As do Kehrig (2015) and Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan, Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez (2017), we find an
upward trend in cross-sectional dispersion.


                                                          47
of plants within firms are larger and countercyclical, this suggests tha one should not discard the
dynamics inside multi-unit firms when studying business cycles.
    Lastly, we study which tail of the marginal revenue product and investment rate distribution
is more cyclically sensitive. This is motivated by recent work on cyclical capital reallocation and
the various frictions governing that process. Lanteri (2016), for example, develops an endogenous
process of capital reallocation based on capital resales that posits that the left, less productive tail
of the distribution of marginal revenue products is more cyclically sensitive. Panel B in Table A4
confirms this hypothesis empirically: The distance between the median and the 10th percentile is
more countercyclical than its corresponding portion in the upper tail of the marginal revenue prod-
uct of capital distribution. Such a cyclical pattern of the lower tail of the productivity distribution
has been shown to hold as well for TFP levels by Kehrig (2015).

A.9    Discussion
More generally, our findings in this section imply that welfare gains from a more efficient allocation
of resources would not only stem from reallocation across firms, but also within. This highlights the
importance of developing a better understanding of the factors that impede capital from flowing to
its most productive use inside the firm. As such, our findings have implications for micro-founded
macroeconomic models and their calibration. In much of the literature, the concepts of plants and
firms are used interchangeably, with little discussion of their respective roles and constraints. For
example, in the empirical uncertainty literature, plants are almost always interpreted as independent
decision makers facing various frictions that impede the reallocation of productive capital. Arguably,
some frictions, such as technological ones as in Bloom (2009) and Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich,
Saporta-Eksten, and Terry (2018), are indeed most relevant at the level of the plant. Yet others
are more likely to impact the decisions of firms. This is, for example, the case of external financing
constraints, which affect interactions between firms and their lenders, as in Christiano, Motto, and
Rostagno (2014).
    What is the link between firm-level financial frictions and mrpk dispersion? To investigate this
issue, we repeat our between-firm/within-firm decomposition on the sample of privately held firms
only. We find that the share of within-firm dispersion for private firms is higher than for the whole
sample, at 71% and 80% for mrpk and i/k , respectively. This is despite the fact that privately
held firms tend to operate fewer plants than their publicly traded counterparts, which, as discussed
earlier, leaves less room for within-firm dispersion in the first place.
    This result may appear surprising. After all, it could be expected that by impeding the efficient
allocation of capital, financial frictions would increase the dispersion of mrpk across firms. Yet our
results indicate that firm-level borrowing constraints may in fact shape the allocation of capital
across plants within the firm. This suggests that the internal capital market of a multi-plant firm
could play an important role in overcoming external financial frictions. In the next section, we aim
to gain insight into this channel by building a model of a multi-plant firm facing various types of
frictions, including financial ones.


B     Investment and financing policies
Here we present an illustration of the total cost of investing within the firm subject to the various
adjustment costs and financing constraints. In addition to the external financing constraint, this


                                                  48
illustration features a fixed cost of accessing external financial markets, a friction that we abandon
in our quantitative model because it plays little role.
    We plot the total cost of investment in Figure B1 to illustrate the multiple non-convexities and
how the interaction of investment across plants shapes the cost of investment for the firm. Note
that in these plots we assume that  , the parameter that regulates the fixed costs of investing in
a plant, is "small" in the sense that the minimum investment in one plant can be financed using
internal funds of the firm. If they were excessive, even the minimum investment to justify the
fixed investment adjustment costs would require borrowing. In that case, the effective fixed cost of
investing in any plant would be ( +  )knt .


C     Numerical solution of model
To solve the model, we discretize plant-level capital stock using an Nk -point grid, where Nk = 100
to produce the results in this paper. This implies that the two-plant capital grid contains a total
of 10,000 points. In addition, the shock process is approximated by an 8-point grid, from the
combination of plant-specific and firm-specific Markov chain processes.
    We use a hybrid iterative method to solve the model. First, we iterate and maximize over the
(kA , k  ) pairs of plant-specific capital until convergence of the policy function. Then, we continue
       B
iterating until changes in the value of the firm between iteration steps is below a given threshold
for all states.30 We then ensure that the policy function is indeed stable. This method, while
not particularly computationally efficient, allows us to handle the numerous non-convexities of our
model. We also tested to verify that lowering or increasing Nk did not have any meaningful impact
on our results.
    Next, we simulate a single two-plant firm over 100,500 periods, throw out the first 500 observa-
tions to allow for burn-in, and then create a panel of 500 two-plant firms with the simulations that
were kept. This approach is appropriate because there are no aggregate shocks in our setup: With
uncorrelated firm-level shocks, we are not required to simulate a panel of firms period-by-period.
Simulated moments are computed on this firm panel.
    However, since shocks are completely uncorrelated across firms in our panel, dispersion across
firms is mechanically higher than it would be if we allowed for aggregate disturbances. Because
our focus is not on aggregate time-series properties, we follow a different route and instead adjust
the between-firm dispersion measures in order to match the within-firm share of mrpk dispersion
found in the data (equal to 0.6; see Table 2). While this allows for more meaningful dispersion
comparisons across various scenarios, no other moments are affected by this adjustment.




   30
      Because we report the value of firms under various economic environments, we cannot solely rely on the conver-
gence of the policy function.


                                                        49
                                      Figure B1: Total cost of investment
   (a)    Total cost of investing in plant A when iB             (b)     Total cost of investing in plant A when iB
          can be fully financed internally                               cannot be financed internally

        Real and                                                         Real and
     Financial Cost                                                   Financial Cost




                           K                                             kA

                                                                        K
        kA
                                                      iA                                                iA
                               ­ iB     K +  ­ iB                                  K +  ­ iB

                                   (c) Total investment costs for the firm




Note: Panel (a) on the left displays total cost of investing in plant A when investment in the rest of the firm does
not exceed internal funds 0  iBt  t . Then, small amounts of iAt can be financed with left over internal funds
(t - iBt ) without incurring borrowing costs. Any investment exceeding that amount makes the cost level jump due
an additional fixed borrowing cost, denoted Kt . Panel (b) on the right displays the case when the firm already
needs to borrow to finance investment in the rest of the firm. Even zero investment in plant A means fixed and linear
borrowing costs Kt + R(iBt - t ). Investment in either case is always limited by the external financial constraint:
Et  K  iAt  K + t - iBt . Panel (c) shows the the total cost jointly for kAt = 1, kBt = 3,  =  = 0.02,
 = 0.04,  = 0.03,  = 0.1 and t = 1.4.



                                                            50
