                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    FREEING FINANCIAL EDUCATION VIA TABLETS:
                     EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM COLOMBIA

                                       Orazio Attanasio
                                        Matthew Bird
                                      Lina Cardona-Sosa
                                        Pablo Lavado

                                      Working Paper 25929
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25929


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019


This research was funded by Innovations for Poverty Action's Global Financial Inclusion
Innovation and Research Fund, which was supported by Citi Foundation. We also acknowledge
funding from the USAID-Skoll Innovation Investment Alliance which, with technical support
from Mercy Corps, financed the final wave of data collection. We thank Veronica Frisancho,
Xavi Giné, Dean Karlan, Olivia Mitchell, Silvia Prina, and Bilal Zia for inputs at various stages
of the research and analysis. We thank Colombia's Ministry of Social Prosperity, especially
Mariana Escobar Uribe and Maria Jose Uribe, for their collaboration. We are grateful to
Fundación Capital, including Any Benitez, Carolina Bonilla, Laura Cordero, Rodrigo de Reyes,
Magali de Varax, Franz Gómez, Miquel Jordana, Najin Kim, Yves Moury, Ana Pantelic,
Mauricio Romero, and Claudia Vergara, for implementation. We are grateful to Rebecca Rouse,
Beniamino Savonitto, and Pooja Wagh from Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA) for support, as
well as Sebastian Chaskel, Juan Sebastian Leiva, Juan Camilo Medina, Pablo Villar, and,
especially, Marta Carnelli from IPA Colombia for excellent field support and oversight. Finally,
we thank Ami Ichikawa, Bruno Esposito, Ana Paula Franco, and Jorge Zavala for research
assistance at the Universidad del Pacífico. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Orazio Attanasio, Matthew Bird, Lina Cardona-Sosa, and Pablo Lavado. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Freeing Financial Education via Tablets: Experimental Evidence from Colombia
Orazio Attanasio, Matthew Bird, Lina Cardona-Sosa, and Pablo Lavado
NBER Working Paper No. 25929
June 2019
JEL No. D14,D18,G21,I22,I38,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

Financial knowledge is critical for making sound decisions that foster financial health and protect
consumers from predation. A widely-used tool for building this capability is financial education.
Yet evidence suggests that conventional approaches which teach concepts in classroom-style
settings are ineffective and expensive at scale, especially for lower-income users. More recent
findings indicate that customizing financial education to the needs, interests, and location of
participants may increase impact, though doing so in a cost-effective and scalable way remains
challenging. This randomized evaluation of a tablet-based financial education program with
mostly female recipients of a conditional cash transfer (CCT) program in Colombia offers
evidence for how to design and scale an effective digital-based financial education program.
Results indicate that the LISTA Initiative had significant positive impacts on financial
knowledge, attitudes, practices, and performance, increasing for poorer, less educated, and more
rural populations, with users exhibiting increased financial health over two years later. Critical
mechanisms included well-designed content and a social learning component. Yet the longer-
term impact on formal financial inclusion was limited, suggesting the possible benefits of
combining supply-side solutions with financial education interventions.

Orazio Attanasio                                 Lina Cardona-Sosa
Department of Economics                          Institute for Fiscal Studies
University College London                        7 Ridgmount Street
Gower Street                                     London WC1E 7AE
London WC1E 6BT                                  United Kingdom
UNITED KINGDOM                                   lina_s@ifs.org.uk
and NBER
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk                            Pablo Lavado
                                                 Centro de Investigación de la Universidad
Matthew Bird                                     del Pacífico
Centro de Investigación de la Universidad        Universidad del Pacífico
del Pacífico                                     Av. Sánchez Cerro 2050
Universidad del Pacífico                         Jesús María Lima, Perú
Av. Sánchez Cerro 2098, Jesús María              p.lavadopadilla@up.edu.pe
Lima, Perú
bird_md@up.edu.pe



A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at AEARCTR-0000696
A Supplementary Material is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25929
1     Introduction
Around the world, levels of financial literacy correlate with better financial outcomes (Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2014). This empirical relationship has provided justification for financial education
interventions, which seek to transfer information, knowledge, and skills for managing financial
flows.1 Yet evidence of the impact of financial education programs and human capital theories of
financial knowledge indicate that the relationship between financial literacy and financial outcomes
is more complex than a simple case of cause (Hastings et al., 2013; Lusardi et al., 2017).
    Evidence of the effects of financial education remains mixed (Fernandes et al., 2014; Miller
et al., 2015; Kaiser and Menkhoff, 2017). Comparisons are difficult because program design and
quality vary based on user type, objectives, content, channel, intensity, and duration, to name a
few. Interventions targeting rural farmers in Rwanda, adolescents in Brazilian high schools, and
military enlistees at their place of work in the United Sates will differ. Regardless, some lessons have
emerged as meta-analytic reviews have incorporated more experimental evidence and adopted more
rigorous analytic methods. Financial education has been shown to increase knowledge, savings, and
record-keeping, domains in which the user has more control, compared to debt (Miller et al., 2015;
Kaiser and Menkhoff, 2017). Consistent impact is harder to create among lower-income participants
in developing countries as well as among higher-income users in more developed countries (Kaiser
and Menkhoff, 2017). Studies reveal that the number of hours of program exposure, i.e., intensity,
relates to impact (Miller et al., 2015; Kaiser and Menkhoff, 2017). Despite evidence of a financial
literacy gender gap favoring males, differential impacts by gender have not been found (Kaiser
and Menkhoff, 2017), (Bucher-Koenen et al., 2017). People with greater self-efficacy or locus of
control appear to benefit more from financial education (Fernandes et al., 2014; Miller et al., 2015),
suggesting that programs should also target psychological components. Although financial tasks
differ depending upon where one is in the life cycle, no systematic age effects emerge (Kaiser and
Menkhoff, 2017).
    Human capital theories, which model the endogenous relationship between financial literacy and
financial outcomes over the life cycle, propose explanations for how and when interventions may
have impact (Jappelli and Padula, 2013; Lusardi et al., 2017). Model predictions for the United
States show that the differential life-cycle investment in financial knowledge among income groups
with varying returns explains between 30 and 40 percent of retirement wealth inequality (Lusardi
et al., 2017). If social insurance programs exist, it may be rational for the lower-income population
to not invest in financial literacy (Hubbard et al., 1995; Lusardi et al., 2017). Finally, the stock
of financial literacy early in life is predicted to deliver compounded returns across the life-cycle
(Jappelli and Padula, 2013; Lusardi et al., 2017). The above models offer an explanation for why
interventions among lower-income populations may lead to less impact and why it may be more
    1
      For example, results from the Financial Development Barometer, an online poll conducted for the 2014 World
Bank Global Financial Development Report (GFDR), indicated that over 60 percent of officials from 21 developed
and 54 developing economies asserted that financial education was the most effective way to increase financial access
to lower-income citizens (see Miller et al., 2015).



                                                         1
cost-effective to focus on financial literacy earlier in life.
    Regardless, what some considered the disappointing results of financial education interventions
(Willis, 2011) led to a focus on the larger concept of financial inclusion and supply-side components
(Hastings et al., 2013). In developing countries, for example, scholars and practitioners have part-
nered to apply behavioral economic principles to product redesigns targeting limited self-control
and inattention. Commitment devices have proven effective, especially those of the soft variety,
such as labeled accounts, lock-boxes, and triggers (Ashraf et al., 2006; Duflo et al., 2011; Dupas
and Robinson, 2013; Brune et al., 2017). Changes in behavior may also reverse the direction of
the causal relationship between financial education programs and practices. While human capital
theories have not disentangled whether knowledge leads to behavior or behavior to knowledge, im-
pact evaluations of product redesigns offer evidence for the latter. In Rural Kenya, the effects of
a temporary incentive to save can persist for at least three years after the intervention (Schaner,
2018). In Afghanistan, default assignment into a savings treatment shifted attitudes towards saving
and increased the likelihood of doing so 18 months after the experiment ended. The authors suggest
that the experience of benefits from saving helped change perceptions (Blumenstock et al., 2018).
    Yet supply-side interventions, such as the savings products described above, may still leave
unaddressed an important goal of financial education: empowering consumers to take control of
their financial lives, improve their decisions, and protect themselves against predation (Hastings
et al., 2013). These issues are particularly relevant given expanding global access to the formal
financial system. In developing countries, consumer empowerment and protection become even
more critical with government adoption of financial inclusion policies (many of which are tied to
cash transfer programs) and technological innovations (such as mobile banking and digital payment
services), which increase the number of people entering the formal financial system (Karlan et al.,
2016a; Demirguc-Kunt et al., 2017). One estimate claims that three of every four newly banked
global poor had never received any form of financial training (Deb and Kubzansky, 2012). Merely
banking the unbanked is thus not enough (Dupas et al., 2018). Just as financial education gave
way to financial inclusion, practitioners have begun to reconsider the objectives and implications of
financial inclusion policies and refocus on financial health, the ability to create and manage financial
systems that protect against shocks and create opportunities (CSFI, 2017; Prabhajar, 2018).
    As financial access increases for lower-income populations, the lack of financial literacy or capa-
bility may hinder optimal use of new products or, at worst, leave consumers vulnerable to predatory
services, as seen in the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the United States or microcredit overindebt-
                                        erin et al., 2015; Mader, 2015; Bateman et al., 2018).2 A
edness crises in Nicaragua and India (Gu´
critical challenge, especially in developing countries, is how to offer impactful, cost-effective, and
scalable financial education that helps lower-income citizens become more informed consumers who
can use newly accessed financial services to better leverage their earned or transferred resources to
   2
     Beyond supply- and demand-side interventions, regulation is a third option for protecting consumers against
predatory financial practices, as seen with the creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in the United
States (Hastings et al., 2013). See also Gine et al. (2014) and Fort et al. (2016) for studies on the influence of bank
financial information disclosure a practice which may be regulated by authorities.



                                                          2
improve their financial health.
    In this paper, we estimate the impact of a tablet-based application that incorporated simplified,
concrete, targeted, timely, engaging, and interactive content on savings and budgeting via a delivery
method that relied on local community leaders to rotate the tablets among mostly female recipients
of M´                  on, a conditional cash transfer (CCT) program in Colombia.3 As the
    as Familias en Acci´
evaluation sample is followed over time and the survey data are linked to bank administrative and
credit system records, we are able to track how the intervention's impacts on a variety of outcomes
change over time. The data's richness allows us to interpret the observed effects and their evolution.
    Our results show that the intervention had significant positive impacts on financial knowledge,
attitudes, practices, and performance, translating into increased financial health 25 months after
the end of the intervention. Although the impacts on certain outcomes were stronger immediately
following and seven months after the intervention ended, for a subset of outcomes we find persistent
positive impacts. For a few outcomes, the impacts observed 25 months after the intervention are
actually higher than those observed at just following it. Initially, women who received the LISTA
tablets demonstrated better understanding of savings and budgeting concepts, expressed stronger
preferences for saving formally rather than informally, reported more trust in banks, and professed
more optimism in general. LISTA participants were also more likely to set savings goals, felt more
capable of teaching others how to use ATMs, and reported more informal savings. These results,
based on self-report, are mirrored in administrative bank data, which also indicated higher savings
account balances three months after the intervention. Seven months after the intervention, many
of the impacts held but with smaller magnitudes. When measured 25 months after the intervention
concluded, the impact on knowledge, attitudes, and practices waned and even disappeared in some
cases, yet the impact on savings strengthened while the use of formal credit, based on credit history
administrative data, decreased.
    We also observe some heterogeneity in the impacts. In general, estimated impacts are larger for
poorer, less educated, younger, and more rural populations. These heterogeneous patterns seen over
time are consistent with a story that explains the intervention's effects as resulting from providing
important information to the households that needed it most.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 situates the study within the
existing evidence-base on what works or could work within financial education programs and in-
troduces the policy context, target population, and tablet program. Sections 3 and 4 outline the
experimental design and empirical strategy. Section 5 presents the main results before exploring
heterogeneous effects and possible mechanisms in section 6. Section 7 concludes.


2       Financial Education and the LISTA Program
Effective financial intermediation via formal or informal savings, credit or insurance markets is
crucial for any household, be they a suburban home in the United States or semi-subsistence
    3
     Although the MFA program targets women, there are a minority of male beneficiaries. In our study sample, 91
percent were female.


                                                       3
families in the Peruvian Amazon. Access to and the ability to operate efficiently in such markets
is especially critical for lower-income families, who struggle to match volatile and unpredictable
income streams with volatile and unpredictable spending needs (Collins et al., 2009). Yet enabling
for smoothing and overcoming shocks to current income in order to ensure survival is only part of
the task of public policy and welfare systems. To escape poverty and vulnerability, poor households
also face the challenge of accumulating savings to invest in human or business capital, with the hope
of increasing income over the long-term. Financing these investments requires good understanding
of the importance of saving and financial access. If lower-income households can access and navigate
comfortably financial systems that smooth income and consumption, protect them against shocks,
and enable investment, then they may be considered as financially healthy (CSFI, 2017).
    Since credit and insurance markets are often imperfect or inaccessible for poor households
(Karlan and Morduch, 2010; Morduch, 1995), savings mobilization may be perceived as the most
viable option for creating financial health. Regardless, supply-side barriers to savings remain,
given account opening or maintenance fees, transportation costs, inconvenience, or poorly designed
products, which fail to take into account client needs or behavioral biases. Demand-side barriers
to savings include decision biases as well as a lack of consumer information, knowledge, attitudes,
preferences, and skills, all of which may affect the adoption of formal or informal savings practices
and hinder usage following take-up (Karlan et al., 2014).
    The LISTA para Ahorrar or "Ready to Save" program was created with the premise that
generating savings was the most effective tool for supporting poor households in Latin America.
Designed by Fundaci´
                   on Capital, the intervention grew out of a regional initiative, Proyecto Capital,
which sought to leverage Latin America's conditional cash transfer (CCT) infrastructure by com-
bining automatic opening of bank accounts (supply) with financial education (demand) to promote
savings.4 Proyecto Capital emerged in the mid-2000s amid the movement towards delivery of cash
transfers via bank accounts and wariness of microcredit approaches to poverty reduction. At that
time, Latin American governments had created and expanded CCT programs focusing on education
and child health, with evidence of impact.5 Meanwhile, mixed evidence of microcredit's impact
started to appear (Morduch and Roodman, 2014; Banerjee et al., 2015). Some argued that micro-
credit might be more beneficial for people living above the extreme poverty threshold, while CCT
programs were better suited for the financially vulnerable (Panteli´
                                                                   c, 2011). In parallel, Fundaci´
                                                                                                 on
Capital's founders gained experience with a rural women's savings programs in the Peruvian Andes
(FIDA, 2004b,a; Edge Finance, 2007). This confluence led to the founding of Proyecto Capital.6
    A central challenge for Fundaci´
                                   on Capital was how to leverage the CCT infrastructure to offer
impactful, cost-effective financial education at scale. The organization concluded that any solution
   4
      For more information on Fundaci´   on Capital and its programs, see https://fundacioncapital.org/.
   5
      For Mexico see Gertler (2004); for Colombia see Attanasio and Mesnard (2006); for an early review in Latin
America see Handa and Davis (2006); for a systematic global review see Bastagli et al. (2016).
    6
      Funded by the Ford Foundation and IDRC, the initiative rested on the argument that increased savings would
help users smooth consumption, buffer against shocks, and invest in human and productive capital, while the targeting
of women was seen as the most effective way to improve resource use and break the household reproduction of poverty
(Duflo, 2012; Alm° as et al., 2018). See Maldonado (2018) for reflections on the program's learnings.



                                                         4
required moving away from traditional, in-person interventions, which called for a physical space,
skilled instructors, and printed materials (Cohen and Nelson, 2011), and risked low participation
rates since beneficiaries incur transportation and opportunity costs to attend multiple sessions (e.g.,
Seshan and Yang, 2012).
   Fundaci´
          on Capital sought to "free" financial education via a tablet-based application guided
by three principles: tablet use would not require the physical presence of a trainer since the pupil
would bring the teacher (the tablet) into the home; users could work through the content at their
own pace; and tablet use may foster content customization since people could focus on topics
most relevant to them. Piloting began in Colombia in 2012, with a second version tested in 2014.
The result was an evidence-based intervention which incorporated simplified, actionable, concrete,
targeted, timely, engaging, and interactive content via a delivery method that relied on a network
of local female community leaders, a trusted channel which could activate social learning.
   LISTA's approach and original content was developed from the lessons learned in a variety
of contexts. Although traditional financial education programs often provide broad theoretical
content, concrete, simplified and focused messages are better retained and more actionable (e.g.,
                         ¨ umen and Cheema, 2011). A randomized evaluation in the Dominican
Soman and Zhao, 2011; Ulk¨
Republic, for example, revealed that the teaching of rules of thumb to micro-entrepreneurs not
only made the tips easier to remember but spurred action, resulting in differences in practices and
revenues compared to a control and traditional education treatment (Drexler et al., 2014).
   Meta-analysis also suggests that financial education has more impact in domains where people
have greater control, such as budgeting and savings, with less impact in areas contingent on the
decisions of other actors, such as loan default (Miller et al., 2015). Furthermore, since omitted psy-
chometric variables such as self-efficacy and self-control may relate to improved outcomes (Hsiaw,
2013), more explicit focus on these elements may complement traditional content (Fernandes et al.,
2014). For example, a focus on goal-setting, which affects self-control, has proven effective for
                                                                  ¨ umen and Cheema, 2011).
encouraging savings (Carpena et al., 2017; Soman and Zhao, 2011; Ulk¨
   Content conveyed via emotions and stories are better remembered and acted upon. Laboratory
experiments find that fear makes people more risk-averse and anger spurs more risk seeking (Lerner
and Keltner, 2001), while sadness creates a myopic focus (Lerner et al., 2013) and fosters more
consumption (Garg and Lerner, 2013). For example, conveying disgust and sadness via film clips
has led to differential buying and selling decisions in laboratory settings (Lerner et al., 2004).
Likewise, stories are intimately linked to memory and action (e.g., Tulving, 2002, for episodic
memory). Exposure to soap operas which use emotionally-laden storytelling techniques has had
effects on divorce (Chong and Ferrara, 2009) and fertility rates (La Ferrara et al., 2012). Finally, the
seeding of financial education content in a South African soap opera increased financial knowledge
and shifted borrowing and credit-use habits (Berg and Zia, 2017). Given message recall, the authors
hypothesize that the story-driven emotional connection was critical for generating impact.
   Content is also made more engaging via practice and interaction, such as gamification, which
taps into distinct learning pathways, i.e., learning by doing or experiential learning (Kolb, 2014).


                                                   5
Games may be particularly useful in low-literacy contexts as an alternative learning channel, though
to our knowledge the field still lacks rigorous evidence of gamification's impact.
   Finally, timing matters. First, information or reminders that are made just-in-time when people
are about to make decisions have a greater likelihood of impact (Karlan et al., 2016b). Second,
longer and more intense programs may improve results (Miller et al., 2015; Kaiser and Menkhoff,
2017; Lusardi et al., 2017), but there is a trade-off. Programs with longer duration can increase
costs and attrition.
   In sum, simplified, actionable, concrete, targeted, and timely content that taps into emotions
and stories may be more effective, and both, like gamification, are more engaging and thus more
motivating for users. Together these components may enhance retention while spurring behavior.
The LISTA tablet-based application incorporated these insights. Repeated testing resulted in
simplified content with a focus on savings and budget management, as well as information on
the participating bank and the CCT program (see Appendix A). Simple, concrete, and actionable
goal-focused messages were developed and reinforced by integrating audio, inspirational testimonial
videos, educational games, and interactive ATM and mobile banking simulators. The use of multiple
media sought to overcome literacy barriers and provide an entertaining educational experience,
while empowering users through messaging and technology use. With tablet access, users could
review the content as much or little as they wanted within a time frame. Since the application
did not require Internet access, it was readily accessible even in remote rural areas. Finally, after
the tablet intervention, SMS nudge messages were timed to be sent just before and after the MFA
program's bi-monthly cash transfers.
   But the impact of even well-designed content will be blunted if not delivered well. The degree
of trust that the receiver has of the messenger is critical for the attention given to the message
(Pornpitakpan, 2006). In financial education, the trust users have in a program or its channels
(i.e., radio, television, SMS) may affect both take-up and perception of the program's utility. Social
learning interventions also serve as a kind of channel in their ability to amplify messages via peers
and networks (Duflo and Saez, 2003; Beshears et al., 2015). In other contexts the use of "near-peers"
have been useful for mentoring in secondary and higher education settings since pupils identify more
with the near-peer, are more likely to trust the shared information, and are communicated to in a
register that pupils better understand (Bulte et al., 2007; Terrion and Leonard, 2007).
   To reach as many people as possible in Colombia, Fundaci´
                                                           on Capital experimented with several
implementation strategies, before selecting a rotation approach. In Colombia, as in other contexts,
the CCT beneficiaries, which include the 20 percent poorest households, elect a representative as
a local leader and spokesperson for the program. As the cash transfers are targeted predominantly
                                                              ideres or "mother leaders."7 These
to women, in Colombia these representatives are called madre l´
local representatives are responsible for communicating MFA program information to, on average,
the 20 to 80 women they represent. Furthermore, the madre l´
                                                           ider organizes periodic meetings
of the program beneficiaries, where a number of activities are planned. This infrastructure had
   7
       In Mexico they are known as vocales or promotoras.



                                                            6
already been used to deliver successfully other interventions such as home visiting programs for
early childhood development, as discussed in Attanasio et al. (2014), who report that the madres
l´
 ideres are typically better educated and generally better off than the average beneficiary.
    Fundaci´
           on Capital thus decided to use this infrastructure to deliver the intervention. The tablet
was thus rotated for a month by madres l´
                                        ideres among beneficiary mothers within their group,
either by visiting their homes and leaving the tablet for one or two nights and/or by convening
mothers to their homes or community centers where they completed the tablet training in groups.
After one month, a facilitator retrieved the tablet and rotated it with a new madre l´
                                                                                     ider in the
municipality. On average, madres l´
                                  ideres reached 20 mothers per month. For the LISTA para
Ahorrar program, tablets were distributed to madres l´
                                                     ideres in 30 municipalities, reaching 100,000
program beneficiaries. The intervention was also combined with distribution of a physical LISTA
kit, which included calendars with stickers to create a savings plan and simplified accounting books,
both of which sought to scaffold new behavior. Finally, 14 SMS messages were sent to a subset
of the tablet recipients over a four-month period after the tablet intervention, with the goal of
reinforcing knowledge and reminding users to save (see section 9 in the Supplementary Material
document).


3     Experimental Design
The experimental design estimates the impact that the LISTA treatment has on financial knowl-
edge, attitudes, practice adoption, and performance relative to a control group. To estimate these
impacts we designed a cluster randomised controlled trial, where the randomization was performed
across a number of municipalities. The experiment's cluster design avoids spillover effects between
treated and untreated madres l´
                              ideres which could have biased the estimates of the impacts. As a
municipality is randomized either into treatment or control groups, subjects in the latter cannot
be affected by the program being implemented with beneficiaries they know.

3.1   Municipality Selection
Municipalities were selected based on government and research criteria. Prosperidad Social, the
government entity responsible for the M´
                                       as Familias en Acci´
                                                          on (MFA) program, wanted to target
the most vulnerable population. Eligible municipalities therefore needed to be category 3 or 4,
according to Colombian state law, which meant that they were medium or small in population
and budget size. The municipality's Multidimensional Poverty Index needed to be greater than
66.5 percent, ensuring that the average target population in the municipality was "vulnerable"
compared to the national average of 24.8 percent. At least 2,600 MFA beneficiaries needed to live
in each municipality, permitting the program to reach 100,000 beneficiaries. At least one active
bank or ATM machine needed to exist in the municipality, providing the population with at least
minimal access to the formal financial system, though participants in remote areas may have still
had difficulties accessing these financial channels. No other government-related financial education


                                                  7
programs could be active in the municipality. Finally, municipalities needed to be geographically
proximate to minimize operational costs. Sixty municipalities distributed among eight departments
in Colombia's two poorest regions, the Caribbean and Pacific, met these criteria (see Appendix B).8
    To ensure covariate balance among the treatment and control municipalities, randomization
blocks were created based on region (Caribbean or Pacific), average poverty marker or SISBEN
points9 at the municipality level, and distance to closest department capital. Block randomization
helped account for economic vulnerability, access to financial markets, and geography, with the
latter also proxying for sub-national cultural differences. A 2x2x2 stratification was created; within
each, municipalities were randomized into control and treatment.10

3.2    Beneficiary Selection
We developed a strategy to identify the beneficiaries most likely to receive the tablet in the control
and treatment municipalities. Several elements were considered: LISTA was a voluntary program
offered to madres l´
                   ideres of a group of existing MFA beneficiaries, the selected sample had to be
statistically identical between control and treatment municipalities, and baseline surveys had to
occur before the intervention. Given the role madres l´
                                                      ideres played in the final selection of LISTA
users, we created a list of the beneficiaries most likely to be selected by the madres l´
                                                                                        ideres.
    MFA beneficiaries are organized into groups ranging from on average 20 to 80, with each led
by a madre l´
            ider. Based on pilots of the LISTA rotation methodology, one tablet was estimated to
reach 20 and 30 beneficiaries. Given this, 11 madres l´
                                                      ideres per municipality were randomly selected
and contacted. They were asked to identify 18 to 21 beneficiaries in their group who they would
consider approaching to participate in a generic financial training program. From those identified
beneficiaries, four to six were randomly selected and surveyed at baseline, with the expectation of
some sample attrition, especially during the first approximation. Since data indicated whether the
madres l´
        ideres were in rural or urban environments, a representative selection of madres l´
                                                                                          ideres
was ensured. Overall, 615 madres l´
                                  ideres were contacted and 13,216 individual beneficiaries were
identified, with 3,136 CCT recipients surveyed as part of the baseline survey.
     8
       The Colombian government contracts with two banks, Banco Agrario and Davivienda, to open and make transfers
into accounts. At the time, Banco Agrario served the largest number of MFA beneficiaries, mostly because it had
better coverage in smaller and more remote municipalities. Of the 60 municipalities identified for randomization, 54
were served by Banco Agrario and six by Davivienda. MFA beneficiaries have the option of withdrawing the transfers
via an ATM, while Davivienda offered mobile banking services. The LISTA tablet provided information for both
withdrawal types, depending on the account specified by the beneficiary.
     9
       The SISBEN is an information system used by the Colombian National Government to determine eligible ben-
eficiaries of social programs, such as the M´
                                            as Familas en Acci´
                                                              on CCT program.
    10
       Upon completion of the LISTA implementation five months after baseline, a second randomization was performed
for the SMS nudge message treatment. This required a cluster randomization at the mother leader level, in order
to prevent spillover between recipients with the same mother leader from biasing estimates. Only those mother
leaders whose recipients reported receiving the tablet were included in the randomization. Randomization blocks
were constructed according to the average number of MFA beneficiaries per leader in order to ensure sample size
balance.




                                                         8
3.3      Sample Characteristics
Ninety-one percent of the sample was female, averaging 39 years of age at baseline (SD 10.34 years,
minimum age 18.55, maximum age 83.58). Fifty-one percent lived in rural areas, which was higher
than the national average of 24 percent. Nearly 10 percent of the sample considered themselves
indigenous, over double the 4 percent national average. These characteristics reflected the govern-
ment's goal of targeting Colombia's most vulnerable communities. However, the proportion of the
population living in rural areas varied by department and region. Forty percent of the Caribbean
and 75 percent of the Pacific regions were rural. Sixty-eight percent of the total sample lived in
the Caribbean, with 32 percent from the Pacific.
     Sampled households averaged five members, with two younger than 18 and less than one (0.4)
considered a senior citizen. Over half of the beneficiaries practiced Catholicism; 19 percent were
married, while 58 percent co-habitated or lived in free union; 54 percent owned their home; and
53 percent lived in houses with cement or gravel floors. Overall, 46 percent had primary education
and 41 percent reached secondary schooling. The average number of people working per household
(either formally or informally) was 1.4. In 14 percent of the households, nobody worked or received
monetary remuneration for labor activities in a designated period of time prior to the baseline
survey, though this may have been due to the cyclical nature of remunerated work in rural areas.
Reported expenditures were relatively homogeneous, with spending increasing less than proportion-
ally with each additional household member. Most of the sample households (87 percent) spent
weekly between 50,000 and 150,000 Colombian pesos (COP) or approximately US$ 2.55 to US$
7.65 per day.


4        Empirical Strategy
This section describes our estimation approach. We start with a discussion of the empirical spec-
ifications estimated. We then describe the data used and the balance between the treatment and
control sample prior to the program. Finally, we discuss attrition.

4.1      Estimation Approach
This paper evaluates the short-, medium-, and long-term impact of the LISTA tablet intervention
on financial attitudes, knowledge, practices, performance, and psychosocial indicators. The cluster
randomized controlled trial we designed allows us to estimate these effects, comparing the outcomes
of interest between MFA beneficiaries in tablet treatment versus control municipalities.11
     Our analysis presents intention-to-treat (ITT) impacts, that is, comparison of the means of those
assigned to receive LISTA with those in the control group. In other words, all beneficiaries living in
municipalities randomly assigned to the treatment group are considered as treated, independently
of whether they actually received the tablet. Based on self-reported and telemetric data, 77.5
    11
    For the SMS treatment, the evaluation compared LISTA tablet beneficiaries who received SMS messages vs.
LISTA tablet beneficiaries who did not.


                                                    9
percent of people surveyed reported receiving the LISTA tablet. We also compared the people who
effectively received LISTA to the control group by instrumenting actual use of the tablets with a
dummy indicating whether or not the beneficiary was randomized into the treatment group.12
    We focus on the ITT analysis to avoid issues that could arise from possible self-selection effects
within the treatment group. An additional advantage of this more conservative approach is we can
interpret the experimental intervention as a policy, in the sense that we estimate impact for targeted
beneficiaries of the program and not just those who used the LISTA tablet. For the remainder of
this article, the term "the impact of LISTA" refers to the ITT estimation.
    The core regression framework used for the estimation was:

                                        Yim = 0 + 1 Tim + x Xi +           i                                     (1)

Where 1 measures the impact of LISTA, and Yim is the outcome variable of interest for individual
i in municipality m. Whether a beneficiary was assigned to receive a tablet is determined by Tim .
Xim is a set of characteristics of the respondents at the baseline and includes both demographic
and outcome variables. When available, we condition on the baseline level of the outcome variable
to improve statistical power (McKenzie, 2012; McConnell and Vera-Hern´
                                                                     andez, 2015). Finally,                        i
is the error term. To compute standard errors, we cluster the residuals at the municipality                 level.13



4.2    Data
Data included four survey rounds plus administrative data from the government, two banks, and
credit records.14 Baseline data were collected after the randomization and sample definition, but
prior to the intervention. These data were used to check for balance and as control variables
in subsequent analysis. A specialized survey firm working under the research team's supervision
conducted a phone survey baseline in late April and early May 2015.
    Data for the first follow-up survey were gathered after the LISTA implementation and enabled
a short-term measurement of impact five months after baseline, just following the end of the tablet
intervention (see Appendix C). The first follow-up data collection was performed via the Prosperidad
Social call center, under the research team's guidance and supervision in late September and early
October 2015. The second follow-up survey data were collected in person by the same survey firm
7 months after the tablet treatment ended, in April and May 2016 and also under the research
team's supervision. A third follow-up survey was conducted over the phone 25 months after the
intervention ended. The same firm as that which conducted the baseline and second follow-up
   12
      This Treatment-on-the-Treated (ToT) analysis provided similar results to the ITT findings, though with slightly
higher magnitudes, as expected. Results are available in section 6 of the Supplemental Materials document.
   13
      We measured the impact of SMS messages by comparing SMS recipients vs. tablet-only recipients. To estimate
the effect of the SMS treatment in the second and third follow-ups, we control for the baseline and first follow-up,
since the SMS intervention began after the first follow-up. We added a dummy variable dim , to account for missing
data from the first follow-up survey (equal to 1 for missing values and 0 otherwise), thus dummying out the missing
data and preserving the full sample found at the second and third follow-ups.
   14
      These data were obtained via agreements with the Department of Social Prosperity and, later, the Central Bank
of Colombia, who granted data access while co-author Lina Cardona worked in the latter entity.


                                                         10
survey collected the data under the research team's supervision in November 2017.
   Survey data were complemented with administrative and demographic data provided by Pros-
peridad Social (e.g. the SISBEN points and household composition). Prosperidad Social also
facilitated access to anonymous bank data through December 2015. Finally, the Colombian finan-
cial superintendency enabled access to credit system data through December 2017. Measurement
focused on five classes of outcomes: financial attitudes, financial knowledge, financial practices,
financial performance, and psychosocial indicators.
   To measure the effect of the tablet on financial performance, we use two different sources of
administrative information. First, we estimate the effect of the tablet intervention on formal savings
and transactionality or frequency of use of formal financial services using bank administrative data
(from May to December 2015) following an ANCOVA specification for each two-month moving
average. Due to data privacy laws in Colombia, we were unable to match survey data with the
bank administrative data. We standardized average savings using the mean and variance from
January 2014 data. Controls for this estimation include having an account with Banco Agrario
(vs. Davivienda), two-month average monthly savings between January 2014 and April 2015,
the number of financial institutions in the municipal district, randomization blocks, and a set of
municipal-level socioeconomic covariates.
   We estimate the impact of LISTA on credit and debt following the regression specification in
equation (1), using credit system data between the third quarter of 2015 until the end of 2017.
While the bank data was anonymous and we were not able to match the individual observations
with our survey data, we were able to match individual observations with credit records from the
Central Bank of Colombia. Credit records data contain indicators about the type of consumer
credit (i.e., whether it is a standard loan or a credit card), the institution that provided the credit,
outstanding debt amount, the number of default days, among others. Between 2004 and 2017, 10
percent of the sample were found at least once in the dataset, i.e., having at least one credit.

4.3    Treatment-Control Balance
The baseline survey collected data over the phone for 3,136 individuals, 1,567 of which were in the
treatment. For the first follow-up, a sub-sample of 2,526 beneficiaries was administered the survey
over the phone, with 1,267 in the treatment. For the second follow-up, 2,327 people were surveyed
in person, with 1,172 in the treatment. Finally, for the third follow-up, 2,202 people were surveyed
over the phone, with 1,096 in the treatment.
   Table 2 compares the control and treatment groups on a subset of baseline measures. Respon-
dents in both groups were statistically identical in terms of household characteristics, savings, MFA,
and ATM practices. Only one of 36 demographic and outcome variables measured at baseline was
significant.




                                                  11
                                        Table 1: Variable Description


 Variable                                                Description

 Financial Knowledge
  Knowledge: savings (S)                                 0­3 score based on 3 comparable "True or False" questions
  Knowledge: budget (B)                                  0­2 score based on 2 comparable "True or False" questions
  Knowledge: debt (D)                                    0­2 score based on 2 comparable "True or False" questions
  Knowledge: total score                                 0­7 score (S + B + D)
  Knowledge extended: savings (Se)                       0­4 score based on 4 "True or False" questions
  Knowledge extended: budget (Be)                        0­3 score based on 3 "True or False" questions
  Knowledge extended: debt (De)                          0­4 score based on 4 "True or False" questions
  Knowledge extended: math                               0­2 score based on 2 "True or False" questions
  Knowledge extended: total score                        0­11 score (Se + Be + De)
 Financial attitudes
  Has a savings goal                                     Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
  Believes can leave money in MFA account                Dummy variable
  Trust in bank                                          1 to 4 scale (Little=1, Not much=2, Some=3, A lot=4)
  Comfort with banks                                     1 to 4 scale (Little=1, Not much=2, Some=3, A lot=4)
  Preference: money in bank vs. cash                     1 to 6 scale (Always cash taker=1, Always bank taker=6)a/
  Intertemporal preference: today over one month ahead   1 to 4 scale (Always a month ahead=1, Always today=4)a/
 Financial practices (ATM, MFA)
  Manages household finances                             Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Keeps written track of accounts                        Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Withdrew last MFA transfer                             Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Accompanied when withdrew                              Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Has money in MFA account (today)                       Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Leaves money in MFA account                            Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Someone helped use ATM                                 Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Feels can teach ATM use                                Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Has taught someone use ATM                             Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Has a MFA card                                         Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
 Financial practices (budgeting)
  In case of a 350k emergency:
    Would use savings                                    Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
    Would use loans                                      Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
    Would sell or pawn something                         Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
    Would look for a job                                 Dummy      variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  In case of receiving 300k extra:
    Would save                                           Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
    Would spend on healthcare or education               Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
    Would build, improve or buy a house                  Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
    Would spend on household expenses                    Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
    Would invest in business                             Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
  Was able to cover household expenses                   Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
  Household weekly expenses                              Last week expenses (COP standardized)

a/ Own construction based on a set of two alternatives questions.




                                                         12
                                   Table 1: Variable Description (continued)


 Variable                                                Description

 Financial practices (savings)
  Formal or informal savings                             Dummy    variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Formal savings: bank or cooperative                    Dummy    variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Informal savings: piggy bank or other places           Dummy    variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Save money in piggy bank                               Dummy    variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
  Save money in bank account                             Dummy    variable   (Yes=1,   No=0)
 Financial Performance (self-reported)
  Total amount of formal and informal savings            Sum of formal and informal savings (COP standardized)
  Total amount of formal savings                         Sum of savings in bank and cooperative (COP standardized)
  Total informal savings                                 Sum of savings in piggy bank and other places (COP standardized)
  Amount of savings in piggy bank                        In COP standardized
  Amount of savings in a bank                            In COP standardized
 Financial performance (savings) - Administrative data
  Two-month moving averages                              In Colombian Pesos standardized
 Financial Performance (credit) - Administrative data
  Credit                                                 Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
  Consumption credit                                     Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
  Credit with banks                                      Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
  Credit card                                            Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
  Default                                                Dummy variable (Yes=1, No=0)
  Max. default days                                      Maximum number of days in default per year
  Amount of debt                                         In Colombian Pesos, standardized
  Credit card debt                                       In Colombian Pesos, standardized
  Consumption credit debt                                In Colombian Pesos, standardized
  Average number of credits                              Number of credits per year
 Psychosocial Indicators
  Optimism                                               1 to 7 scale (1=Not at all optimistic, 7=Very optimistic)
  Pessimism                                              1 to 7 scale (1=Not at all pessimistic, 7=Very pessimistic)
  People trust                                           Dummy variable (Believes people are trustworthy=1)
  More trustworthy of other people                       1 to 4 scale (Can trust a little in other people=1, Can trust a lot=1)
  Interested in savings program                          1 to 4 scale (Little interested=1, A lot=4)
  There are lots of ways around any problem              1 to 7 scale (Completely disagree=1, Completely agree=7)
   Is meeting her goals                                  1 to 7 scale (Completely disagree=1, Completely agree=7)
  Self-efficacy                                          1 to 4 scale (Low self-efficacy=1, High self-efficacy=4)b/
  Future orientation                                     1 to 4 scale (Low future orientation=1, High=4)b/
  Social capital                                         1 to 3 scale (Low social capital=1, High=3)c/


b/ Own construction based on three 1 to 4 scale questions.
c/ Own construction based on three "Yes/No" questions.




                                                             13
4.4   Attrition
For the first follow-up survey, 81 percent of the baseline respondents were successfully re-interviewed.
Response rates for the second and third follow-ups were 74 and 70 percent of baseline respondents,
respectively. This attrition was due in large part to budget constraints which prevented survey-
ing the entire sample at each follow-up, allowing for data collection of 2,500 subjects for the first
follow-up and 2,300 for the second follow-up. An attempt was made to reach 2,500 subjects for
the third follow-up but due mostly to disconnected cellular numbers, 2,202 surveys were completed
for the third follow-up. It is important to note that 2,983 people (95 percent of the sample) were
surveyed at least once after baseline, as part of the first, second or third follow-up surveys.
   To assess the possible impact of sample attrition, a balance analysis was performed for each
survey round. We estimate the probability of attrition as a function of a treatment dummy and
a range of respondent and household characteristics, controlling for randomization blocks. Results
indicate no significant difference between attrition levels in the control and treatment groups.
Some covariate controls did correlate at different moments with the probability of attrition in
the first, second and third follow-up surveys. At separate points, the probability of attrition was
negatively correlated with age, years of schooling, whether the beneficiary belongs to an urban
district, and whether the beneficiary receives money via account deposits. Having an account with
Banco Agrario, which had a greater ratio of clients in rural areas, was also positively related to
attrition status. In other words, younger, rural, and less educated individuals were harder to reach
in general in the follow-up surveys, regardless of whether they were conducted over the phone or
in person. In sum, the analysis suggests that treatment was not related to attrition status. Some
variables, in particular, years of schooling, area (urban or rural) and type of bank account (deposit
or wire transfer), may be correlated with respondent attrition. Yet the effect of this attrition on
results is marginal at most. The analysis presented in this section considers attrition between
the baseline and the first, second, and third follow-ups, with only 5 percent of the sample not
re-interviewed at all in the follow-up surveys. Also, the coefficients and significances detected in
estimations with and without control are highly similar, suggesting that the attrition effect (if
present) does not represent a major threat to the validity of results. Regardless, we present results
for the intervention with controls for those characteristics. (See section 5 of the Supplemental
Material for estimates without controls.)




                                                  14
                                          Table 2: Baseline Balance Checks


                                                                                               Treatment group
                                                                             Control              - Control
                                                             Obs     Obs     Mean       SD      Coeff.    p-value

              Household characteristics
                Education level                             3,127    1,569    3.572    0.897    -0.044     0.394
                Years of education                          3,127    1,569    9.723    4.311    -0.167     0.487
                Members per household                       3,126    1,569    5.224    1.976    -0.046     0.664
                Children per household                      3,126    1,569    2.357    1.267    -0.005     0.939
                Worker in the household1/                   3,127    1,569    0.874    0.331    -0.032     0.373
                Workers per household                       3,127    1,569    1.467    1.015    -0.074     0.340
                Urban1/                                     3,119    1,566    0.486    0.500     0.015     0.796
              M´
               as Familias en Acci´on
                Withdrawal accompanied1/                    2,556    1,260    0.404    0.491    0.036      0.144
                ATM withdrawal1/                            2,553    1,260    0.710    0.453    0.054      0.201
                ATM use1/                                   2,923    1,461    0.444    0.497    0.047      0.241
                Believes can teach ATM use1/                1,392     664     1.303    0.936    0.011      0.874
                Believes can leave money in account1/       2,514    1,264    0.584    0.493    0.014      0.618
                Money left in account1/                     2,047    1,009    0.525    0.500    0.021      0.493
              Budget
                Budget control1/                            3,125    1,568    1.496    0.774    -0.012     0.680
                Written budget1/                            2,566    1,289    0.221    0.414    -0.005     0.794
                Budget income and expenses written1/         561      283    0.770     0.421    -0.044     0.185
                Last week expenses                          2,869    1,421   -0.009    0.966     0.012     0.855
                Savings for 100k COP emergency1/            3,092    1,551    0.281    0.449     0.029     0.145
                Loans for 100k COP emergency1/              3,092    1,551    0.655    0.476    -0.018     0.410
                Other for 100k COP emergency1/              3,092    1,551    0.064    0.248    -0.011     0.310
                Was able to cover household expenses1/      3,119    1,567    2.804    0.858     0.013     0.643
                Has applied for loan from bank1/            3,126    1,569    0.307    0.461     0.021     0.365
                Loan from bank approved1/                    989      481    0.877     0.331     0.014     0.534
              Savings
                Has savings goal1/                          3,122    1,566    0.461    0.499     0.035     0.166
                Has savings in piggy bank1/                 3,122    1,566    0.413    0.492     0.026     0.284
                Has informal savings1/                      3,126    1,568    0.418    0.493     0.023     0.335
                Total informal savings (standardized)       3,126    1,568    0.008    1.071    -0.015     0.698
                Has savings in bank account1/               3,118    1,563    0.158    0.365    -0.001     0.917
                Has savings in cooperative1/                3,126    1,568    0.024    0.154    -0.009     0.114
                Has formal savings1/                        3,127    1,569    0.184    0.387    -0.007     0.642
                Total formal savings (standardized)         3,127    1,569    0.007    1.039    -0.014     0.707
                Total savings (standardized)                3,127    1,569    0.006    1.031    -0.012     0.751
              Preferences
                Money now vs. one month                     3,116    1,563    3.024    1.508     0.056     0.315
                Money now vs. 7 months                      3,113    1,559    4.379    1.176     0.019     0.672
                Money in cash vs. bank account              3,114    1,561    2.980    2.089    -0.029     0.744
                Trust in banks                              2,734    1,367    2.337    1.164   0.144**     0.020


Note: This table presents the balance checks for the baseline survey. 1/ indicates a dichotomous variable. Coefficient compares
the treatment and control groups, controlling for randomization blocks and clustering standard errors at the municipality level.




                                                              15
5        Results
This section reports the main results.15 The tablet telemetric data suggesst that an average user
engaged with the application for three to four hours, though this does not account for the possibility
that there were multiple users in the same beneficiary household.16 Following presentation of the
main results in this section, we will examine heterogeneous effects and their links to possible
mechanisms in order to understand how impacts were achieved despite what appears as a low
intensity of treatment compared to traditional financial education programs.
     We also test various individual hypotheses based on the unadjusted marginal p-values. This
implies a potentially large probability that some of the true null hypotheses will be rejected. Fol-
lowing Romano and Wolf (2005), we use a stepwise multiple-testing procedure that asymptotically
controls for the family-wise error rate. Most of the effects for the first follow-up survive this cor-
rection for multiple-hypothesis testing and remain significant. For the second and third follow-up,
the results that hold after adjusting for the family-wise error rate are mostly related to financial
knowledge, attitudes, and savings outcomes.

5.1      Financial Knowledge and Attitudes
Financial knowledge refers to acquisition of basic financial concepts and information about the CCT
program. Financial attitudes relate to perceptions of the banking sector as well as intertemporal
preferences for having money in cash or in a bank and for having money today or in the future.
Results are reported as standardized effects in Tables 3 and 4.


Financial knowledge. To assess the impact of LISTA on basic financial concepts, a "true or
false" test was administered in the three follow-up surveys. It included three sections: savings,
budgeting, and debt. Questions were based on the tablet curriculum although the tablet content
focused less on debt. For the second and third follow-up, additional questions were included, with a
new section for basic numeracy administered in-person for the second follow-up. The first follow-up
test included 10 questions, while the second and third follow-up surveys had 14 and 11, respec-
tively. Our first measure of financial knowledge is based on seven questions that were comparable
between all of the surveys, with each correct answer accounting for one point on the total score (0
to 7). The extended measure included four additional questions, comparable between the second
and third follow-up (0 to 11).
     The tablet content focused specifically on savings and budgeting with light mention of debt
    15
      Results for the evaluation's SMS intervention are available in section 8 of the Supplemental Materials document.
SMS messages had a positive medium-term impact on the acquisition of financial knowledge, due to increased un-
derstanding of savings, but limited effects in other areas. Over the longer-term, SMS recipients were less likely to
save - and saved less - in a bank account compared to the tablet-only treatment group. While the reported informal
savings when compared to the tablet-only treatment had a positive coefficient, it was not significant and it is difficult
to conclude that the SMS treatment encouraged substitution between formal and informal savings. Given this, we
report detailed results on the pooled treatment versus control in this paper.
   16
      While it was straightforward to cross-reference tablet registrants with the survey database, it was not possible
to determine which unmatched registrants were members of the beneficiary households.


                                                           16
management only in relation to the previous two topics. Regardless, questions on debt (and nu-
meracy for the second follow-up) were included to explore the possibility of ancillary learning.
LISTA had a positive and significant short-, medium-, and long-term impact on the composite
scores (Table 3). Overall scores for the treatment group were 0.20 standard deviations (sd) higher
immediately following the intervention, 0.18 sd higher seven months after the intervention, and 0.14
sd higher 25 months after the intervention compared to the control group for the basic test. Scores
for the expanded test were 0.19 and 0.17 sd higher after treatment in the medium- and long-term,
respectively.
   Analysis revealed positive and significant short-, medium-, and long- term impact on savings
and budget knowledge. For the reduced test, there was a positive short-, medium-, and long-term
impact of 0.23, 0.15, and 0.13 sd for savings, respectively. For budget knowledge, the increases were
0.14, 0.08, and 0.14 sd, respectively. Results for the extended version of the test were even more
robust, with medium- and long-term savings knowledge impacts of 0.16 and 0.14 sd and budget
knowledge increases of 0.16 and 0.18 sd. Interestingly, while the savings knowledge impacts waned,
the budget knowledge impacts appear to have strengthened over time. The latter may reflect the
building of knowledge via practice.
   Results for the reduced debt section lacked significance in the short-term, reached significance
in the medium-term with 0.08 sd, and lost significance in the long-term. For the expanded debt
knowledge section, results were not significant for the medium- or the long-term. As we will see,
this may align with differences in uses of formal credit between the control and treatment groups
25 months after completing the intervention.
   There was some indication of marginal impact on numeracy skills in the second follow-up survey,
suggesting that practice may have increased acquisition of certain types of knowledge and skills,
since LISTA did not directly address mathematical concepts. In other words, people who begin
to manage their accounts may need to use more basic math, which in turn may have increased
their performance on the basic numeracy questions. As will be seen below, results from rural areas
appear to have driven this improvement. Unfortunately, given budget constraints an in-person
survey could not be conducted for the third follow-up so long-term numeracy was not examined.


Financial Attitudes. The survey asked respondents to rate their trust and comfort with banks
on a 1 to 4 scale. The treatment group increased the levels of trust by around 0.20 sd both in the
short- and medium-term, but this effect dissipated in the long-term. Similarly, there is a positive
short-term effect on comfort with banks with a shift of 0.19 sd. While this effect is not significant
in the medium-term, a marginal increase in comfort with banks is found in the long-term, though it
was not robust to the multiple-hypothesis correction. In other words, right after the intervention,
the treated beneficiaries reported feeling more comfortable going to banks, but after a few months
the effect dissipated. One hypothesis is that the intervention succeeded in changing attitudes to-
ward visiting a bank, but after additional experience testing this new perception, the beneficiary
may have updated her attitude, returning to the level of comfort prior to the intervention.


                                                 17
                                                       Table 3: Impact of LISTA on Financial Knowledge


                                                                First follow-up                  Second follow-up                Third follow-up
                                                         Obs     Control   Treatment     Obs      Control   Treatment     Obs     Control   Treatment
                     Knowledge: total score             2,502     5.120     0.201***     2,305      5.574    0.177***    2,180     5.325     0.140***
                                                                             (0.033)                          (0.050)                         (0.045)

                     Knowledge: savings section         2,502     2.110     0.230***     2,305      2.256    0.153***    2,180     2.059     0.129**
                                                                             (0.035)                          (0.050)                        (0.050)
                                                                             [0.000]                          [0.007]                        [0.021]
                     Knowledge: budget section          2,502     1.442     0.144***     2,305      1.602     0.078*     2,180     1.540     0.143***
                                                                             (0.038)                          (0.045)                         (0.042)
                                                                             [0.000]                          [0.095]                         [0.003]
                     Knowledge: debt section            2,502     1.568       -0.018     2,305      1.716     0.083**    2,180     1.726       -0.033
                                                                             (0.044)                          (0.041)                         (0.042)
                                                                             [0.680]                          [0.092]                         [0.434]
                     Knowledge extended: total score                                     2,305      8.639    0.194***    2,180     7.790     0.173***
                                                                                                              (0.055)                         (0.051)
18




                     Knowledge extended: savings                                         2,305      3.135    0.162***    2,180     2.908     0.136**
                                                                                                              (0.054)                        (0.051)
                                                                                                              [0.009]                        [0.016]
                     Knowledge extended: budget                                          2,305      2.262    0.157***    2,180     1.971     0.177***
                                                                                                              (0.046)                         (0.049)
                                                                                                              [0.003]                         [0.001]
                     Knowledge extended: debt                                            2,305      3.242      0.069     2,180     2.911       0.023
                                                                                                              (0.047)                         (0.039)
                                                                                                              [0.143]                         [0.554]
                     Knowledge extended: math                                            2,305      1.623     0.091*
                                                                                                              (0.047)
                                                                                                              [0.102]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors
     at the municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and
     household characteristics (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized
     values.
                                                            Table 4: Impact of LISTA on Financial Attitudes


                                                                            First follow-up                    Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                                     Obs     Control     Treatment      Obs     Control     Treatment      Obs     Control     Treatment
              Has a savings goal                                    1,716      0.368      0.167***     1,630      0.270      0.093***     1,558      0.280      0.147***
                                                                                           (0.028)                            (0.025)                            (0.026)
                                                                                           [0.000]                            [0.000]                            [0.000]
              Believes can leave money in MFA account               1,597      0.650      0.121***     1,405      0.685      0.073***     1,441      0.736       0.054*
                                                                                           (0.020)                            (0.023)                            (0.027)
                                                                                           [0.000]                            [0.005]                            [0.166]
              Trust in bank                                         1,749      2.727      0.204***     1,588      2.616      0.203***     1,528      2.604       0.087*
                                                                                           (0.046)                            (0.048)                            (0.046)
                                                                                           [0.000]                            [0.000]                            [0.170]
              Comfort with banks                                    1,720      2.356      0.190***     1,557      2.471        0.023      1,510      2.599       0.092*
                                                                                           (0.046)                            (0.052)                            (0.053)
                                                                                           [0.000]                            [0.630]                            [0.174]
              Preference: money in bank vs. cash                    1,773      3.552      0.156***     1,624      2.734      0.179***     1,555      2.796      0.191***
                                                                                           (0.038)                            (0.045)                            (0.056)
19




                                                                                           [0.000]                            [0.000]                            [0.003]
              Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month                                            1,621      3.170     -0.167***     1,553      2.971      -0.085*
                                                                                                                             (0.045)                            (0.049)
                                                                                                                              [0.000]                           [0.174]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values. The lower number of observations
     is due to missing observations (respondents reporting they don't know or refuse to answer).
    Historically, many MFA beneficiaries believed they were not allowed to leave any money in
MFA bank accounts because it would be "sent back" to the government. This caused a practice
of withdrawing all funds from their accounts following the transfer. While this was true early on
in the MFA program, the practice or returning funds was eliminated several years earlier. In one
of the LISTA modules, the beneficiaries are taught that balances left in the MFA bank accounts
are safe following their MFA transfer. Results indicate that the probability of believing they can
leave money in their MFA account increased significantly for the treatment compared to the control
group in the short-term, while decreasing in magnitude, with significance in the medium- and no
significance in the long-term following the multiple-hypothesis correction.


Intertemporal Preferences. Respondents were asked whether they preferred 80 thousand COP
in cash compared to 80, 90 or 100 thousand COP in a bank (and vice versa). Based on these
responses, we constructed a bank over cash preference scale that goes from 1 (always cash taker)
to 6 (always bank taker). Similarly, individuals were asked to choose between 80 thousand COP
today or receiving successively higher amounts in one month in order to construct an intertemporal
preference scale, which ranks from lower to higher patience.
    A significant impact is found for intertemporal preferences and preferences for money in a bank
over cash (Table 4). Significant medium-term and long-term intertemporal preferences were -0.17
sd and -0.09 sd, indicating greater patience. This suggests that beneficiaries may have accumu-
lated more savings or felt more confident about their ability to manage cash flows and expenses.
Meanwhile, preferences for money in bank over cash strengthened over the short-, medium-, and
long-term, with 0.16, 0.18, and 0.19 sd changes, respectively. These preference shifts may be linked
to, and become vital for, changing financial habits and preferences in the future. Overall, treated
beneficiaries were less likely to prefer money today or to need it on hand immediately, implying
that they were more patient or had fewer liquidity constraints. This result likewise suggests that
acquisition of basic financial knowledge and positive changes in attitudes towards banks may lead
to changes in behavior.
    In sum, LISTA had an impact on basic financial knowledge, attitudes, and preferences. Next,
we examine whether these shifts translated into practice adoption.

5.2    Financial Practices
As found in previous financial education evaluations, knowledge and attitudes may change, but this
need not imply the adoption of new financial practices. We analyzed whether the program had an
effect on concrete financial practices adoption such as CCT withdrawals, ATM use, savings habits,
budgeting, and technology use.17 Tables 5 to 7 report these results.
   17
      A section of questions related to technology use was introduced at the second follow-up survey. As expected,
use of tablets over the previous six months was significantly higher in the treatment group. But interestingly, the
probability of use of other forms of technology in particular, use of Facebook, WhatsApp, video applications on the
cellphone also increased after intervention, indicating that the intervention may have helped to reduce barriers to
technology use. See the Supplemental Material document for results.



                                                        20
MFA practices. As discussed above, LISTA sought to eliminate myths about the MFA pro-
gram and encourage new withdrawal practices ensuring the female beneficiary's control over the
transfer. A major issue is how the beneficiary withdraws the transfer and whether she leaves funds
in the account for safekeeping or withdraws it all, either submitting to the temptation to spend
it or increasing the likelihood of others accessing the funds. In the medium-term, the program
had a positive effect on the probability of leaving money in the MFA account, while a long-term
effect was found on whether the beneficiary was the person who withdrew the cash transfer. This
indicates that treated beneficiaries not only changed beliefs about whether money could be left in
their accounts (as seen in the "Financial Attitudes" section), but they put that belief into practice
and started leaving money in their MFA accounts, a finding confirmed below with the bank admin-
istrative data. Nevertheless, the difference in leaving money in the MFA account appears to have
disappeared in the long-term, based on self-report.
   More people in the treatment also withdrew money while accompanied with another person, but
in the medium- and long-term this effect disappeared. This short-term finding was unexpected. The
assumption was that the tablet content would foster more individual and independent withdrawals.
The program encouraged users to not share their cards nor their pin passwords because they were
unable to use or felt uncomfortable engaging with an ATM. In the medium-term, questions were
added to understand the shift. A hypothesis for why more women in the treatment group went
with others to the ATM is discussed below.


ATM use. A range of questions explored ATM practices. No impact was detected for induc-
ing members of the treatment group to use ATMs as their withdrawal channel, nor were there
differences for sharing their card with others. This may be due to external constraints related to
ATM access. Short-term outcomes indicate that the ATM simulator may have increased the prob-
ability of feeling capable of teaching someone to use the ATM, given the unexpected increase in the
number of people in the treatment group who accompanied someone to withdraw their transfers
from the ATM. To examine whether the ATM gamification-based learning module was put into
practice, we further asked at the second and third follow-ups if those who felt capable of teaching
others had actually taught someone in the previous six months. We found a significant increase
in the medium-term, with the treatment reporting teaching their friends, neighbors, or strangers
to use the ATM. Yet no effect was found in the long-term. Beyond CCT, ATM, and technology
practices, we also examined budgeting and savings habits.


Budgeting habits. In the short- and medium-term, a marginally significant impact was found
in whether the beneficiaries (91 percent female) were those responsible for managing household fi-
nances. Yet no effect was found relating to the probability of a treated beneficiary keeping written
track of the household accounts.




                                                 21
                                                   Table 5: Impact of LISTA on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA)


                                                                       First follow-up                   Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                               Obs     Control     Treatment      Obs     Control     Treatment      Obs     Control     Treatment
                    Manages household finances                 1,712     0.929       0.016*      1,582      0.915       0.018*      1,512      0.933        0.007
                                                                                     (0.009)                            (0.010)                            (0.012)
                                                                                     [0.203]                            [0.387]                            [0.912]
                    Keeps written track of accounts            1,655     0.229        0.032      1,500      0.157        0.012      1,451      0.347        0.020
                                                                                     (0.020)                            (0.017)                            (0.024)
                                                                                     [0.215]                            [0.908]                            [0.912]
                    Withdrew last MFA transfer                 1,663     0.840        -0.007     1,577      0.780        0.009      1,448      0.835      0.038**
                                                                                     (0.011)                            (0.016)                           (0.019)
                                                                                     [0.564]                            [0.908]                           [0.315]
                    Accompanied when withdrew                  1,521     0.401      0.062***      982       0.494        0.044      1,415      0.413        0.035
                                                                                     (0.021)                            (0.028)                            (0.030)
                                                                                     [0.010]                            [0.425]                            [0.833]
                    Has money in MFA account (today)                                             1,237      0.352       0.062*      1,318      0.496        0.044
                                                                                                                        (0.034)                            (0.035)
22




                                                                                                                        [0.380]                            [0.802]
                    Leaves money in MFA account                                                  1,384      0.360      0.066**      1,411      0.420        0.019
                                                                                                                       (0.026)                             (0.031)
                                                                                                                       [0.093]                             [0.912]
                    Someone helped use ATM                                                        494       0.661        0.004       600       0.628        0.016
                                                                                                                        (0.039)                            (0.034)
                                                                                                                        [0.922]                            [0.912]
                    Feels can teach ATM use                                                      1,563      0.391      0.056***     1,508      0.555        -0.012
                                                                                                                        (0.020)                            (0.018)
                                                                                                                        [0.053]                            [0.912]
                    Has taught someone use ATM                                                   1,563      0.196      0.046**      1,508      0.257        0.025
                                                                                                                       (0.022)                             (0.022)
                                                                                                                       [0.261]                             [0.833]
                    Has a MFA card                                                               1,577      0.825        0.015      1,449      0.958      0.027**
                                                                                                                        (0.023)                           (0.010)
                                                                                                                        [0.908]                           [0.092]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
   Budgeting and saving. The survey included two multiple response questions regarding bud-
geting and savings practices in the face of hypothetical situations. Respondents were asked what
they would do in the case of an emergency when they needed a certain amount of money. Over 17
percent of the treatment chose "using savings" in the short-term, nearly doubling that of control,
while in the medium-term more than double selected "using saving" (Table 6). Interestingly, a
statistically significant substitution appeared between those who opted to pawn something versus
those who would look for a job, with the treatment preferring the former over the latter. Despite
the multiple choices given, the results suggest a substitution with the "using loan" option. Similar
results with slightly smaller magnitudes were found for the long-term.
   When asked what they would do with a similar windfall, no impact in distribution was found,
suggesting that although the treatment group may be saving more, enabling them to buffer against
external shocks (a finding also found with the stated of savings goals), this does not necessarily
mean that treatment members generated such a large surplus that they perceived greater utility
(compared to control) in saving the hypothetical windfall. The three most popular options for both
treatment and control were invest in a business, followed by savings and home investment. These
hypothetical questions call for deeper understanding of savings goals and habits.
   Finally, there is evidence of better expense management. In the medium-term, a marginal effect
that failed to survive the multiple-hypothesis correction was detected on the self-reported ability
to cover expenses over the past six months. Yet these results strengthened in the long-term, with
7.5 percentage points more in the treatment claiming they could cover their expenses, amount-
ing to a statistically significant 21 percent increase, robust to the multiple-hypothesis correction.
This evidence is further supported by the fact that no significant differences were found for weekly
household expenditures. In other words, our data suggest that the intervention did not increase
household expenditures (a proxy for increased cash flow) but did promote better saving habits (as
seen in the next sections) and, thus, improved budget management.


Saving habits. The LISTA intervention emphasized the importance of setting a savings goal,
and results suggest that the treatment had a positive and significant impact (Table 4). In the
short-term, the probability of having a saving goal was around 17 percentage points higher com-
pared to the control group mean, representing a 45 percent increase. This significant effect remained
in the medium- and long-term, with 9 and 15 percentage point differences, which translate into
33 and 53 percent increases, respectively. The data also suggest that the intervention improved
the probability of setting a saving goal for emergencies among the LISTA recipients, while LISTA
beneficiaries were less likely to specify household and business improvement savings objectives.
   To further test the impact of LISTA on savings habits, the survey asked whether beneficiaries
saved money and where they saved it (see Panel A of Table 7). More people in the treatment group
reported saving (both formally and informally), yet this impact was only significant in the short-
term. The same result appeared when analyzing if people saved at all formally, with short-term
impact yet with no medium- or long-term effect. There is a marginally significant improvement in


                                                 23
formal savings in the long-term, driven by more savings in cooperatives compared to the control
group. This is evident when disaggregating the formal savings; even though saving in groups and
cooperatives was significant in the medium-term, the largest component of these savings channels
(in a bank) was significant only in the short-term.
   Impact on informal savings habits were present across all three follow-ups. In the short-term,
LISTA boosted the percentage of people saving informally by 15 percentage points, a growth of
26 percent over control. The impact persisted in the medium-term and long-term, with 11 and 10
percentage points more saving informally compared to control, a 32 percent and 26 percent increase,
respectively. In other words, treated users reported that they were more likely to save, particularly
at home (informal savings). There is some indication that users could be substituting the initial
attempt to save formally in the short-term with informal savings in the medium- and long-term,
given the disappearance of formal savings habits between the short- and medium-term combined
with maintenance of the percentage growth of informal savers in the medium- and long-term. The
treatment group is thus not losing the savings habit spurred by the intervention, as seen in the
maintenance of a savings goal and savings habits across all three follow-ups. Rather, users seem to
opt for informal savings in the medium- and long-term, suggesting the possible existence of formal
savings barriers.
   Taken together, the loss of comfort in the banks, external constraints related to ATM access,
and the shift from formal to informal savings habits, all raise questions about supply-side barriers
to formal savings given the persistence of informal savings habits. Despite evidence of increases in
knowledge and expressed trust in the financial entity, if the product is too costly or poorly designed,
adoption will suffer. Evidence on financial performance further supports this assertion.

5.3   Financial Performance
Self-reported savings. For the self-reported savings data, the impact of the intervention on the
aggregate amount of money saved formally and informally is significant for the short-, medium-,
and long-term in the Tobit estimation (see Panel B of Table 7). But this was not the case for the
total amount of self-reported formal savings, in which only a short-term impact was detected. This
finding aligns with the shift in self-reported formal savings habits between the short- and medium-
term. Interestingly, Tobit estimates of self-reported bank savings and OLS estimates using the
bank administrative data are both around 17,000 Colombian pesos. In other words, at both the
extensive and intensive margins, LISTA appears to have had less of an impact on saving in formal
financial institutions over time, compared to informal savings. Unfortunately, we lack access to the
medium- and long-term bank data to further confirm this hypothesis.


Bank savings and transactionality. Bank administrative data corroborate the self-reported
short-term impact on formal savings (see Table 9). The treatment group had higher average sav-
ings in the partner banks in the months following the start of the intervention up until three months
after it ended, or until December 2015, the last date the bank data were available.


                                                  24
                                                    Table 6: Impact of LISTA on Financial Practices (Budgeting)


                                                                       First follow-up                   Second follow-up                     Third follow-up
                                                                Obs     Control    Treatment     Obs       Control     Treatment      Obs      Control      Treatment
                 In case of a 350k emergency
                    Would use savings                          2,412     0.193     0.171***     2,223       0.069       0.084***     2,121       0.085       0.061***
                                                                                    (0.023)                              (0.010)                              (0.016)
                                                                                    [0.000]                              [0.000]                              [0.000]
                    Would use loans                            2,412     0.752     -0.161***    2,223       0.822       -0.109***    2,121       0.838       -0.066***
                                                                                    (0.023)                              (0.017)                              (0.020)
                                                                                    [0.000]                              [0.000]                              [0.004]
                    Would sell or pawn something               2,412     0.036       -0.006     2,223       0.099           0.023    2,121       0.042           0.007
                                                                                    (0.007)                              (0.014)                              (0.010)
                                                                                    [0.407]                              [0.111]                              [0.761]
                    Would look for a job                                                        2,247       0.029       -0.014**     2,141       0.026          -0.000
                                                                                                                         (0.006)                              (0.007)
                                                                                                                         [0.046]                              [0.879]
                 In case of receiving 300k extra
                    Would save                                                                  2,305       0.852        0.046**     2,177       0.833          0.042**
                                                                                                                         (0.018)                              (0.017)
25




                                                                                                                         [0.051]                              [0.065]
                    Would spend on healthcare or education                                      2,305       0.083           0.008    2,172       0.962           0.004
                                                                                                                         (0.012)                              (0.009)
                                                                                                                         [0.659]                              [0.737]
                    Would build, improve or buy a house                                         2,294       0.796           -0.019   2,172       0.802           0.016
                                                                                                                         (0.019)                              (0.019)
                                                                                                                         [0.659]                              [0.737]
                    Would spend on household expenses                                           2,305       0.063        -0.019*     2,175       0.833          -0.012
                                                                                                                         (0.010)                              (0.017)
                                                                                                                         [0.224]                              [0.737]
                    Would invest in business                                                    2,300       0.843           0.013    2,176       0.895           0.022
                                                                                                                         (0.015)                              (0.014)
                                                                                                                         [0.659]                              [0.389]
                 Was able to cover household expenses1/                                         2,112       0.361        0.036*      2,004       0.366       0.075***
                                                                                                                         (0.021)                              (0.022)
                                                                                                                         [0.146]                              [0.002]
                 Household weekly expenditure1/                                                 2,112    143,146.708        0.004    1,968   154,229.275        -0.008
                                                                                                                         (0.046)                              (0.057)
                                                                                                                         [0.923]                              [0.885]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values. 1/ Regressions additionally control
     for weekly expenditure measured and amount of loan received measured at the baseline. Household weekly expenditure was standardized and the control group mean columns
     show non-standardized values in pesos.
                                          Table 7: Impact of LISTA on Financial Performance (Savings) - Self-reported


                                                                        First follow-up                    Second follow-up                Third follow-up
                                                               Obs       Control     Treatment     Obs      Control    Treatment    Obs     Control    Treatment
                       Panel A: Probability of saving
                         Has formal or informal savings        2,502      0.601       0.146***     2,305      0.385     0.110***   2,180     0.434      0.115***
                                                                                      (0.023)                           (0.018)                         (0.022)

                         Has formal savings                    2,502      0.105       0.030**      2,305      0.092      0.008     2,178     0.101       0.026*
                                                                                      (0.013)                           (0.011)                         (0.014)

                         Has informal savings                  2,501      0.568       0.148***     2,304      0.334     0.108***   2,180     0.390      0.103***
                                                                                      (0.022)                           (0.019)                         (0.021)

                         Has savings in a bank                 2,488      0.052       0.029***     2,299      0.063      -0.003    2,170     0.063       0.010
                                                                                      (0.009)                           (0.009)                         (0.012)
                                                                                      [0.000]                           [0.705]                         [0.369]
                         Has savings in cooperative            2,481      0.059           0.017    2,297      0.032      0.015*    2,172     0.045      0.022***
                                                                                      (0.011)                           (0.008)                         (0.008)
                                                                                      [0.151]                           [0.107]                         [0.003]
26




                         Has savings in piggy bank             2,492      0.559       0.148***     2,298      0.325     0.104***   2,173     0.360      0.094***
                                                                                      (0.022)                           (0.018)                         (0.017)
                                                                                      [0.000]                           [0.000]                         [0.000]
                       Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
                         Total formal and informal savings     2,502     115,635      0.516***     2,305    138,010     0.858**    2,180    156,347     0.907***
                                                                                      (0.158)                           (0.339)                         (0.283)

                         Total formal savings                  2,502     38,248           1.244*   2,305     63,128      0.990     2,179     57,070      1.534
                                                                                      (0.659)                           (1.205)                         (1.003)

                         Total informal savings                2,502   70,933.812     0.505***     2,305     53,033     0.809***   2,120     88,950     1.040***
                                                                                      (0.161)                           (0.268)                         (0.250)

                         Savings in a bank                     2,502     17,161       3.214***     2,305     39,249      0.252     2,172     26,124      1.033
                                                                                      (1.070)                           (2.019)                         (1.272)
                                                                                      [0.009]                           [0.886]                         [0.435]
                         Savings in cooperative                2,502     15,722           0.860    2,305     11,429      4.288     2,180     19,446     7.509**
                                                                                      (2.338)                           (3.598)                         (3.097)
                                                                                      [0.695]                           [0.409]                         [0.034]
                         Savings in piggy bank                 2,502     62,864       0.464***     2,305     42,182     0.843***   2,120     63,510     0.788***
                                                                                      (0.169)                           (0.274)                         (0.158)
                                                                                      [0.019]                           [0.004]                         [0.000]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
                                  Table 8: Impact of LISTA on Financial Performance (Savings/Expediture) - Self-reported


                                                                      First follow-up                   Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                               Obs    Control     Treatment      Obs     Control    Treatment       Obs     Control    Treatment
                     Total savings/expenditure                                                  2,096      1.278       0.028       1,963     1.344       0.267**
                                                                                                                      (0.043)                            (0.108)

                     Formal savings/expenditure                                                 2,096      0.509       0.058       1,962     0.479        0.391
                                                                                                                      (0.047)                            (0.314)
27




                     Informal savings/expenditure                                               2,096      0.540       0.008       1,910     0.793      0.338***
                                                                                                                      (0.039)                            (0.109)

                     Savings in piggy bank/expenditure                                          2,096      0.441       -0.004      1,910     0.539      0.486***
                                                                                                                      (0.037)                            (0.109)
                                                                                                                      [0.994]                            [0.001]
                     Savings in bank/expenditure                                                2,096      0.301       0.000       1,957     0.212        0.220
                                                                                                                      (0.041)                            (0.520)
                                                                                                                      [0.995]                            [0.657]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
   Analysis of the administrative data did not indicate overall increased transactionality with the
bank, e.g., more use of debit, credit, withdrawals, or deposits. In fact, the coefficient for a composite
measure of transactionality was negative for the treatment, suggesting that users overall interacted
less with their bank account. The analysis of heterogeneous effects suggest that this is the result
of statistically significant less transactionality in the Caribbean. It should also be noted that for
MFA accounts, fees were charged for transactions after surpassing a minimal threshold of use.


Credit. At end of 2017, when the third follow-up was administered, the credit system data
indicated a marginally significant 19 percent decrease in the proportion of the treatment group
that had taken out a formal loan since the start of the intervention (Table 10). Much of this impact
appears to have occurred between 2015 and 2016, when there was a significant 25 percent decrease
in whether the treatment had taken a formal loan.
   More robust findings emerge when the sample is examined only for the 91 percent of women in
the sample. For them, the impact strengthened over time, with women systematically taking out
less credit, with a marginally significant decrease of 23 percent in 2015 and 2016 and a significant
decrease of 26 percent between 2015 and 2017. It appears that this is driven mostly by a statistically
significant reduction in credit card use. Finally, it should be noted that all people in the sample
received the CCT benefit. Previous evidence on this population has identified a positive effect in
the extensive margin of credit (a 15 percent increase) for MFA program beneficiaries (Cardona
et al., 2017). It is reasonable to hypothesize that the LISTA intervention decreased formal credit
use on top of the positive impact created by participation in the CCT program.


Spending. Self-reported weekly savings data were collected at the baseline and third follow-
up, with detailed six-month, monthly, and weekly spending data collected for the second follow-up.
No spending differences were detected, although significant savings impacts were found. A possible
explanation is that the intervention may have impacted income; unfortunately, we could not collect
data for this variable.
   Regardless, evidence indicates that even with an effective demand-side intervention targeting
financial literacy and capability, it is important to take into account supply-side constraints asso-
ciated with access, products, and services. Financial inclusion is not equivalent to financial health.
Taken together, these findings - more informal savings, less use of formal credit, specified savings
goals focused on emergencies, and reported ease of meeting household expenses though without a
rise in household expenditures - all paint an emerging picture of increased financial health for the
treatment households (CSFI, 2017).

5.4   Psychosocial Indicators
Given impact found at the first follow-up, the second and third follow-ups attempted light measures
of participant attitudes towards themselves, their life, and others. Results indicate that LISTA had
varying impact on these outcomes given the measures used (Table 11).


                                                   28
                                            Table 9: Impact of LISTA on Financial Performance - Administrative Data


                                                                    May-Jun        Jun-Jul         Jul-Aug         Aug-Sep         Sep-Oct        Oct-Nov       Nov-Dec
                 Panel A: Non-standardized effects
                   Number of monthly withdraws (a)                    -0.005        -0.012           -0.026          0.003          0.016          -0.005         -0.018
                                                                     (0.004)       (0.015)          (0.023)         (0.014)        (0.019)        (0.014)        (0.031)
                   Number of other debit transactions (b)             -0.003       -0.022*         -0.025**          -0.007         0.001          0.004          0.006
                                                                     (0.004)       (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.014)        (0.013)        (0.008)        (0.010)
                   Number of total debit transactions (a) + (b)       -0.005        -0.033          -0.051*          -0.006         0.018          -0.004         -0.023
                                                                     (0.005)       (0.022)          (0.028)         (0.019)        (0.022)        (0.015)        (0.031)
                   Number of active credits (c)                       0.001         0.000            0.000           0.003          0.003          0.001          0.000
                                                                     (0.001)       (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.001)
                   Number of monthly deposits (d)                    -0.007*        0.006            0.011           0.012          -0.000        0.015*          0.028
                                                                     (0.004)       (0.007)          (0.015)         (0.007)        (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.018)
                   Total transactionality (a) + (b) + (c) + (d)       -0.016        -0.025           -0.036          0.009          0.020          0.011          -0.001
                                                                     (0.011)       (0.023)          (0.031)         (0.023)        (0.024)        (0.019)        (0.042)
                   Average monthly account balance                   282.884     2,782.711***    4,330.339***    3,587.273***    3,178.461**    2,757.618*     3,650.628**
                                                                    (408.465)      (783.502)       (879.883)      (1,295.289)    (1,361.245)    (1,421.726)    (1,624.026)
                 Panel B: Standardized effects
29




                   Number of monthly withdraws (a)                    -0.008        -0.020           -0.045          0.005          0.028          -0.009         -0.030
                                                                     (0.007)       (0.025)          (0.039)         (0.024)        (0.032)        (0.025)        (0.052)
                   Number of other debit transactions (b)             -0.012       -0.092*         -0.105**          -0.029         0.004          0.017          0.024
                                                                     (0.018)       (0.050)          (0.050)         (0.060)        (0.054)        (0.033)        (0.044)
                   Number of total debit transactions (a) + (b)       -0.008        -0.053          -0.084*          -0.009         0.029          -0.006         -0.037
                                                                     (0.008)       (0.036)          (0.046)         (0.030)        (0.036)        (0.025)        (0.050)
                   Number of active credits (c)                       0.036         0.010            0.008           0.105          0.078          0.016          0.006
                                                                     (0.032)       (0.042)          (0.044)         (0.066)        (0.055)        (0.042)        (0.043)
                   Number of monthly deposits (d)                    -0.020*        0.017            0.028           0.031          -0.001        0.040*          0.072
                                                                     (0.012)       (0.019)          (0.039)         (0.019)        (0.021)        (0.022)        (0.047)
                   Total transactionality (a) + (b) + (c) + (d)       -0.019        -0.028           -0.041          0.010          0.023          0.012          -0.001
                                                                     (0.012)       (0.026)          (0.035)         (0.026)        (0.028)        (0.022)        (0.048)
                   Average monthly account balance                    0.005        0.048***        0.075***        0.062***        0.055**        0.048*         0.064**
                                                                     (0.007)        (0.014)         (0.015)         (0.023)        (0.024)        (0.025)        (0.028)


     Note: Average savings are standardized using the mean and the variance from January 2014. Controls include: randomization blocks, account is from Banco Agrario, two-month
     moving average savings up to April 2015, number of financial institutions in the district, and a set of socioeconomic covariates at the municipal level. Clustered standard errors
     in parenthesis. * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.
                                                          Table 10: Financial performance (Credit) - Administrative data


                                                                                Full sample                                                                          Female sub-sample
                                                   2015-2016                    2016-2017                   2015-2017                       2015-2016                   2016-2017                    2015-2017
                                              Control Treatment            Control   Treatment         Control   Treatment             Control   Treatment         Control   Treatment          Control   Treatment
      Credit                                    0.059         -0.008        0.074         -0.012        0.080        -0.014*            0.057         -0.010         0.072        -0.015*        0.077       -0.016**
                                                             (0.007)                     (0.008)                     (0.007)                         (0.007)                      (0.008)                     (0.007)

      Consumption credit                        0.018         0.000         0.021         -0.001        0.024         -0.001            0.019         -0.001         0.022         -0.002        0.024         -0.002
                                                             (0.003)                     (0.004)                     (0.003)                         (0.003)                      (0.003)                     (0.003)
                                                             [0.970]                     [0.931]                     [0.208]                         [0.861]                      [0.931]                     [0.901]
      Credit with banks                         0.038         0.003         0.044         0.003         0.049         0.001             0.035         0.001          0.042         -0.000        0.046         -0.002
                                                             (0.005)                     (0.006)                     (0.006)                         (0.005)                      (0.006)                     (0.006)
                                                             [0.970]                     [0.931]                     [0.881]                         [0.861]                      [0.931]                     [0.901]
      Credit card                               0.045         -0.010        0.059        -0.013*        0.064        -0.016**           0.042          -0.010        0.056       -0.015*         0.061       -0.017**
                                                             (0.006)                      (0.007)                     (0.007)                         (0.006)                    (0.008)                      (0.007)
                                                            [0.4752]                     [0.4752]                    [0.1584]                        [0.4356]                    [0.3267]                    [0.1287]
      Default                                   0.009         0.002         0.015         -0.004        0.019         -0.003            0.008         0.003          0.015         -0.004        0.019         -0.003
                                                             (0.003)                     (0.004)                     (0.004)                         (0.003)                      (0.004)                     (0.004)
                                                             [0.970]                     [0.871]                     [0.812]                         [0.822]                      [0.782]                     [0.901]
30




      Max. default days                         1.695         -0.138        3.123         -0.502        2.458         -0.298            1.603         0.022          3.077         -0.407        2.459         -0.240
                                                             (0.194)                     (0.348)                     (0.237)                         (0.118)                      (0.314)                     (0.210)
                                                             [0.970]                     [0.604]                     [0.673]                         [0.970]                      [0.703]                     [0.762]
      Total Average Debt                      154,963         0.002        188,400        0.018        171,114        0.008            145,972        0.005        180,161         0.024        162,864        0.013
                                                             (0.018)                     (0.029)                     (0.021)                         (0.018)                      (0.031)                     (0.022)

      Credit card debt                         37,592         0.021        45,432         0.023         41,391        0.022             35,105        0.029         42,957         0.025        38,949         0.026
                                                             (0.028)                     (0.030)                     (0.027)                         (0.029)                      (0.032)                     (0.029)
                                                             [0.970]                     [0.871]                     [0.812]                         [0.861]                      [0.871]                     [0.901]
      Consumption credit debt                 171,444         -0.005       217,333        0.007        194,479        -0.001           167,584        -0.003       213,746         0.015        191,048        0.004
                                                             (0.017)                     (0.027)                     (0.020)                         (0.016)                      (0.028)                     (0.020)
                                                             [0.970]                     [0.931]                     [0.881]                         [0.970]                      [0.931]                     [0.901]
      Av. number of credits per year            0.165         0.004         0.296         -0.023        0.227         -0.013            0.161         -0.005         0.293         -0.044        0.224         -0.027
                                                             (0.015)                     (0.027)                     (0.019)                         (0.015)                      (0.029)                     (0.020)
                                                             [0.970]                     [0.871]                     [0.643]                         [0.861]                      [0.545]                     [0.713]
      Observations                                      3105                         3105                        3105                            2820                        2820                         2820

     N otes :*** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. Clustered standard errors at the municipality level in parenthesis. Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and
     household characteristics (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and dummies for having a formal credit each year between 2011 and 2014. Credit Debt has been standardized around the
     average value of 2014. The control means column shows non-standardized values. The dependent variable of credit refer to persons either having a credit card or a consumption credit itself. Similarly,
     total debt includes consumption debt and credit card debt.
Optimism and pessimism. Respondents were asked to use a Likert scale of one to seven to
grade themselves on an optimism and pessimism continuum (Kemper et al., 2011). A statistically
significant impact was detected in the medium-term - being part of the treatment group increased
the level of optimism and decreased the level of pessimism among beneficiaries.18 Yet this effect
disappeared over the long-term.


Trust. Another set of questions, which borrowed one item and adapted another from the World
Values Survey, asked beneficiaries if they trusted other people and how much they trusted them.
Although there was no statistical difference between the control and treatment groups in trusting
others in general, LISTA may have improved marginally the level of trust the treated beneficiaries
felt towards others in their community over the medium-term. This could be a result of the rota-
tion methodology implemented during the treatment. Specifically, social interaction between the
MFA mother leader and her group members as a result of the tablet rotations may have generated
enough social capital to increase levels of trust between people in the same community. Yet in the
long-term, no differences were found.
    While some results indicate a general shift in orientation over the medium-turn, they are more
suggestive than definitive. The primary goal of the evaluation was to measure financial knowledge,
practices, and performance impacts, and inadequate attention was paid to the effects of the female
empowerment messaging.


6     Potential Mechanisms
Results indicate that a digital-based tool which incorporates simplified, actionable, concrete, tar-
geted, and engaging content can be effective when combined with a community-based distribution
methodology. But who did the intervention work best for and why? An examination of the het-
erogeneous effects helps specify mechanisms for further exploration.

6.1    Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
To identify initial insights into how the intervention generated impact, we explored heterogeneous
effects by interacting the treatment with a series of socio-demographic variables: urban/rural, edu-
cation (primary/secondary), poverty (quartiles), age (quartiles), and region (Caribbean/Pacific). In
general, the more rural, less educated, poorer, and younger the individual, the greater the impact.
This suggests that the intervention was effective in providing important information to households
with relatively greater consumption smoothing and income shock challenges.




  18
     Evidence suggests that optimism and pessimism may be two constructs. Less optimism, for example, does not
imply necessarily that someone is more pessimistic and vice versa (Herzberg et al., 2006)


                                                     31
                                                         Table 11: Impact of LISTA on Psychosocial Indicators


                                                                     First follow-up                   Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                              Obs    Control     Treatment      Obs     Control    Treatment       Obs     Control    Treatment
                      Optimism                                                                 2,241      5.785      0.095**      2,128     5.846        0.027
                                                                                                                     (0.043)                            (0.046)
                                                                                                                     [0.151]                            [0.723]
                      Pessimism                                                                2,252      2.404     -0.119***     2,114     2.859        -0.055
                                                                                                                     (0.044)                            (0.060)
                                                                                                                      [0.047]                           [0.723]
                      People trust                                                             2,284      0.052       -0.013      2,172     0.114        -0.024
                                                                                                                     (0.009)                            (0.015)
                                                                                                                     [0.359]                            [0.483]
                      More trustworthy of other people                                         2,297      1.830      0.080*
                                                                                                                     (0.044)
                                                                                                                     [0.278]
                      Interested in savings program                                            2,232      2.974       0.055
                                                                                                                     (0.055)
32




                                                                                                                     [0.509]
                      There are lots of ways around                                            2,305      5.743       0.025
                      any problem that I am facing now                                                               (0.059)
                                                                                                                     [0.667]
                      Is meeting her goals                                                     2,305      5.312      0.088*
                                                                                                                     (0.052)
                      Self-efficacy                                                                                  [0.292]
                                                                                                                                  2,180     3.017        0.048
                                                                                                                                                        (0.053)
                      Future orientation                                                                                                                [0.723]
                                                                                                                                  2,180     3.255        0.065
                                                                                                                                                        (0.044)
                      Social capital                                                                                                                    [0.483]
                                                                                                                                  2,180     1.709        0.085
                                                                                                                                                        (0.055)
                                                                                                                                                        [0.483]

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing).    significant at 1%,  significant at
     5%,  significant at 10% (based on p-values adjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the municipality level in parenthesis. Regressions control
     for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control group means
     column show non-standardized values.
Financial Knowledge and Attitudes. Overall, the broad and lasting effects of knowledge gains
and savings goals suggest that the content was clear, easy to understand, and memorable. Yet
there were differences. We consistently find at all follow-ups more gains among the rural and
primary educated compared to the urban and secondary educated populations (Tables 21-26 in
the Supplementary Material document). This was the case for savings and budget knowledge.
The sample in the Pacific region, which is 75 percent rural, experienced larger gains in savings
knowledge. In the long-term, savings knowledge improvements were greatest among the sample's
middle income segments. Furthermore, those with greatest gains were the youngest quartile or
those between the ages of 18 and 32 years.
   With respect to attitudes (Tables 27-32 in the Supplementary Material), the relationship to the
MFA account were similar across different groups. Yet, regarding attitudes towards banks and in
contrast to the Caribbean, the Pacific region reported less trust and comfort with banks as well as
a higher preference for cash in hand vs. having it in the bank. In the medium- and long-term, only
people in the Caribbean reported more trust in the banks, while people in the Pacific region re-
ported negative trust in the long-term. More trust and comfort was also registered among those in
rural areas and with secondary education. Regarding intertemporal preferences, primary educated
individuals reported preferring cash vs. banks while the youngest group exhibited more patience
compared to the control.


Financial Practices. People across all segments reported similar gains in having a savings goals
(Tables 33-38 in the Supplementary Material). As for budgeting practices, for the short- and
medium-term people in rural areas reported more being able to manage their finances, an improve-
ment also observed in the long-term for those living in the Caribbean. In the same region and in
urban areas, people reported higher probabilities of leaving money in their accounts. The lack of
this finding among those in the Pacific and rural areas aligns with the less trust in banks reported
in the previous section, suggesting the possible existence of supply-side constraints.
   More people in rural areas report feeling capable of teaching someone how to use an ATM,
having also taught or accompanied someone to do so. This is also the case for those in the Pacific,
a region with a large share of rural population. By level of education, while the primary educated
report having been accompanied to an ATM, those with secondary education reported having
taught someone how to use one, a skill also reported more by the youngest people in the study.
This suggests the possible existence of a social mechanism with the secondary educated and younger
people teaching the primary educated and older population how to use an ATM.
   In the long-term, the only effects that remained were for people being able to manage their
finances in the Caribbean region, and poorer people having an MFA card and having withdrawn
their last MFA transfer themselves.


Financial Performance. As mentioned earlier, similar impacts on savings and budgeting knowl-
edge and the setting of savings goals were found across groups (Tables 45-50 in the Supplementary


                                                 33
Material). These results align with effects on whether people save informally, which were found
across all groups and survey waves. On the one hand, it appears that in the long-term there was
more impact on informal savings among the rural, less educated, and poorest population, which
aligns with results for knowledge and practices. On the other hand, the rural, Caribbean, and bet-
ter educated reported greater use of formal savings, while no impact was found for amount saved.
In terms of age effects, larger savings magnitudes were seen among the older population groups.
The primary educated reported greater impact in the ability to cover recent household expenses in
the medium-term, with the effect strengthening in the long-term.
    We were able to examine effects of region using the bank administrative data (Table 51 in the
Supplementary Material). The results tell two stories and help to make sense of the differential
impacts seen in the regions. In the Caribbean, users decreased their transactionality with the
MFA bank and saved more by leaving more money in their account. Both categories of variables
were significant across several months. In the Pacific region, however, transactionality increased
significantly as did access to credit, while savings impacts were null. Given the nature of the MFA
account, greater transactionality also implies more fees. This may have helped lead over time to
less trust in banks in the Pacific region        19 .   In other words, initial steps toward financial inclusion
may have occurred in the respective regions, with one taking a savings/low transactionality and
the other a credit/high transactionality pathway.
    Results once again indicate that in general the poorer, less educated, and the more rural the
population, the stronger the impact on informal and overall savings. Furthermore, there are corre-
lations in the sample between poverty, rural residence, educational level, age, and region.

6.2    Discussion
The patterns of heterogeneous effects lead us to hypothesize four mechanisms that may have rein-
forced one another to improve financial knowledge, attitudes, practices, and performance, with a
fifth mechanism hindering formal financial inclusion: (i) simple, focused, and memorable content,
(ii) social learning within the household, (iii) channel, (iv) social learning within the community,
and (v) barriers to formal financial system access. Mechanisms ii, iii, and iv highlight the impor-
tance of leveraging a social component with digital interventions.


Content. The tablet content consisted of simple, focused, well-crafted messages communicated via
testimonial videos and stories that sought to build an emotional identification and connection with
the largely female audience. Certain components such as learning how to use the ATM and the im-
portance of savings, were also communicated via gamification. Messages sought to be actionable in
the areas of MFA practices, ATM withdrawals, savings, and budgeting. The impact detected across
groups for financial knowledge, attitudes, and practice adoption suggest that these messages were
   19
      We were not able to use administrative data to analyze heterogeneous effects of other socio-demographic variables
for formal savings since the individual data was anonymous below the cluster or municipal level. We analyzed
heterogeneous effects with the credit administrative data, but we did not find any differential effect of the intervention
on credit outcomes that survived the multiple hypothesis test correction


                                                            34
socialized and internalized. While the SMS messages may have increased knowledge and savings at
the intensive margins, the bulk of the impact was generated by having access to the tablet 20 . What
remains unknown is which content in the LISTA app worked best individually or together and why.


Social learning within the household. One reason Fundaci´
                                                        on Capital selected the tablet
rotation methodology was because it allowed users to bring the tablet into their homes. The pro-
gram confirmed reaching 100,000 registered CCT users, yet at the end of the program over 160,000
individuals had registered on the tablets, as it was common for family members and friends to create
their own profiles. Qualitative interviews likewise suggest the tablets were a novelty when brought
into the home and it was common for mothers to share them with partners, children, and other
household members, thus generating conversations within the family, which may have continued
after the tablet passed to the next user. An open question is how much the family-centered nature
of this learning reinforced knowledge acquisition, practice adoption, and improved performance
after the intervention.


Channel. The use of the mother leader as a near-peer who brought the tablet to the end-users
appears as a third mechanism. This might have driven impact in two ways. First, trust in the
mother leader may have increased adoption and openness to the messaging. This is supported by
qualitative interviews during the pilot phase and the process evaluation, and, more importantly,
with detection of a positive and statistically significant link between quality of the relationship
with the mother leader and beneficiary outcomes, as reported by the user during the second in-
person follow-up. We hypothesize that (a) the closeness of the relationship with the mother leader
increases not only the likelihood of receiving the tablet, but the amount of time spent on it, and
(b) the time of use or intensity further predicts outcomes.


Social learning within the community. Another channel of impact involves the network of
(mostly female) beneficiaries, with whom the mother leader often communicates en masse via mobile
phone or by convening meetings. The process evaluation revealed that it was common for mother
leaders to conduct trainings by inviting mothers to her home or another space where they trained
as a group and discussed content. As with the social learning generated within the household,
knowledge and attitude acquisition may have continued afterward within peer networks (mothers
and households), especially as tablets rotated among beneficiaries within the municipality over sev-
eral months. The aforementioned results on ATM accompaniment withdrawal practices and the
teaching of ATM may reflect such a social learning component at work.


Barriers to formal financial system access. As can be inferred from the main results and
  20
     See section 8 of the Supplemental Document for SMS results. Respondents were also asked during the in-person
second follow-up survey about use of the LISTA Kit, including the calendar and stickers which reiterated the tablet
messaging. In most cases these materials were not actively used and, instead, were stored in non-visible places as
observed during the in-person second follow-up.



                                                        35
heterogeneous effects, the major barrier to formal savings and deeper financial inclusion across
product types does not appear to be an issue of trust alone. In the short-, medium-, and long-
term, the preference for safekeeping cash in banks maintained statistical significance. In terms of
practices, over the short-term members of the treatment group expressed an openness to leaving
money in the account and saving in the bank, as evidenced by both self-reported and bank admin-
istrative data. Yet overall this impact was lost in the medium-term, with marginal significance in
the long-term for whether people save formally. The heterogeneity of positive effects concentrated
in the Caribbean, with negative effects in the Pacific. Furthermore, the lack of effects in the formal
market among the rural population suggest that geographical access and product design may be
the biggest barriers. While in the Caribbean, transactionality decreased, it increased in the Pacific
according to the short-term bank administrative data. Yet overall in the long-term, use of formal
credit decreased. Even though data are still lacking for testing further hypotheses, the use of less
credit is aligned with the ability to save and manage better their own finances. A structural analysis
of the supply and demand factors at play in this intervention, something that to our knowledge
has not been attempted in the field of financial inclusion, may shed light on these unanswered
questions.
     In sum, future evaluations could disaggregate these mechanisms, while further structural mod-
eling of the data, which would move beyond the reduced form analysis used here, could add insights
into learning processes.


7        Conclusion
Evaluation results suggest that it is possible to design and deliver an impactful, cost-effective, and
scalable digital-based financial education program for lower-income CCT recipients. When the
content is presented in a simplified and gamified way, includes relevant and motivating content,
and is aligned with government social protection strategies, financial knowledge can be improved,
increasing financial health in the long-term, benefiting the poorest women at low cost               21 .

     On average, members of the treatment group created financial systems, undergirded largely
by savings and budgeting practices, which positively influenced their spending, saving, borrowing,
and planning. Such outcomes reflect increased financial health (CSFI, 2017). Nevertheless, un-
derstanding how to move from these outcomes to formal financial inclusion, especially in relation
to saving, credit, and insurance products, requires more analysis. Just as banking alone is not
enough, neither is a demand-side financial education intervention. To use a popular Marshallian
metaphor, for the scissors to cut, both blades ­ supply and demand ­ are needed. Increasing the
financial inclusion and, by extension, the financial health of the most vulnerable requires both.
Regardless, this evidence demonstrates that a well-designed digital-based programs that takes into
consideration content, channel, and social learning within and between households could help.
    21
     When massively deployed, the LISTA intervention can create economies of scale, dramatically decreasing cost
per person. Fundaci´  on Capital calculated that once completed, the LISTA program in Colombia cost US$6-9 per
user, a significant savings from the US$22 per person of the pilot intervention or the US$40 of in-person training.


                                                        36
References
Alm°
   as, I., Armand, A., Attanasio, O., and Carneiro, P. (2018). Measuring and changing control:
  Women's empowerment and targeted transfers. The Economic Journal, 128(612):F609­F639.

Ashraf, N., Karlan, D., and Yin, W. (2006). Tying odysseus to the mast: Evidence from a commit-
  ment savings product in the Philippines. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2):635­672.

Attanasio, O., Fern´
                   andez, C., Fitzsimons, E., Grantham-McGregor, S., Meghir, C., and Rubio-
  Codina, M. (2014). Using the infrastructure of a conditional cash transfer program to deliver a
  scalable integrated early child development program in Colombia: cluster randomized controlled
  trial. BMJ, 349:g5785.

Attanasio, O. and Mesnard, A. (2006). The impact of a conditional cash transfer programme on
  consumption in Colombia. Fiscal Studies, 27(4):421­442.

Banerjee, A., Karlan, D., and Zinman, J. (2015). Six randomized evaluations of microcredit:
  Introduction and further steps. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1):1­21.

Bastagli, F., Hagen-Zanker, J., Harman, L., Barca, V., Sturge, G., Schmidt, T., and Pellerano, L.
  (2016). Cash transfers: what does the evidence say. a rigorous review of programme impact and
  the role of design and implementation features. London: Overseas Development Institute.

Bateman, M., Blankenburg, S., and Kozul-Wright, R., editors (2018). The Rise and Fall of Global
  Microcredit. Routledge.

Berg, G. and Zia, B. (2017). Harnessing emotional connections to improve financial decisions:
  Evaluating the impact of financial education in mainstream media. Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 15(5):1025­1055.

Beshears, J., Choi, J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B., and Milkman, K. (2015). The effect of providing
  peer information on retirement savings decisions. The Journal of Finance, 70(3):1161­1201.

Blumenstock, J., Callen, M., and Ghani, T. (2018). Why do defaults affect behavior? experimental
  evidence from afghanistan. American Economic Review, 108(10):2868­2901.

Brune, L., Gin´
              e, X., Goldberg, J., and Yang, D. (2017). Savings defaults and payment delays for
  cash transfers: Field experimental evidence from Malawi. Journal of Development Economics,
  129:1­13.

Bucher-Koenen, T., Lusardi, A., Alessie, R., and Van Rooij, M. (2017). How financially literate
  are women? an overview and new insights. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 51(2):255­283.

Bulte, C., Betts, A., Garner, K., and Durning, S. (2007). Student teaching: views of student
  near-peer teachers and learners. Medical Teacher, 29(6):583­590.


                                               37
Cardona, L., Medina, C., and Nu~
                               nez, J. (2017). Impacto de las transferencias condicionadas sobre
  el mercado de cr´
                  edito: el caso de Familias en Acci´
                                                    on en Colombia. In Tamayo, C. and Malag´
                                                                                           on,
  J., editors, Ensayos sobre inclusi´
                                    on financiera en Colombia. Bogot´
                                                                    a: Banco Interamericano de
  Desarrollo y Asobancaria.

Carpena, F., Cole, S., Shapiro, J., and Zia, B. (2017). The ABCs of financial education: experi-
  mental evidence on attitudes, behavior, and cognitive biases. Management Science, Articles in
  Advance:1­24.

Center for Financial Services Innovation (CSFI) (2017). Beyond financial inclusion: Financial
  health as a global framework. Chicago: Center for Financial Services Innovation and Center for
  Financial Inclusion at Accion.

Chong, A. and Ferrara, E. (2009). Television and divorce: Evidence from brazilian novelas. Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 7(2-3):458­468.

Cohen, M. and Nelson, C. (2011). Financial literacy: A step for clients towards financial inclusion.
  Global Microcredit Summit, pages 14­17.

Collins, D., Morduch, J., Rutherford, S., and Ruthven, O. (2009). Portfolios of the Poor: How the
  World's Poor Live on a Day. Princenton, USA: Princeton University Press.

Deb, A. and Kubzansky, M. (2012). Bridging the gap: The business case for financial literacy. Citi
  Foundation.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Klapper, L., and Singer, D. (2017). Financial inclusion and inclusive growth:
  a review of recent empirical evidence. Policy Research Working Paper Series 8040, The World
  Bank.

Drexler, A., Fischer, G., and Schoar, A. (2014). Keeping it simple: Financial literacy and rules of
  thumb. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(2):1­31.

Duflo, E. (2012).    Women empowerment and economic development.                Journal of Economic
  Literature, 50(4):1051­79.

Duflo, E., Kremer, M., and Robinson, J. (2011). Nudging farmers to use fertilizer: Theory and
  experimental evidence from Kenya. American Economic Review, 101(6):2350­90.

Duflo, E. and Saez, E. (2003). The role of information and social interactions in retirement plan deci-
  sions: Evidence from a randomized experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3):815­
  842.

Dupas, P., Karlan, D., Robinson, J., and Ubfal, D. (2018). Banking the unbanked? Evidence from
  three countries. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10(2):257­97.



                                                  38
Dupas, P. and Robinson, J. (2013). Savings constraints and microenterprise development: Evidence
  from a field experiment in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1):163­92.

Edge Finance (2007). El proyecto capital: Proyecto de capitalizaci´
                                                                  on y reducci´
                                                                              on de la vulner-
  abilidad de los pobres (protecci´
                                  on social y formaci´
                                                     on de activos para las familias vulnerables).
  Technical report.

Fernandes, D., Lynch Jr, J., and Netemeyer, R. (2014). Financial literacy, financial education, and
  downstream financial behaviors. Management Science, 60(8):1861­1883.

FIDA (2004a). Diez claves de ´
                             exito para el desarrollo rural: basadas en las experiencias de los
  proyectos feas, marenass, corredor, y sierra sur. Technical report, Fondo Internacional para el
  Desarrollo Agr´
                icola.

FIDA (2004b). Experiencias innovadoras en los proyectos del FIDA en la Rep´
                                                                          ublica del Per´
                                                                                        u.
  Technical report, Informe 1497-PE, Fondo Internacional para el Desarrollo Agr´
                                                                               icola.

Fort, M., Manaresi, F., and Trucchi, S. (2016). Adult financial literacy and households financial
  assets: the role of bank information policies. Economic Policy, 31(88):743­782.

Garg, N. and Lerner, J. S. (2013). Sadness and consumption. Journal of Consumer Psychology,
  23(1):106­113.

Gertler, P. (2004). Do conditional cash transfers improve child health? Evidence from PRO-
  GRESA's control randomized experiment. American Economic Review, 94(2):336­341.

Gine, X., Martinez Cuellar, C., and Mazer, R. K. (2014). Financial (dis-) information: evidence
  from an audit study in Mexico. The World Bank.

Gu´
  erin, I., Labie, M., and Servet, J.-M. (2015). The crises of microcredit. University of Chicago
  Press.

Handa, S. and Davis, B. (2006). The experience of conditional cash transfers in Latin America and
  the Caribbean. Development Policy Review, 24(5):513­536.

Hastings, J. S., Madrian, B. C., and Skimmyhorn, W. L. (2013). Financial literacy, financial
  education, and economic outcomes. Annu. Rev. Econ., 5(1):347­373.

Herzberg, P. Y., Glaesmer, H., and Hoyer, J. (2006). Separating optimism and pessimism: a robust
  psychometric analysis of the revised Life Orientation Test (LOT-R). Psychological Assessment,
  18(4):433.

Hsiaw, A. (2013). Goal-setting and self-control. Journal of Economic Theory, 148(2):601­626.

Hubbard, R. G., Skinner, J., and Zeldes, S. P. (1995). Precautionary saving and social insurance.
  Journal of political Economy, 103(2):360­399.

                                                39
Jappelli, T. and Padula, M. (2013). Investment in financial literacy and saving decisions. Journal
  of Banking & Finance, 37(8):2779­2792.

Kaiser, T. and Menkhoff, L. (2017). Does financial education impact financial literacy and financial
  behavior, and if so, when? The World Bank.

Karlan, D., Kendall, J., Mann, R., Pande, R., Suri, T., and Zinman, J. (2016a). Research and
  impacts of digital financial services. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Karlan, D., McConnell, M., Mullainathan, S., and Zinman, J. (2016b). Getting to the top of mind:
  How reminders increase saving. Management Science, 62(12):3393­3411.

Karlan, D. and Morduch, J. (2010). Access to finance. In Rodrik, D. and Rosenzweig, M., editors,
  Handbook of development economics, volume 5, pages 4703­4784. Elsevier.

Karlan, D., Ratan, A. L., and Zinman, J. (2014). Savings by and for the poor: A research review
  and agenda. Review of Income and Wealth, 60(1):36­78.

Kemper, C., Kovaleva, A., Beierlein, C., and Rammstedt, B. (2011). Measuring the construct
  of optimism-pessimism with single item indicators. In 4th conference of the European Survey
  Research Association (ESRA), Lausanne, Switzerland.

Kolb, D. A. (2014). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development.
  FT press.

La Ferrara, E., Chong, A., and Duryea, S. (2012). Soap operas and fertility: Evidence from Brazil.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(4):1­31.

Lerner, J., Li, Y., and Weber, E. (2013). The financial costs of sadness. Psychological Science,
  24(1):72­79.

Lerner, J., Loewenstein, G., and Small, D. (2004). Heart strings and purse strings: Carryover
  effects of emotions on economic decisions. Psychological Science, 15(5):337­341.

Lerner, J. S. and Keltner, D. (2001). Fear, anger, and risk. Journal of personality and social
  psychology, 81(1):146.

Lusardi, A., Michaud, P.-C., and Mitchell, O. (2017). Optimal financial knowledge and wealth
  inequality. Journal of Political Economy, 125(2):431­477.

Lusardi, A. and Mitchell, O. S. (2014). The economic importance of financial literacy: Theory and
  evidence. Journal of economic literature, 52(1):5­44.

Mader, P. (2015). The Political Economy of Microfinance. The financializaton of poverty. Springer.

Maldonado, J. H., editor (2018). Proyecto Capital: diez a~
                                                         nos vinculando la inclusi´
                                                                                  on financiera con
  la protecci´
             on social. Fundaci´
                               on Capital, Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.

                                                40
McConnell, B. and Vera-Hern´
                           andez, M. (2015). Going beyond simple sample size calculations: A
  practitioner's guide. Technical report, IFS Working Papers.

McKenzie, D. (2012). Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more t in experiments. Journal
  of Development Economics, 99(2):210­221.

Miller, M., Reichelstein, J., Salas, C., and Zia, B. (2015). Can you help someone become financially
  capable? A meta-analysis of the literature. The World Bank Research Observer, 30(2):220­246.

Morduch, J. (1995).     Income smoothing and consumption smoothing.           Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 9(3):103­114.

Morduch, J. and Roodman, D. (2014). The impact of microcredit on the poor in bangladesh:
  Revisiting the evidence. Journal of Development Studies, 50(4):583­604.

Panteli´
       c, A. (2011). A comparative analysis of microfinance and conditional cash transfers in latin
  america. Development in Practice, 21(6):790­805.

Pornpitakpan, C. (2006). The persuasiveness of source credibility: A critical review of five decades'
  evidence. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(2):243­281.

Prabhakar, R. (2018). Financial inclusion: A tale of two literatures. Social Policy and Society,
  pages 1­14.

Romano, J. P. and Wolf, M. (2005).        Stepwise multiple testing as formalized data snooping.
  Econometrica, 73(4):1237­1282.

Schaner, S. (2018). The persistent power of behavioral change: Long-run impacts of temporary
  savings subsidies for the poor. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10(3):67­100.

Seshan, G. and Yang, D. (2012). Transnational household finance: A field experiment on the cross-
  border impacts of financial education for migrant workers. In Qatar Foundation Annual Research
  Forum Proceedings.

Soman, D. and Zhao, M. (2011). The fewer the better: Number of goals and savings behavior.
  Journal of Marketing Research, 48(6):944­957.

Terrion, J. L. and Leonard, D. (2007). A taxonomy of the characteristics of student peer mentors
  in higher education: Findings from a literature review. Mentoring & Tutoring, 15(2):149­164.

Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain. Annual Review of Psychology, 53(1):1­
  25.

¨ umen, G. and Cheema, A. (2011). Framing goals to influence personal savings: The role of
Ulk¨
  specificity and construal level. Journal of Marketing Research, 48(6):958­969.

Willis, L. E. (2011). The financial education fallacy. American Economic Review, 101(3):429­34.

                                                 41
Appendices
A   LISTA Application




                        42
B   Randomization Map




C   Intervention Timeline




                            43
         Freeing Financial Education via Tablets:
           Experimental Evidence from Colombia
                   Supplementary Material
Orazio Attanasio   Matthew Bird     Lina Cardona   Pablo Lavado

                          May 28, 2019
    1   Attrition Analysis

                                                   Table 1: Attrition between baseline and 1st follow-up

                                                             Dependent variable: attrited between baseline and first follow-up
                                       (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)

          Treatment                   -0.011     -0.011    -0.011    -0.011    -0.014    -0.014    -0.016    -0.022    -0.021      -0.024     -0.018      -0.017
                                     (0.069)    (0.069)   (0.069)   (0.069)   (0.069)   (0.069)   (0.069)   (0.069)   (0.065)     (0.066)    (0.066)     (0.066)
          Children in hh              -0.014     -0.014    -0.011     0.006     0.004     0.004     0.003     0.034     0.037       0.026      0.023       0.024
                                     (0.018)    (0.018)   (0.018)   (0.026)   (0.026)   (0.026)   (0.026)   (0.036)   (0.036)     (0.035)    (0.035)     (0.035)
          Someone works in hh                    -0.001    0.036      0.016     0.030     0.029     0.033     0.051     0.061       0.055      0.057       0.059
                                                (0.075)   (0.087)   (0.094)   (0.095)   (0.095)   (0.094)   (0.095)   (0.095)     (0.095)    (0.097)     (0.097)
          People working in hh                             -0.023    -0.008    -0.010    -0.009    -0.009    -0.016    -0.009      -0.011     -0.012      -0.011
                                                          (0.026)   (0.029)   (0.029)   (0.028)   (0.028)   (0.028)   (0.027)     (0.027)    (0.027)     (0.027)
          Number of hh members                                       -0.017    -0.017    -0.017    -0.020    -0.022    -0.023      -0.018     -0.018      -0.018
                                                                    (0.018)   (0.018)   (0.018)   (0.018)   (0.018)   (0.018)     (0.018)    (0.018)     (0.018)
          Urban                                                               -0.122*   -0.121*    -0.110   -0.114*    -0.098      -0.090     -0.086      -0.087
                                                                              (0.070)   (0.069)   (0.069)   (0.069)   (0.067)     (0.066)    (0.066)     (0.066)
          Sex                                                                            -0.023    -0.022    -0.006     0.001      -0.011      0.001       0.013
                                                                                        (0.079)   (0.080)   (0.080)   (0.079)     (0.080)    (0.081)     (0.083)
1




          Years of schooling                                                                       -0.008    -0.010    -0.010    -0.017**   -0.017**    -0.016**
                                                                                                  (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.007)     (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.007)
          Age of MFA beneficiaries                                                                           -0.051    -0.061     -0.063*     -0.051      -0.052
                                                                                                            (0.037)   (0.038)     (0.038)    (0.038)     (0.038)
          Banco Agrario                                                                                               0.269**     0.250**    0.300**     0.298**
                                                                                                                      (0.118)     (0.118)    (0.119)     (0.119)
          Age                                                                                                                    -0.007**   -0.007**    -0.006**
                                                                                                                                  (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
          Account type (deposit)                                                                                                            -0.190**    -0.183**
                                                                                                                                             (0.081)     (0.081)
          Mujeres ahorradoras                                                                                                                            -0.137*
                                                                                                                                                         (0.082)

          Observations                3,126     3,126     3,126      3,125     3,117     3,117     3,117     3,105     3,105      3,105       3,105      3,105
          Note: Coe cients and clustered standard errors (in parentheses) from a probit regression where the dependent variable is an indicator of whether the
          beneficiary attried or not. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                    Table 2: Attrition between baseline and 2nd follow-up

                                                              Dependent variable: attrited between baseline and second follow-up
                                 (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)

    Treatment                   -0.052     -0.054    -0.054     -0.054     -0.050      -0.052      -0.050       -0.055      -0.056       -0.059      -0.050      -0.048
                               (0.054)    (0.054)   (0.054)    (0.054)    (0.053)     (0.052)     (0.052)      (0.052)     (0.052)      (0.053)     (0.053)     (0.053)
    Children in hh               0.002      0.004     0.008     -0.022     -0.025      -0.024      -0.021        0.033       0.033        0.020       0.020       0.022
                               (0.018)    (0.018)   (0.019)    (0.034)    (0.035)     (0.035)     (0.035)      (0.043)     (0.044)      (0.044)     (0.044)     (0.044)
    Someone works in hh                    -0.076    -0.021     0.015      0.033        0.030       0.024        0.038       0.038        0.031       0.032       0.035
                                          (0.064)   (0.082)    (0.091)    (0.092)     (0.093)     (0.093)      (0.091)     (0.091)      (0.093)     (0.092)     (0.092)
    People working in hh                             -0.033     -0.059    -0.063*     -0.063*      -0.062     -0.073**    -0.073**     -0.074**    -0.076**    -0.075**
                                                    (0.031)    (0.038)    (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.038)      (0.037)     (0.037)      (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.038)
    Number of hh members                                        0.029      0.028       0.029       0.031        0.023       0.023        0.030       0.029       0.028
                                                               (0.022)    (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.022)      (0.022)     (0.022)      (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.022)
    Urban                                                                -0.145***   -0.141***   -0.152***   -0.155***   -0.155***    -0.146***   -0.149***   -0.149***
                                                                          (0.048)     (0.049)     (0.050)      (0.051)     (0.051)      (0.051)     (0.051)     (0.052)
    Sex                                                                                -0.106      -0.108       -0.076      -0.076       -0.093      -0.078      -0.061
                                                                                      (0.079)     (0.080)      (0.079)     (0.079)      (0.079)     (0.078)     (0.078)
    Years of schooling                                                                             0.010         0.007       0.007       -0.001       0.000       0.001
                                                                                                  (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
    Age of MFA beneficiaries                                                                                 -0.091***   -0.090***    -0.093***    -0.080**    -0.082**
                                                                                                               (0.032)     (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.033)     (0.033)
2




    Banco Agrario                                                                                                           -0.018       -0.042       0.027       0.023
                                                                                                                           (0.075)      (0.077)     (0.068)     (0.068)
    Age                                                                                                                               -0.008***   -0.008***   -0.007***
                                                                                                                                        (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
    Account type (deposit)                                                                                                                        -0.225***   -0.214***
                                                                                                                                                    (0.076)     (0.076)
    Mujeres ahorradoras                                                                                                                                         -0.187*
                                                                                                                                                                (0.105)

    Observations                3,126     3,126     3,126      3,125       3,117       3,117       3,117       3,105        3,105       3,105       3,105       3,105
    Note: Coe cients and clustered standard errors (in parentheses) from a probit regression where the dependent variable is an indicator of whether the
    beneficiary attried or not. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                    Table 3: Attrition between baseline and 3rd follow-up

                                                              Dependent variable: attrited between baseline and third follow-up
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)         (11)          (12)

    Treatment                   0.023       0.022      0.021      0.021     0.023       0.022      0.020      0.011     0.012      0.009       0.020           0.022
                               (0.072)    (0.073)     (0.073)   (0.074)    (0.073)    (0.073)    (0.073)    (0.072)   (0.070)    (0.070)     (0.069)         (0.070)
    Children in hh              0.016       0.017      0.022    0.057**    0.054**    0.055**     0.052*     0.057*    0.059*      0.043       0.041           0.043
                               (0.018)    (0.018)     (0.017)   (0.027)    (0.027)    (0.027)    (0.027)    (0.034)   (0.034)    (0.034)     (0.034)         (0.034)
    Someone works in hh                    -0.043      0.033     -0.007     0.004       0.002      0.008      0.000     0.005     -0.003       0.000           0.003
                                          (0.081)     (0.095)   (0.102)    (0.102)    (0.102)    (0.101)    (0.100)   (0.101)    (0.101)     (0.103)         (0.103)
    People working in hh                               -0.047    -0.018     -0.018     -0.017     -0.016     -0.016    -0.013     -0.014      -0.016          -0.014
                                                      (0.030)   (0.036)    (0.037)    (0.037)    (0.036)    (0.036)   (0.036)    (0.036)     (0.036)         (0.036)
    Number of hh members                                        -0.035*    -0.036*    -0.036*    -0.039*    -0.040*   -0.041*     -0.032      -0.033         -0.034*
                                                                (0.021)    (0.021)    (0.021)    (0.021)    (0.021)   (0.021)    (0.021)     (0.020)         (0.020)
    Urban                                                                 -0.131**   -0.128**   -0.116**   -0.118**   -0.111*    -0.099*     -0.098*         -0.099*
                                                                           (0.058)    (0.058)    (0.059)    (0.060)   (0.060)    (0.059)     (0.059)         (0.059)
    Sex                                                                                -0.067     -0.064     -0.061    -0.056     -0.075      -0.053          -0.035
                                                                                      (0.085)    (0.086)    (0.086)   (0.086)    (0.087)     (0.086)         (0.086)
    Years of schooling                                                                           -0.011*    -0.011*   -0.012*   -0.022***   -0.021***      -0.019***
                                                                                                 (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.006)    (0.007)     (0.007)         (0.007)
    Age of MFA beneficiaries                                                                                 -0.006    -0.011     -0.014       0.004           0.003
                                                                                                            (0.030)   (0.031)    (0.031)     (0.030)         (0.031)
3




    Banco Agrario                                                                                                       0.134      0.107      0.191*          0.188*
                                                                                                                      (0.112)    (0.111)     (0.111)         (0.109)
    Age                                                                                                                         -0.010***   -0.010***      -0.009***
                                                                                                                                 (0.002)     (0.002)         (0.002)
    Account type (deposit)                                                                                                                  -0.325***      -0.314***
                                                                                                                                             (0.075)         (0.074)
    Mujeres ahorradoras                                                                                                                                     -0.210**
                                                                                                                                                             (0.086)

    Observations                3,126     3,126       3,126      3,125     3,117      3,117      3,117      3,105     3,105       3,105       3,105          3,105
    Note: Coe cients and clustered standard errors (in parentheses) from a probit regression where the dependent variable is an indicator of whether the
    beneficiary attried or not. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
  Table 4: Comparison of attrition in the control and treatment groups

                                             (1)             (2)             (3)
                                          Attrition       Attrition       Attrition
                                        1st follow-up   2nd follow-up   3rd follow-up

Treatment                                    0.261          0.152           -0.139
                                           (0.437)         (0.372)         (0.442)
Treatment x Children in hh                   0.072          -0.070           0.018
                                           (0.070)         (0.089)         (0.069)
Treatment x Someone works in hh              0.243          -0.135          0.045
                                           (0.191)         (0.190)         (0.215)
Treatment x People working in hh            -0.074           0.049          -0.028
                                           (0.054)         (0.075)         (0.072)
Treatment x Number of hh members             0.007          0.072*          -0.007
                                           (0.037)         (0.043)         (0.040)
Treatment x Urban                           -0.070           0.081        -0.246**
                                           (0.123)         (0.110)         (0.124)
Treatment x Sex                              0.058          0.040            0.113
                                           (0.163)         (0.166)         (0.181)
Treatment x Years of schooling            -0.033**         -0.020*           0.015
                                           (0.013)         (0.012)         (0.013)
Treatment x Age of MFA beneficiaries        -0.018           0.032          -0.046
                                           (0.076)         (0.067)         (0.062)
Treatment x Banco Agrario                   0.059            0.022          -0.174
                                           (0.217)         (0.110)         (0.221)
Treatment x Age                             -0.006          -0.002           0.004
                                           (0.006)         (0.005)         (0.005)
Treatment x Account type                    -0.068         -0.289*           0.111
                                           (0.158)         (0.153)         (0.148)
Treatment x Mujeres Ahorradoras             -0.081          0.213           0.080
                                           (0.163)         (0.211)         (0.176)

Observations                                  3,105         3,105           3,105
Note: Coe cients and clustered standard errors (in parenthesis). Regressions include
control variables. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                          4
    2      Results: Technology Practices

                                                           Table 5: Impact of LISTA on Financial Practices (Technology)


                                                                                    First follow-up                        Second follow-up                         Third follow-up
                                                                            Obs      Control      Treatment         Obs       Control      Treatment        Obs      Control       Treatment

                     Has a cellphone                                                                               2,305       0.954          0.008
                                                                                                                                             (0.006)
                     Has bought a cellphone after June 2015                                                        2,184       0.292          -0.020
                                                                                                                                             (0.020)
                     Uses cellphone                                                                                2,305       0.993          -0.000
                                                                                                                                             (0.003)
                     Uses WhatsApp on cellphone                                                                    2,289       0.292         0.037**
                                                                                                                                             (0.018)
5




                     Uses Facebook on cellphone                                                                    2,289       0.252         0.034**
                                                                                                                                             (0.015)
                     Uses banking app on cellphone                                                                 2,289       0.054          -0.001
                                                                                                                                             (0.010)
                     Watches videos on cellphone                                                                   2,289       0.423         0.035*
                                                                                                                                             (0.020)
                     Has a tablet                                                                                  2,301       0.098          0.004
                                                                                                                                             (0.012)
                     Has bought a tablet after June 2015                                                           2,304       0.040          -0.006
                                                                                                                                             (0.006)
                     Uses tablet                                                                                   2,280       0.258        0.396***
                                                                                                                                             (0.024)

    Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the municipality level (in parenthesis).
    Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics.
    3      Results: Household monthly expenditure

                                                                          Table 6: Impact of LISTA on Expenditure


                                                                                          Monthly expenditure on item              Expenditure on item / Total
                                                                                         Obs        Control        Treatment       Obs       Control     Treatment
                                               Total monthly expenditure                 2,305      779,122          -0.002
                                                                                                                    (0.058)
                                               Utilities (water, gas, electricity)       2,296     48,437.442       0.153***       2,295      0.072        0.010**
                                                                                                                    (0.055)                                (0.005)
                                               Telephone, internet                       2,297       12,610          -0.043        2,296      0.017         -0.002
                                                                                                                    (0.056)                                (0.002)
                                               Celphone services                         2,247       15,229          -0.014        2,246      0.020         0.000
                                                                                                                    (0.055)                                (0.001)
                                               Clothes                                   2,294       19,761          -0.025        2,293      0.022         -0.002
                                                                                                                    (0.050)                                (0.003)
                                               Rent                                      2,303       19,015           0.028        2,302      0.023         -0.001
                                                                                                                    (0.039)                                (0.003)
6




                                               Gas                                       2,305        3,509         -0.150**       2,304      0.004        -0.003**
                                                                                                                    (0.066)                                (0.002)
                                               Repaying debt                             2,305       18,382          -0.042        2,304      0.015         -0.001
                                                                                                                    (0.061)                                (0.004)
                                               Water                                     2,305        1,167          -0.102        2,304      0.001         -0.001
                                                                                                                    (0.074)                                (0.001)
                                               Home appliances                           2,305        1,232          -0.034        2,304      0.001         -0.000
                                                                                                                    (0.044)                                (0.001)
                                               Fixing the house                          2,305        1,888          -0.041        2,304      0.001         -0.001
                                                                                                                    (0.040)                                (0.001)
                                               Fixing the vehicle                        2,305     2,304.952         -0.063        2,304      0.001         -0.001
                                                                                                                    (0.053)                                (0.001)

                                               Emergencies                               2,305      260.643           0.031        2,304      0.000         0.000
                                                                                                                    (0.034)                                (0.000)


    Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the municipality level (in parenthesis).
    Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. Results only available for the second
    follow-up.
                                                                          Table 7: Impact of LISTA on Expenditure


                                                                                        Monthly expenditure on item            Expenditure on item / Total
                                                                                         Obs      Control     Treatment        Obs      Control      Treatment
                                                    Food                                2,256     421,477        0.016        2,256       0.546         -0.003
                                                                                                                (0.045)                                (0.011)
                                                    Cleaning                            2,247     82,218         -0.039        2,256      0.546         -0.003
                                                                                                                (0.049)                                (0.011)
                                                    Transport                           2,279     69,800          0.059        2,256      0.546         -0.003
                                                                                                                (0.053)                                (0.011)
                                                    Tabaco, alcohol, and others         2,291      4,600         -0.005        2,256      0.546         -0.003
                                                                                                                (0.048)                                (0.011)
                                                    Leisure                             2,300      5,261          0.067        2,299      0.006         0.001
                                                                                                                (0.057)                                (0.002)
                                                    Health                              2,266     15,302         -0.015       2,265       0.019         0.001
                                                                                                                (0.034)                                (0.002)
                                                    Education                           2,246     44,032         -0.031        2,245      0.064         -0.002
                                                                                                                (0.053)                                (0.003)
                                                    Business                            2,305       882          -0.043       2,304       0.001         -0.000
                                                                                                                (0.040)                                (0.000)
7




                                                    Birthdays                           2,305       226          0.041        2,304       0.000         0.001
                                                                                                                (0.040)                                (0.001)

    Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the municipality level (in parenthesis).
    Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics.Results only available for the second
    follow-up.
    4      Results: Financial performance

                                               Table 8: Impact of LISTA on Financial Performance - Administrative Data


                                                                     May             Jun              Jul             Aug               Sep              Oct             Nov             Dec
          Panel A: Non-standardized eects
            Number of monthly withdraws (a)                          0.004           0.009           -0.042          -0.041           0.035              0.007          -0.025          -0.050
                                                                   (0.023)         (0.006)          (0.050)         (0.032)          (0.046)           (0.007)         (0.050)         (0.052)
            Number of other debit transactions (b)                  -0.022          -0.002           -0.017          -0.001           0.025            0.009**           0.007        0.015**
                                                                   (0.017)         (0.010)          (0.020)         (0.006)          (0.030)           (0.004)         (0.016)         (0.007)
            Number of total debit transactions (a) + (b)            -0.013          0.008            -0.057          -0.041           0.057             0.015           -0.014          -0.035
                                                                   (0.030)         (0.010)          (0.056)         (0.032)          (0.052)           (0.010)         (0.049)         (0.052)
            Number of active credits (c)                           0.005**           0.002           -0.001           0.002           0.005             -0.000           0.001          -0.000
                                                                   (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.004)           (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)
            Number of monthly deposits (d)                           0.003        0.009***           0.055*           0.013           0.030             -0.000         0.081**           0.011
                                                                   (0.007)         (0.003)          (0.030)         (0.011)          (0.019)           (0.003)         (0.034)         (0.022)
            Total transactionality (a) + (b) + (c) + (d)            -0.010          0.019*           -0.007          -0.008           0.094              0.016           0.063          -0.012
                                                                   (0.033)         (0.011)          (0.072)         (0.038)          (0.058)           (0.011)         (0.071)         (0.069)
            Average monthly account balance                      3,616.752*       2,041.990      6,531.610***     3,819.453**      4,425.518*         2,672.709      4,096.390*     5,569.400**
8




                                                                 (2,100.507)     (1,637.884)      (1,876.770)     (1,533.978)      (2,597.346)       (1,619.132)     (2,403.549)    (2,276.862)
            Maximum monthly account balance                      7,853.093**     4,241.635*        5,385.363       1,841.118      17,735.971***       3,083.098       4,201.990      7,420.492
                                                                 (3,337.649)     (2,288.351)      (5,011.287)     (2,866.701)      (5,482.454)       (1,988.390)     (4,686.818)    (6,229.629)
          Panel B: Standardized eects
            Number of monthly withdraws (a)                          0.005            0.012          -0.055           -0.053           0.045             0.009          -0.033          -0.066
                                                                   (0.031)          (0.008)         (0.066)          (0.042)          (0.060)          (0.010)         (0.066)         (0.068)
            Number of other debit transactions (b)                  -0.053           -0.006          -0.041           -0.002           0.060           0.022**           0.017         0.037**
                                                                   (0.042)          (0.023)         (0.049)          (0.016)          (0.072)          (0.010)         (0.039)         (0.017)
            Number of total debit transactions (a) + (b)            -0.016           0.010           -0.068           -0.049           0.068            0.019           -0.016          -0.042
                                                                   (0.036)          (0.012)         (0.067)          (0.038)          (0.062)          (0.012)         (0.058)         (0.062)
            Number of active credits (c)                           0.093**            0.047          -0.014            0.038           0.100            -0.008           0.017          -0.003
                                                                   (0.042)          (0.040)         (0.046)          (0.042)          (0.073)          (0.052)         (0.032)         (0.041)
            Number of monthly deposits (d)                           0.006         0.016***         0.102*             0.023           0.055            -0.000         0.150**           0.021
                                                                   (0.014)          (0.005)         (0.055)          (0.021)          (0.035)          (0.005)         (0.063)         (0.041)
            Total transactionality (a) + (b) + (c) + (d)            -0.008          0.016*           -0.006           -0.007           0.078             0.013           0.053          -0.010
                                                                   (0.027)          (0.009)         (0.060)          (0.032)          (0.048)          (0.009)         (0.060)         (0.058)
            Average monthly account balance                        0.047*             0.026        0.084***          0.049**          0.057*            0.035          0.053*          0.072**
                                                                   (0.027)          (0.021)         (0.024)          (0.020)          (0.034)          (0.021)         (0.031)         (0.029)
            Maximum monthly account balance                        0.057**          0.031*            0.039            0.013         0.128***           0.022            0.030           0.054
                                                                   (0.024)          (0.017)         (0.036)          (0.021)          (0.040)          (0.014)         (0.034)         (0.045)

    N otes: Average savings are standardized using the mean and the variance from January 2014. Controls include: randomization blocks, account is from Banco Agrario, average savings up to April 2015,
    number of financial institutions in the district, and a set of socioeconomic covariates at the municipal level. Clustered standard errors in parenthesis. *p¡.1, ** p ¡.05, *** p¡.01.
    5      Results: Estimates without Controls

                                                     Table 9: Impact of LISTA on Financial Knowledge - without Controls


                                                                                First follow-up                       Second follow-up                       Third follow-up
                                                                        Obs      Control      Treatment        Obs      Control      Treatment        Obs      Control      Treatment
                             Knowledge: total score                    2,502       5.120       0.199***       2,305       5.574       0.173***       2,180      5.325        0.124***
                                                                                                (0.036)                               (0.055)                                (0.045)

                             Knowledge: savings section                2,502       2.110       0.227***       2,305       2.256       0.154***       2,180      2.059        0.114**
                                                                                                (0.036)                               (0.054)                                (0.050)
                                                                                                [0.000]                               [0.012]                                [0.046]
                             Knowledge: budget section                 2,502       1.442       0.141***       2,305       1.602         0.074        2,180      1.540        0.124***
                                                                                                (0.040)                               (0.047)                                (0.037)
                                                                                                [0.001]                               [0.126]                                [0.000]
                             Knowledge: debt section                   2,502       1.568         -0.015       2,305       1.716        0.076*        2,180      1.726         -0.025
                                                                                                (0.044)                               (0.042)                                (0.045)
                                                                                                [0.728]                               [0.126]                                [0.567]
                             Knowledge extended: total score                                                  2,305       8.639       0.190***       2,180      7.790        0.156***
9




                                                                                                                                      (0.064)                                (0.052)

                             Knowledge extended: savings                                                      2,305       3.135       0.164***       2,180      2.908        0.124**
                                                                                                                                      (0.057)                                (0.051)
                                                                                                                                      [0.015]                                [0.023]
                             Knowledge extended: budget                                                       2,305       2.262        0.151**       2,180      1.971        0.158***
                                                                                                                                      (0.058)                                (0.049)
                                                                                                                                      [0.025]                                [0.001]
                             Knowledge extended: debt                                                         2,305       3.242         0.064        2,180      2.911          0.021
                                                                                                                                      (0.050)                                (0.040)
                                                                                                                                      [0.185]                                [0.582]
                             Knowledge extended: math                                                         2,305       1.623        0.090*
                                                                                                                                      (0.053)
                                                                                                                                      [0.157]

    N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the municipality level (in parenthesis).
    Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control only for randomization blocks. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
                                              Table 10: Impact of LISTA on Financial Attitudes - without Controls


                                                                           First follow-up                   Second follow-up                  Third follow-up
                                                                   Obs     Control    Treatment      Obs      Control   Treatment      Obs      Control   Treatment

              Has a savings goal                                   2,396     0.368     0.168***      2,301      0.270    0.074***     2,177      0.280     0.118***
                                                                                        (0.023)                           (0.024)                           (0.023)
                                                                                        [0.000]                           [0.004]                           [0.000]
              Believes can leave money in MFA account              1,597     0.650     0.125***      1,405      0.685    0.072***      1,441     0.736      0.053*
                                                                                        (0.021)                           (0.024)                           (0.029)
                                                                                        [0.000]                           [0.005]                           [0.267]
              Trust in bank                                        1,749     2.727     0.201***      1,588      2.616    0.205***      1,528     2.604      0.083*
                                                                                        (0.045)                           (0.050)                           (0.049)
                                                                                        [0.000]                           [0.000]                           [0.267]
              Comfort with banks                                   1,720     2.356     0.187***      1,557      2.471      0.026       1,510     2.599       0.088
                                                                                        (0.047)                           (0.057)                           (0.053)
10




                                                                                        [0.000]                           [0.653]                           [0.267]
              Preference: money in bank vs. cash                   1,773     3.552     0.145***      1,624      2.734    0.176***      1,555     2.796     0.186***
                                                                                        (0.037)                           (0.050)                           (0.056)
                                                                                        [0.000]                           [0.004]                           [0.003]
              Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month                                          1,621      3.170    -0.175***     1,553     2.971      -0.089*
                                                                                                                          (0.047)                           (0.052)
                                                                                                                           [0.001]                          [0.267]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control only for randomization blocks. The control means column shows
     non-standardized values.
                                     Table 11: Impact of LISTA on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA) - without Controls


                                                                     First follow-up                   Second follow-up                  Third follow-up
                                                              Obs     Control    Treatment     Obs      Control    Treatment     Obs      Control    Treatment
                   Manages household finances                1,712     0.929      0.015*       1,582      0.915      0.016       1,512     0.932       0.006
                                                                                  (0.009)                           (0.011)                           (0.012)
                                                                                  [0.236]                           [0.585]                           [0.977]
                   Keeps written track of accounts           1,655     0.228       0.036       1,500      0.158      0.009       1,451     0.347       0.011
                                                                                  (0.022)                           (0.017)                           (0.026)
                                                                                  [0.236]                           [0.943]                           [0.977]
                   Withdrew last MFA transfer                1,663     0.840       -0.012      1,577      0.782      0.005       1,448     0.835       0.032
                                                                                  (0.013)                           (0.016)                           (0.020)
                                                                                  [0.369]                           [0.943]                           [0.555]
                   Accompanied when withdrew                 1,521     0.401      0.061***      982       0.492      0.039       1,415     0.412       0.033
                                                                                   (0.021)                          (0.028)                           (0.031)
                                                                                   [0.014]                          [0.585]                           [0.873]
                   Has money in MFA account (today)                                            1,237      0.353     0.063*       1,318     0.497       0.049
                                                                                                                    (0.034)                           (0.035)
11




                                                                                                                    [0.384]                           [0.712]
                   Leaves money in MFA account                                                 1,384      0.360     0.065**      1,411     0.419       0.019
                                                                                                                    (0.026)                           (0.033)
                                                                                                                    [0.107]                           [0.977]
                   Someone helped use ATM                                                       494       0.661      0.008        600      0.630       0.022
                                                                                                                    (0.044)                           (0.037)
                                                                                                                    [0.943]                           [0.977]
                   Feels can teach ATM use                                                     1,563      0.390     0.063**      1,508     0.555       -0.013
                                                                                                                    (0.028)                           (0.023)
                                                                                                                    [0.186]                           [0.977]
                   Has taught someone use ATM                                                  1,563      0.195     0.051*       1,508     0.255       0.023
                                                                                                                    (0.028)                           (0.027)
                                                                                                                    [0.384]                           [0.933]
                   Has a MFA card                                                              1,577      0.822      0.036       1,449     0.956      0.029*
                                                                                                                    (0.047)                           (0.016)
                                                                                                                    [0.886]                           [0.447]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control only for randomization blocks. The control means column shows
     non-standardized values.
                                         Table 12: Impact of LISTA on Financial Practices (Budget) - without Controls


                                                                          First follow-up                 Second follow-up                Third follow-up
                                                                  Obs     Control    Treatment    Obs      Control    Treatment   Obs      Control   Treatment
                     In case of a 350k emergency
                       Would use savings                          2,412     0.193     0.169***    2,223      0.069    0.082***    2,121     0.085     0.059***
                                                                                       (0.023)                         (0.010)                         (0.016)
                                                                                       [0.000]                         [0.000]                         [0.001]
                       Would use loans                            2,412     0.752     -0.156***   2,223      0.822    -0.106***   2,121     0.838     -0.063***
                                                                                       (0.023)                         (0.017)                         (0.022)
                                                                                       [0.000]                         [0.000]                         [0.019]
                       Would sell or pawn something              2,412      0.036       -0.009    2,223      0.099      0.022     2,121     0.042       0.006
                                                                                       (0.008)                         (0.015)                         (0.011)
                                                                                       [0.250]                         [0.146]                         [0.807]
                       Would look for a job                                                       2,247      0.029     -0.014**   2,141     0.026      -0.001
                                                                                                                       (0.006)                         (0.007)
                                                                                                                       [0.044]                         [0.844]
                     In case of receiving 300k extra
                       Would save                                                                 2,305      0.852     0.046**    2,177     0.833      0.041**
                                                                                                                       (0.019)                         (0.017)
12




                                                                                                                       [0.059]                         [0.053]
                       Would spend on healthcare or education                                     2,305      0.083      0.009     2,172     0.962       0.005
                                                                                                                       (0.012)                         (0.009)
                                                                                                                       [0.689]                         [0.772]
                       Would build, improve or buy a house                                        2,294      0.796      -0.018    2,172     0.802       0.020
                                                                                                                       (0.020)                         (0.019)
                                                                                                                       [0.689]                         [0.635]
                       Would spend on household expenses                                          2,305      0.063     -0.018*    2,175     0.833      -0.010
                                                                                                                       (0.010)                         (0.017)
                                                                                                                       [0.308]                         [0.772]
                       Would invest in business                                                   2,300      0.843      0.015     2,176     0.895       0.022
                                                                                                                       (0.015)                         (0.014)
                                                                                                                       [0.689]                         [0.380]
                     Was able to cover household expenses                                         2,112      0.361      0.037*    2,004     0.366     0.078***
                                                                                                                       (0.020)                         (0.021)
                                                                                                                       [0.130]                         [0.001]
                     Household weekly expenditure                                                 2,112    143,147      -0.007    1,968    154,229     -0.013
                                                                                                                       (0.047)                         (0.057)
                                                                                                                       [0.880]                         [0.839]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control only for randomization blocks. The control means column shows
     non-standardized values.
                                 Table 13: Impact of LISTA on Financial Performance (Self - Reported) - without Controls


                                                                       First follow-up                 Second follow-up                Third follow-up
                                                               Obs     Control    Treatment    Obs      Control    Treatment   Obs      Control   Treatment
                        Panel A: Probability of saving
                          Has formal or informal savings       2,502     0.601     0.147***   2,305       0.385    0.112***    2,180     0.434     0.110***
                                                                                    (0.022)                         (0.019)                         (0.024)

                          Has formal savings                   2,502     0.105      0.030**    2,305      0.092      0.008     2,178     0.101       0.023
                                                                                    (0.013)                         (0.011)                         (0.014)

                          Has informal savings                 2,501     0.568     0.150***   2,304       0.334    0.109***    2,180     0.390     0.099***
                                                                                    (0.022)                         (0.020)                         (0.022)

                          Has savings in a bank                2,488     0.052     0.029***    2,299      0.063      -0.003    2,170     0.063       0.008
                                                                                    (0.009)                         (0.009)                         (0.012)
                                                                                    [0.005]                         [0.796]                         [0.457]
                          Has savings in cooperative           2,481     0.059       0.016     2,297      0.032      0.016*    2,172     0.045      0.020**
                                                                                    (0.012)                         (0.008)                         (0.008)
                                                                                    [0.133]                         [0.107]                         [0.016]
13




                          Has savings in piggy bank            2,492     0.559     0.149***   2,298       0.325    0.106***    2,173     0.360     0.092***
                                                                                    (0.022)                         (0.020)                         (0.018)
                                                                                    [0.000]                         [0.000]                         [0.000]
                        Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
                          Total formal and informal savings    2,519    115,635    0.505***    2,322    138,010     0.889***   2,195    156,347    0.851***
                                                                                    (0.160)                         (0.338)                         (0.304)

                          Total formal savings                 2,519    38,248      1.326**    2,322     63,128      1.303     2,194    57,070       1.311
                                                                                    (0.659)                         (1.199)                         (1.036)

                          Total informal savings               2,519    70,934     0.507***    2,322     53,033     0.840***   2,135    88,950     0.997***
                                                                                    (0.159)                         (0.277)                         (0.267)

                          Savings in a bank                    2,519    17,161     3.294***    2,322     39,249      0.730     2,186    26,124       0.868
                                                                                    (1.101)                         (2.170)                         (1.321)
                                                                                    [0.007]                         [0.767]                         [0.512]
                          Savings in piggy bank                2,519    62,864     0.466***    2,322     42,182     0.891***   2,135    63,510     0.772***
                                                                                    (0.166)                         (0.288)                         (0.170)
                                                                                    [0.009]                         [0.005]                         [0.000]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control only for randomization blocks. The control means column shows
     non-standardized values.
                                               Table 14: Impact of LISTA on Psycosocial Indicators - without Controls


                                                                     First follow-up                 Second follow-up                Third follow-up
                                                              Obs    Control    Treatment    Obs      Control    Treatment   Obs      Control   Treatment
                          Optimism                                                           2,241      5.785      0.090*    2,128     5.846       0.012
                                                                                                                  (0.048)                         (0.048)
                                                                                                                  [0.286]                         [0.812]
                          Pessimism                                                          2,252      2.404     -0.115**   2,114     2.859      -0.049
                                                                                                                  (0.046)                         (0.063)
                                                                                                                  [0.087]                         [0.738]
                          People trust                                                       2,284      0.052      -0.012    2,172     0.114      -0.021
                                                                                                                  (0.010)                         (0.015)
                                                                                                                  [0.458]                         [0.499]
                          More trustworthy of other people                                   2,297      1.830      0.077
                                                                                                                  (0.048)
                                                                                                                  [0.389]
                          Interested in savings program                                      2,232      2.974      0.044
                                                                                                                  (0.058)
14




                                                                                                                  [0.681]
                          There are lots of ways around                                      2,305      5.743      0.027
                          any problem that I am facing now                                                        (0.063)
                                                                                                                  [0.681]
                          Is meeting her goals                                               2,305      5.312      0.086
                                                                                                                  (0.053)
                                                                                                                  [0.389]
                          Self-e cacy                                                                                        2,180     3.017       0.044
                                                                                                                                                  (0.052)
                                                                                                                                                  [0.738]
                          Future orientation                                                                                 2,180     3.255       0.067
                                                                                                                                                  (0.046)
                                                                                                                                                  [0.497]
                          Social capital                                                                                     2,180     1.709       0.090
                                                                                                                                                  (0.056)
                                                                                                                                                  [0.426]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control only for randomization blocks. The control means column shows
     non-standardized values.
     6      Results: Treatment-on-the-Treated estimates

                                                               Table 15: Impact of LISTA on Financial Knowledge - ToT


                                                                                 First follow-up                       Second follow-up                       Third follow-up
                                                                         Obs      Control      Treatment        Obs      Control      Treatment        Obs      Control      Treatment
                              Knowledge: total score                    2,502       5.126       0.251***       2,305       5.589       0.216***       2,180      5.330        0.177***
                                                                                                 (0.040)                               (0.060)                                (0.056)

                              Knowledge: savings section                2,502       2.120       0.287***       2,305       2.264       0.186***       2,180      2.058        0.163***
                                                                                                 (0.042)                               (0.059)                                (0.063)
                                                                                                 [0.000]                               [0.004]                                [0.017]
                              Knowledge: budget section                 2,502       1.435       0.180***       2,305       1.607        0.095*        2,180      1.541        0.180***
                                                                                                 (0.046)                               (0.054)                                (0.052)
                                                                                                 [0.000]                               [0.083]                                [0.002]
                              Knowledge: debt section                   2,502       1.572         -0.023       2,305       1.718        0.101**       2,180      1.731         -0.042
                                                                                                 (0.054)                               (0.049)                                (0.052)
                                                                                                 [0.683]                               [0.083]                                [0.423]
                              Knowledge extended: total score                                                  2,305       8.661       0.236***       2,180      7.822        0.218***
15




                                                                                                                                       (0.066)                                (0.063)

                              Knowledge extended: savings                                                      2,305       3.140       0.197***       2,180      2.912        0.171***
                                                                                                                                       (0.065)                                (0.064)
                                                                                                                                       [0.006]                                [0.012]
                              Knowledge extended: budget                                                       2,305       2.267       0.190***       2,180      1.991        0.224***
                                                                                                                                       (0.056)                                (0.062)
                                                                                                                                       [0.004]                                [0.000]
                              Knowledge extended: debt                                                         2,305       3.254         0.084        2,180      2.918          0.028
                                                                                                                                       (0.056)                                (0.048)
                                                                                                                                       [0.143]                                [0.557]
                              Knowledge extended: math                                                         2,305       1.624        0.111**
                                                                                                                                       (0.056)
                                                                                                                                       [0.070]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the municipality level (in parenthesis).
     Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and
     bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
                                                       Table 16: Impact of LISTA on Financial Attitudes - ToT


                                                                            First follow-up                    Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                                     Obs     Control     Treatment      Obs     Control     Treatment      Obs     Control     Treatment
              Has a savings goal                                    2,396      0.373      0.209***     2,301      0.267      0.090***     2,177     0.290       0.161***
                                                                                           (0.026)                            (0.028)                            (0.028)
                                                                                           [0.000]                            [0.000]                            [0.000]
              Believes can leave money in MFA account               1,597      0.649      0.149***     1,405      0.680      0.089***     1,441      0.734      0.067**
                                                                                           (0.024)                            (0.028)                           (0.033)
                                                                                           [0.000]                            [0.006]                           [0.156]
              Trust in bank                                         1,749      2.726      0.256***     1,588      2.627      0.245***     1,528      2.593       0.110*
                                                                                           (0.055)                            (0.057)                            (0.057)
                                                                                           [0.000]                            [0.000]                            [0.156]
              Comfort with banks                                    1,720      2.368      0.238***     1,557      2.467        0.028      1,510      2.603       0.115*
                                                                                           (0.057)                            (0.061)                            (0.065)
                                                                                           [0.001]                            [0.639]                            [0.156]
              Preference: money in bank vs. cash                    1,773      3.530      0.196***     1,624      2.751      0.216***     1,555      2.822      0.241***
                                                                                           (0.047)                            (0.055)                            (0.069)
16




                                                                                           [0.001]                            [0.000]                            [0.002]
              Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month                                            1,621      3.161     -0.200***     1,553      2.972      -0.107*
                                                                                                                             (0.053)                            (0.061)
                                                                                                                              [0.000]                           [0.156]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
                                              Table 17: Impact of LISTA on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA) - ToT


                                                                       First follow-up                   Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                               Obs     Control     Treatment      Obs     Control     Treatment      Obs     Control     Treatment
                    Manages household finances                 1,712     0.928       0.020*      1,582      0.918       0.021*      1,512      0.934        0.009
                                                                                     (0.011)                            (0.012)                            (0.014)
                                                                                     [0.177]                            [0.367]                            [0.907]
                    Keeps written track of accounts            1,655     0.222        0.040      1,500      0.163        0.014      1,451      0.346        0.025
                                                                                     (0.025)                            (0.020)                            (0.030)
                                                                                     [0.187]                            [0.910]                            [0.898]
                    Withdrew last MFA transfer                 1,663     0.837        -0.008     1,577      0.784        0.011      1,448      0.825      0.047**
                                                                                     (0.014)                            (0.019)                           (0.023)
                                                                                     [0.569]                            [0.910]                           [0.264]
                    Accompanied when withdrew                  1,521     0.407      0.076***      982       0.504        0.054      1,415      0.413        0.043
                                                                                     (0.025)                            (0.034)                            (0.037)
                                                                                     [0.010]                            [0.401]                            [0.825]
                    Has money in MFA account (today)                                             1,237      0.357       0.077*      1,318      0.499        0.055
                                                                                                                        (0.042)                            (0.043)
17




                                                                                                                        [0.366]                            [0.789]
                    Leaves money in MFA account                                                  1,384      0.366      0.081***     1,411      0.425        0.023
                                                                                                                        (0.031)                            (0.038)
                                                                                                                        [0.096]                            [0.907]
                    Someone helped use ATM                                                        494       0.657        0.005       600       0.625        0.020
                                                                                                                        (0.047)                            (0.041)
                                                                                                                        [0.919]                            [0.907]
                    Feels can teach ATM use                                                      1,563      0.395      0.068***     1,508      0.544        -0.015
                                                                                                                        (0.023)                            (0.022)
                                                                                                                        [0.048]                            [0.907]
                    Has taught someone use ATM                                                   1,563      0.201      0.056**      1,508      0.250        0.031
                                                                                                                       (0.027)                             (0.027)
                                                                                                                       [0.248]                             [0.825]
                    Has a MFA card                                                               1,577      0.825        0.018      1,449      0.954      0.034***
                                                                                                                        (0.027)                            (0.013)
                                                                                                                        [0.910]                            [0.073]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
                                                   Table 18: Impact of LISTA on Financial Practices (Budget) - ToT


                                                                       First follow-up                   Second follow-up                     Third follow-up
                                                                Obs     Control    Treatment     Obs       Control     Treatment      Obs       Control     Treatment

                 In case of a 350k emergency
                    Would use savings                          2,412     0.195     0.213***     2,223       0.076       0.102***     2,121       0.084       0.077***
                                                                                    (0.026)                              (0.013)                                (0.019)
                                                                                    [0.000]                              [0.000]                                [0.000]
                    Would use loans                            2,412     0.751     -0.201***    2,223       0.815       -0.132***    2,121       0.840       -0.083***
                                                                                    (0.027)                              (0.020)                                (0.025)
                                                                                    [0.000]                              [0.000]                                [0.002]
                    Would sell or pawn something               2,412     0.035       -0.008     2,223       0.098           0.027    2,121       0.039           0.009
                                                                                    (0.009)                              (0.017)                                (0.012)
                                                                                    [0.412]                              [0.103]                                [0.715]
                    Would look for a job                                                        2,247       0.028       -0.016**     2,141       0.027          -0.000
                                                                                                                         (0.007)                                (0.009)
                                                                                                                         [0.049]                                [0.893]
                 In case of receiving 300k extra
                    Would save                                                                  2,305       0.854        0.055**     2,177       0.835          0.053**
18




                                                                                                                         (0.022)                                (0.021)
                                                                                                                         [0.059]                                [0.053]
                    Would spend on healthcare or education                                      2,305       0.083           0.010    2,172       0.965           0.005
                                                                                                                         (0.014)                                (0.011)
                                                                                                                         [0.623]                                [0.739]
                    Would build, improve or buy a house                                         2,294       0.791           -0.023   2,172       0.804           0.020
                                                                                                                         (0.022)                                (0.023)
                                                                                                                         [0.623]                                [0.739]
                    Would spend on household expenses                                           2,305       0.064        -0.023*     2,175       0.843          -0.015
                                                                                                                         (0.012)                                (0.021)
                                                                                                                         [0.204]                                [0.739]
                    Would invest in business                                                    2,300       0.848           0.016    2,176       0.899           0.027
                                                                                                                         (0.018)                                (0.018)
                                                                                                                         [0.623]                                [0.368]
                 Was able to cover household expenses                                           2,112       0.360        0.044*      2,004       0.373       0.096***
                                                                                                                         (0.025)                                (0.027)
                                                                                                                         [0.158]                                [0.002]
                 Household weekly expenditure                                                   2,112    144,602.704        0.005    1,968   155,571.947        -0.010
                                                                                                                         (0.055)                                (0.071)
                                                                                                                         [0.909]                                [0.884]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
                                            Table 19: Impact of LISTA on Financial Performance (Self - Reported) - ToT


                                                                    First follow-up                     Second follow-up                     Third follow-up
                                                           Obs       Control      Treatment     Obs       Control     Treatment      Obs      Control      Treatment
                  Panel A: Probability of saving
                     Has formal or informal savings       2,502       0.600       0.182***      2,305      0.385       0.134***     2,180       0.439       0.145***
                                                                                      (0.027)                           (0.022)                                (0.028)

                     Has formal savings                   2,502       0.106           0.038**   2,305      0.089           0.009    2,178       0.096          0.032*
                                                                                      (0.016)                           (0.014)                                (0.017)

                     Has informal savings                 2,501       0.568       0.185***      2,304      0.336       0.132***     2,180       0.397       0.129***
                                                                                      (0.026)                           (0.023)                                (0.026)

                     Has savings in a bank                2,488       0.054       0.036***      2,299      0.061           -0.004   2,170       0.058           0.013
                                                                                      (0.011)                           (0.011)                                (0.015)
                                                                                      [0.004]                           [0.711]                                [0.360]
                     Has savings in cooperative           2,481       0.059            0.021    2,297      0.030        0.019*      2,172       0.045       0.028***
                                                                                      (0.014)                           (0.010)                                (0.009)
                                                                                      [0.121]                           [0.107]                                [0.007]
19




                     Has savings in piggy bank            2,492       0.559       0.185***      2,298      0.326       0.127***     2,173       0.367       0.119***
                                                                                      (0.026)                           (0.023)                                (0.021)
                                                                                      [0.000]                           [0.000]                                [0.000]
                  Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
                     Total formal and informal savings    2,502    116,452.128    0.641***      2,305   130,451.403     1.015**     2,180    155,136.981    1.126***
                                                                                      (0.203)                           (0.413)                                (0.355)

                     Total formal savings                 2,502    36,004.654         1.475*    2,305   57,237.223         1.132    2,179    52,123.774         1.669
                                                                                      (0.828)                           (1.474)                                (1.242)

                     Total informal savings               2,502    74,136.303     0.632***      2,305   53,193.501     0.967***     2,120    91,590.208     1.301***
                                                                                      (0.206)                           (0.329)                                (0.319)

                     Savings in a bank                    2,502    16,009.309     3.891***      2,305   36,068.833         0.302    2,172    23,701.967         0.733
                                                                                      (1.341)                           (2.452)                                (1.583)
                                                                                      [0.009]                           [0.912]                                [0.028]
                     Savings in piggy bank                2,502    65,065.824     0.579***      2,305   42,344.165     1.005***     2,120    63,980.339     0.982***
                                                                                      (0.216)                           (0.337)                                (0.201)
                                                                                      [0.016]                           [0.002]                                [0.000]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
                                                     Table 20: Impact of LISTA on Psycosocial Indicators - ToT


                                                                     First follow-up                    Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                              Obs     Control    Treatment      Obs      Control    Treatment      Obs      Control    Treatment
                      Optimism                                                                  2,241      5.806      0.115**      2,128     5.850        0.034
                                                                                                                      (0.052)                            (0.057)
                                                                                                                      [0.157]                            [0.680]
                      Pessimism                                                                 2,252      2.355     -0.145***     2,114     2.857        -0.070
                                                                                                                      (0.053)                            (0.075)
                                                                                                                       [0.038]                           [0.680]
                      People trust                                                              2,284      0.046       -0.016      2,172     0.105        -0.030
                                                                                                                      (0.011)                            (0.019)
                                                                                                                      [0.356]                            [0.466]
                      More trustworthy of other people                                          2,297      1.840      0.097*
                                                                                                                      (0.052)
                                                                                                                      [0.276]
                      Interested in savings program                                             2,232      2.989       0.066
                                                                                                                      (0.065)
20




                                                                                                                      [0.503]
                      There are lots of ways around                                             2,305      5.750       0.031
                      any problem that I am facing now                                                                (0.071)
                                                                                                                      [0.694]
                      Is meeting her goals                                                      2,305      5.323      0.107*
                                                                                                                      (0.062)
                                                                                                                      [0.279]
                      Self-e cacy                                                                                                  2,180     3.011        0.060
                                                                                                                                                         (0.065)
                                                                                                                                                         [0.680]
                      Future orientation                                                                                           2,180     3.262        0.082
                                                                                                                                                         (0.054)
                                                                                                                                                         [0.466]
                      Social capital                                                                                               2,180     1.720        0.107
                                                                                                                                                         (0.068)
                                                                                                                                                         [0.466]

     N otes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%, based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing. Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level (in parenthesis). Romano-Wolf adjusted p-values (in square brackets). Regressions control for randomization blocks, individual and household characteristics
     (gender, age, number of member in the household,...) and bank characteristics. The control means column shows non-standardized values.
     7     Results: Heterogeneous Eects

                                   Table 21: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Knowledge


                                                                                       Area                  Region                  Schooling
                                                                    Total      Urban          Rural    Caribe      Pacifico    Primary     Secondary
                                                                     (1)        (2)            (3)      (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                            Knowledge: total score                0.201***    0.160***    0.240***    0.180***     0.258***    0.253***     0.173***
                                                                   (0.033)     (0.049)     (0.041)     (0.038)      (0.060)     (0.050)      (0.046)
                            Knowledge: savings section            0.230***    0.191***    0.260***    0.184***     0.337***    0.266***     0.205***
                                                                   (0.035)     (0.048)     (0.042)     (0.043)      (0.046)     (0.045)      (0.050)
                            Knowledge: budget section             0.144***    0.139***    0.157***    0.144***     0.152*      0.148***     0.152***
                                                                   (0.038)     (0.051)     (0.049)     (0.040)     (0.080)      (0.050)      (0.049)
                            Knowledge: debt section                 -0.018      -0.047      0.011       -0.002      -0.045       0.038        -0.049
                                                                   (0.044)     (0.047)     (0.064)     (0.040)     (0.106)      (0.072)      (0.056)
                            Knowledge extended: total score
21




                            Knowledge extended: savings

                            Knowledge extended: budget

                            Knowledge extended: debt

                            Knowledge extended: math



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                                   Table 22: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Knowledge


                                                                  Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                  Interactions with age quartiles
                                                      Total       Treat      Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4      Treat      Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3    Treat*Q4
                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)
               Knowledge: total score               0.201***     0.169**       0.054        -0.016       0.054      0.151**       -0.000       0.066       0.128
                                                     (0.033)     (0.070)      (0.111)      (0.115)      (0.101)     (0.074)      (0.102)      (0.104)     (0.111)
               Knowledge: savings section           0.230***     0.245***      -0.082       -0.008       -0.009     0.148*        -0.020       0.129      0.208*
                                                     (0.035)      (0.064)     (0.104)      (0.104)      (0.102)     (0.078)      (0.112)      (0.104)     (0.109)
               Knowledge: budget section            0.144***      0.059       0.175*        0.091        0.077       0.142        -0.044       0.079       -0.026
                                                     (0.038)     (0.064)      (0.100)      (0.100)      (0.094)     (0.086)      (0.113)      (0.114)     (0.106)
               Knowledge: debt section                -0.018      -0.024       0.049        -0.106       0.049       -0.013       0.066        -0.103      0.021
                                                     (0.044)     (0.089)      (0.112)      (0.121)      (0.125)     (0.075)      (0.112)      (0.107)     (0.128)
               Knowledge extended: total score

               Knowledge extended: savings
22




               Knowledge extended: budget

               Knowledge extended: debt

               Knowledge extended: math



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                                  Table 23: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Knowledge


                                                                                         Area                Region               Schooling
                                                                      Total     Urban           Rural   Caribe    Pacifico   Primary    Secondary
                                                                       (1)       (2)             (3)     (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)
                                 Knowledge: total score             0.177***    0.115*     0.238***     0.118**   0.332***   0.242***    0.125**
                                                                    (0.050)    (0.058)      (0.072)     (0.056)   (0.096)    (0.078)     (0.059)
                                 Knowledge: savings section         0.153***    0.129*     0.189***     0.103*    0.305***   0.217***     0.103
                                                                    (0.050)    (0.071)      (0.065)     (0.057)   (0.104)    (0.071)     (0.063)
                                 Knowledge: budget section           0.078*      0.050      0.106*       0.055     0.151*    0.138**      0.030
                                                                    (0.045)    (0.055)      (0.059)     (0.055)   (0.082)    (0.066)     (0.051)
                                 Knowledge: debt section             0.083**     0.006      0.136**      0.049     0.120      0.065      0.094*
                                                                    (0.041)    (0.050)      (0.066)     (0.047)   (0.074)    (0.061)     (0.052)
                                 Knowledge extended: total score    0.194***     0.108     0.280***     0.136**   0.346***   0.271***    0.125**
                                                                    (0.055)    (0.072)      (0.070)     (0.062)   (0.107)    (0.075)     (0.062)
                                 Knowledge extended: savings        0.162***     0.116     0.210***      0.092    0.356***   0.224***    0.111*
                                                                    (0.054)    (0.075)      (0.070)     (0.057)   (0.124)    (0.072)     (0.064)
                                 Knowledge extended: budget         0.157***    0.100*     0.215***     0.147**   0.211**    0.203***    0.111**
                                                                    (0.046)    (0.059)      (0.061)     (0.056)   (0.090)    (0.062)     (0.051)
23




                                 Knowledge extended: debt             0.069     -0.003      0.135**      0.036     0.113      0.112*      0.027
                                                                    (0.047)    (0.071)      (0.065)     (0.054)   (0.086)    (0.067)     (0.064)
                                 Knowledge extended: math            0.091*      0.013     0.188***      0.057     0.168*     0.116*      0.082
                                                                    (0.047)    (0.073)      (0.051)     (0.061)   (0.081)    (0.066)     (0.056)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                                  Table 24: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Knowledge


                                                                    Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles               Interactions with age quartiles
                                                         Total     Treat     Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3    Treat*Q4      Treat       Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                          (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)
                    Knowledge: total score             0.177***    0.154*      -0.003      0.136       -0.057     0.162*         -0.033      -0.044           0.133
                                                       (0.050)    (0.087)     (0.103)     (0.121)     (0.126)     (0.081)       (0.108)      (0.104)      (0.125)
                    Knowledge: savings section         0.153***   0.161**      -0.060      0.090       -0.071      0.073         0.150        0.052           0.112
                                                       (0.050)    (0.074)     (0.099)     (0.122)     (0.134)     (0.089)       (0.106)      (0.098)      (0.126)
                    Knowledge: budget section           0.078*      0.014      0.090       0.140       0.022       0.041         -0.061       0.049           0.151
                                                       (0.045)    (0.083)     (0.112)     (0.099)     (0.090)     (0.075)       (0.113)      (0.088)      (0.112)
                    Knowledge: debt section            0.083**      0.085      -0.009      0.021       -0.041     0.213**      -0.247**      -0.236*      -0.033
24




                                                       (0.041)    (0.081)     (0.110)     (0.111)     (0.118)     (0.090)       (0.122)      (0.129)      (0.110)
                    Knowledge extended: total score    0.194***   0.215**      -0.033      0.006       -0.078     0.192**        -0.041      -0.044           0.093
                                                       (0.055)    (0.093)     (0.113)     (0.119)     (0.128)     (0.079)       (0.111)      (0.104)      (0.123)
                    Knowledge extended: savings        0.162***    0.159*      -0.045      0.106       -0.050      0.089         0.149        0.003           0.131
                                                       (0.054)    (0.082)     (0.107)     (0.128)     (0.138)     (0.088)       (0.112)      (0.100)      (0.127)
                    Knowledge extended: budget         0.157***     0.127      0.079       0.012       0.005       0.123         -0.079       0.091           0.120
                                                       (0.046)    (0.095)     (0.124)     (0.114)     (0.113)     (0.075)       (0.109)      (0.094)      (0.115)
                    Knowledge extended: debt             0.069     0.142*      -0.094      -0.116      -0.110     0.175*         -0.171      -0.180       -0.068
                                                       (0.047)    (0.084)     (0.108)     (0.114)     (0.124)     (0.092)       (0.128)      (0.129)      (0.122)
                    Knowledge extended: math            0.091*     0.143*      -0.066      -0.112      -0.076      0.051         0.075        0.130       -0.049
                                                       (0.047)    (0.085)     (0.113)     (0.140)     (0.125)     (0.078)       (0.119)      (0.123)      (0.109)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                                   Table 25: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Knowledge


                                                                                         Area                  Region               Schooling
                                                                     Total      Urban           Rural    Caribe     Pacifico   Primary    Secondary
                                                                      (1)        (2)             (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)
                                 Knowledge: total score            0.140***     0.112*      0.152**       0.089*    0.265***   0.150**     0.125**
                                                                    (0.045)    (0.062)      (0.065)      (0.053)    (0.077)    (0.059)     (0.058)
                                 Knowledge: savings section         0.129**     0.106*      0.153**       0.064     0.306***   0.137**     0.114*
                                                                    (0.050)    (0.062)      (0.075)      (0.060)    (0.081)    (0.059)     (0.063)
                                 Knowledge: budget section         0.143***     0.089      0.183***      0.157***    0.103     0.158***    0.134**
                                                                    (0.042)    (0.063)      (0.060)      (0.051)    (0.062)    (0.058)     (0.052)
                                 Knowledge: debt section             -0.033     -0.004          -0.084    -0.062     0.017      -0.039     -0.035
25




                                                                    (0.042)    (0.058)      (0.068)      (0.052)    (0.064)    (0.056)     (0.056)
                                 Knowledge extended: total score    0.173***    0.141*     0.183***      0.135**    0.258**    0.218***    0.119*
                                                                    (0.051)    (0.072)      (0.063)      (0.060)    (0.091)    (0.061)     (0.062)
                                 Knowledge extended: savings        0.136**     0.100       0.161**       0.075     0.285***   0.178***     0.093
                                                                    (0.051)    (0.067)      (0.073)      (0.060)    (0.098)    (0.055)     (0.070)
                                 Knowledge extended: budget        0.177***    0.154**     0.196***      0.183***   0.164**    0.204***    0.143**
                                                                    (0.049)    (0.067)      (0.058)      (0.060)    (0.069)    (0.059)     (0.059)
                                 Knowledge extended: debt            0.023      0.020           -0.002    0.005      0.049      0.040      -0.006
                                                                    (0.039)    (0.058)      (0.061)      (0.046)    (0.077)    (0.056)     (0.055)
                                 Knowledge extended: math



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                                   Table 26: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Knowledge


                                                                    Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles               Interactions with age quartiles
                                                        Total      Treat    Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3    Treat*Q4      Treat       Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                         (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)
                    Knowledge: total score            0.140***    0.134*      0.088        0.018       -0.093    0.188***        -0.023       -0.097          -0.067
                                                       (0.045)    (0.077)    (0.110)      (0.126)     (0.122)     (0.062)       (0.094)      (0.109)      (0.098)
                    Knowledge: savings section         0.129**     0.024     0.224**       0.191       0.029      0.163**        -0.037       -0.073          -0.025
                                                       (0.050)    (0.084)    (0.111)      (0.130)     (0.125)     (0.081)       (0.098)      (0.114)      (0.105)
                    Knowledge: budget section         0.143***    0.168**     -0.008      -0.027       -0.110      0.124         0.055        0.056           -0.031
                                                       (0.042)    (0.079)    (0.131)      (0.120)     (0.128)     (0.075)       (0.104)      (0.088)      (0.099)
                    Knowledge: debt section             -0.033     0.085      -0.133      -0.218       -0.134      0.040         -0.054       -0.161          -0.077
26




                                                       (0.042)    (0.087)    (0.119)      (0.142)     (0.139)     (0.065)       (0.109)      (0.115)      (0.102)
                    Knowledge extended: total score   0.173***    0.178**     0.050        0.002       -0.097    0.203***        -0.048       -0.052          -0.020
                                                       (0.051)    (0.084)    (0.116)      (0.114)     (0.113)     (0.073)       (0.105)      (0.103)      (0.096)
                    Knowledge extended: savings        0.136**     0.019      0.193*      0.218*       0.081      0.155*         -0.061       -0.054          0.032
                                                       (0.051)    (0.084)    (0.115)      (0.128)     (0.121)     (0.084)       (0.098)      (0.111)      (0.107)
                    Knowledge extended: budget        0.177***    0.220**     -0.057      -0.007       -0.154    0.255***        -0.110       -0.066          -0.124
                                                       (0.049)    (0.086)    (0.121)      (0.115)     (0.122)     (0.078)       (0.112)      (0.078)      (0.104)
                    Knowledge extended: debt            0.023      0.112      -0.045      -0.215*      -0.121     -0.016         0.078        0.020           0.052
                                                       (0.039)    (0.087)    (0.116)      (0.123)     (0.132)     (0.072)       (0.120)      (0.110)      (0.101)
                    Knowledge extended: math



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                                    Table 27: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Attitudes


                                                                                               Area                 Region               Schooling
                                                                            Total      Urban          Rural   Caribe     Pacifico   Primary    Secondary
                                                                             (1)        (2)            (3)     (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)
                         Has a savings goal                               0.167***   0.154***     0.175***    0.189***    0.118     0.186***   0.141***
                                                                          (0.028)     (0.036)     (0.040)     (0.028)    (0.070)    (0.040)     (0.035)
                         Believes can leave money in MFA account          0.121***   0.126***     0.115***    0.112***   0.129***   0.101***   0.147***
                                                                          (0.020)     (0.024)     (0.031)     (0.024)    (0.035)    (0.030)     (0.025)
27




                         Trust in bank                                    0.204***    0.134**     0.276***    0.216***    0.121*    0.195***   0.189***
                                                                          (0.046)     (0.066)     (0.065)     (0.060)    (0.060)    (0.069)     (0.055)
                         Comfort with banks                               0.190***   0.179***     0.193***    0.250***    0.056     0.166**    0.186***
                                                                          (0.046)     (0.056)     (0.067)     (0.055)    (0.065)    (0.066)     (0.066)
                         Preference: money in bank vs. cash               0.156***   0.226***         0.063   0.208***    0.042     0.202***    0.122**
                                                                          (0.038)     (0.061)     (0.054)     (0.045)    (0.071)    (0.065)     (0.053)
                         Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                                    Table 28: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Attitudes


                                                                          Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                Interactions with age quartiles
                                                              Total       Treat     Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3    Treat*Q4      Treat       Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)
            Has a savings goal                               0.167***   0.163***      0.072       -0.069      0.005      0.159***       -0.001       0.069           -0.039
                                                             (0.028)     (0.045)     (0.058)     (0.061)     (0.056)     (0.052)       (0.071)      (0.061)      (0.068)
            Believes can leave money in MFA account          0.121***   0.164***     -0.089       -0.036      -0.049     0.100***       0.082        -0.005          0.004
                                                             (0.020)     (0.042)     (0.064)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.037)       (0.053)      (0.059)      (0.052)
28




            Trust in bank                                    0.204***    0.189**     -0.024       0.076       0.030      0.257***       -0.037       -0.054          -0.108
                                                             (0.046)     (0.086)     (0.124)     (0.136)     (0.122)     (0.083)       (0.120)      (0.114)      (0.124)
            Comfort with banks                               0.190***   0.313***     -0.145       -0.200     -0.187*     0.289***       -0.142       -0.063          -0.183
                                                             (0.046)     (0.092)     (0.120)     (0.145)     (0.096)     (0.093)       (0.117)      (0.142)      (0.113)
            Preference: money in bank vs. cash               0.156***     0.106       0.082       0.081       0.080      0.203***       -0.123       -0.079          0.016
                                                             (0.038)     (0.072)     (0.102)     (0.124)     (0.105)     (0.076)       (0.111)      (0.105)      (0.103)
            Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                                   Table 29: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Attitudes


                                                                                                Area                   Region               Schooling
                                                                           Total       Urban           Rural     Caribe     Pacifico   Primary    Secondary
                                                                            (1)         (2)             (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)
                         Has a savings goal                               0.093***     0.081**     0.089***      0.097***   0.077**    0.110***    0.080**
                                                                          (0.025)     (0.037)          (0.028)   (0.032)    (0.034)    (0.031)     (0.032)
                         Believes can leave money in MFA account          0.073***    0.088***         0.060*    0.052**    0.109**     0.047     0.097***
                                                                          (0.023)     (0.033)          (0.033)   (0.025)    (0.049)    (0.034)     (0.026)
29




                         Trust in bank                                    0.203***    0.222***         0.198**   0.253***    0.042     0.137**    0.244***
                                                                          (0.048)     (0.056)          (0.076)   (0.056)    (0.077)    (0.068)     (0.061)
                         Comfort with banks                                0.023        0.082          -0.047     0.035      -0.029     -0.077      0.100
                                                                          (0.052)     (0.079)          (0.064)   (0.068)    (0.079)    (0.074)     (0.071)
                         Preference: money in bank vs. cash               0.179***    0.187***     0.187***      0.183***    0.163     0.215***    0.147**
                                                                          (0.045)     (0.057)          (0.057)   (0.052)    (0.097)    (0.067)     (0.057)
                         Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month   -0.167***    -0.199***    -0.148**      -0.124**   -0.232**   -0.150**   -0.166***
                                                                          (0.045)     (0.062)          (0.061)   (0.050)    (0.088)    (0.062)     (0.057)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                                   Table 30: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Attitudes


                                                                           Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                Interactions with age quartiles
                                                              Total       Treat     Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4     Treat        Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)
            Has a savings goal                               0.093***     0.071*      0.096*      -0.035       0.008       0.045         0.068        0.097           0.032
                                                             (0.025)     (0.039)     (0.055)     (0.053)      (0.064)    (0.046)        (0.056)      (0.059)      (0.066)
            Believes can leave money in MFA account          0.073***     0.058       0.030       -0.004       0.049      -0.003         0.107*      0.166**          0.028
                                                             (0.023)     (0.041)     (0.057)     (0.061)      (0.059)    (0.043)        (0.062)      (0.063)      (0.065)
30




            Trust in bank                                    0.203***    0.294***     -0.176      -0.075      -0.114     0.395***       -0.374**      -0.224          -0.149
                                                             (0.048)     (0.089)     (0.135)     (0.141)      (0.131)    (0.102)        (0.147)      (0.142)      (0.121)
            Comfort with banks                                 0.023      0.154*    -0.347***     -0.041      -0.179       0.030         0.063        -0.069          -0.026
                                                             (0.052)     (0.090)     (0.128)     (0.123)      (0.137)    (0.092)        (0.138)      (0.134)      (0.142)
            Preference: money in bank vs. cash               0.179***    0.278***    -0.197*      -0.108      -0.066     0.352***       -0.317**      -0.160          -0.206
                                                             (0.045)     (0.086)     (0.109)     (0.136)      (0.124)    (0.100)        (0.141)      (0.127)      (0.130)
            Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month    -0.167***   -0.258**     0.250*      0.030        0.066      -0.207*        -0.040       0.114           0.086
                                                             (0.045)     (0.113)     (0.135)     (0.155)      (0.148)    (0.110)        (0.152)      (0.153)      (0.148)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                                    Table 31: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Attitudes


                                                                                                Area                  Region               Schooling
                                                                            Total      Urban           Rural    Caribe     Pacifico   Primary    Secondary
                                                                             (1)        (2)             (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)
                          Has a savings goal                              0.147***    0.153***     0.151***     0.157***   0.098*     0.126***   0.152***
                                                                           (0.026)    (0.032)      (0.033)      (0.031)    (0.047)    (0.037)     (0.034)
                          Believes can leave money in MFA account          0.054*      0.054*          0.057     0.022      0.111      0.052      0.062**
                                                                           (0.027)    (0.029)      (0.037)      (0.027)    (0.067)    (0.040)     (0.028)
31




                          Trust in bank                                    0.087*      0.016           0.139*   0.192***   -0.176**    -0.007     0.148**
                                                                           (0.046)    (0.062)      (0.072)      (0.056)    (0.071)    (0.073)     (0.056)
                          Comfort with banks                               0.092*      -0.006      0.194**       0.046      0.168      0.029      0.129**
                                                                           (0.053)    (0.069)      (0.082)      (0.058)    (0.107)    (0.095)     (0.063)
                          Preference: money in bank vs. cash              0.191***    0.196***     0.228***     0.193***    0.187     0.354***     0.064
                                                                           (0.056)    (0.067)      (0.081)      (0.061)    (0.118)    (0.077)     (0.070)
                          Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month    -0.085*     -0.078          -0.085    -0.061     -0.114     -0.095     -0.071
                                                                           (0.049)    (0.058)      (0.071)      (0.050)    (0.115)    (0.090)     (0.060)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                                    Table 32: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Attitudes


                                                                          Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                Interactions with age quartiles
                                                              Total       Treat     Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3    Treat*Q4      Treat       Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)
            Has a savings goal                               0.147***   0.176***     -0.043       -0.042      -0.040     0.188***       -0.041       -0.098          -0.022
                                                             (0.026)     (0.045)     (0.055)     (0.060)     (0.067)     (0.048)       (0.078)      (0.062)      (0.066)
            Believes can leave money in MFA account           0.054*      0.043      -0.014       0.069       0.003       -0.001        0.060        0.047       0.120**
                                                             (0.027)     (0.041)     (0.049)     (0.053)     (0.055)     (0.041)       (0.065)      (0.065)      (0.054)
32




            Trust in bank                                     0.087*      0.085       0.094       0.056       -0.111      0.105         -0.039       -0.079          0.054
                                                             (0.046)     (0.090)     (0.133)     (0.164)     (0.137)     (0.091)       (0.132)      (0.127)      (0.131)
            Comfort with banks                                0.092*      0.154      -0.036       -0.044      -0.168      0.066         0.131        -0.097          0.084
                                                             (0.053)     (0.093)     (0.129)     (0.138)     (0.141)     (0.085)       (0.108)      (0.152)      (0.135)
            Preference: money in bank vs. cash               0.191***   0.292***     -0.143       -0.093      -0.160      0.192*        -0.114       0.072           0.050
                                                             (0.056)     (0.082)     (0.122)     (0.137)     (0.103)     (0.101)       (0.117)      (0.136)      (0.128)
            Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month     -0.085*    -0.175*     0.234*       0.106       -0.008     -0.217**      0.326**       0.046           0.150
                                                             (0.049)     (0.095)     (0.121)     (0.154)     (0.116)     (0.100)       (0.132)      (0.142)      (0.154)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                            Table 33: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA)


                                                                                         Area                 Region                 Schooling
                                                                        Total      Urban        Rural   Caribe      Pacifico   Primary     Secondary
                                                                         (1)        (2)          (3)     (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)
                             Manages household finances                0.016*      0.011     0.024*     0.019*       0.015      0.010       0.021*
                                                                       (0.009)    (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.011)     (0.013)    (0.010)      (0.012)
                             Keeps written track of accounts            0.032      0.027      0.029     0.066***     -0.046     -0.001      0.071**
                                                                       (0.020)    (0.030)    (0.026)     (0.024)    (0.032)    (0.032)      (0.028)
                             Withdrew last MFA transfer                 -0.007     -0.023     0.012      -0.011      0.004     -0.038**      0.020
                                                                       (0.011)    (0.016)    (0.021)    (0.014)     (0.021)     (0.017)     (0.015)
                             Accompanied when withdrew                0.062***    0.073**     0.056     0.055**     0.078*     0.069**      0.063**
                                                                       (0.021)    (0.030)    (0.036)    (0.025)     (0.045)    (0.027)      (0.027)
33




                             Has money in MFA account (today)

                             Leaves money in MFA account

                             Someone helped use ATM

                             Feels can teach ATM use

                             Has taught someone use ATM

                             Has an MFA card



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                            Table 34: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA)


                                                                     Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                Interactions with age quartiles
                                                         Total      Treat     Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4      Treat      Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                          (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
              Manages household finances                0.016*       -0.001     0.027        0.033        0.014       0.014        0.008       -0.002       0.004
                                                        (0.009)     (0.014)    (0.019)      (0.022)      (0.023)     (0.021)      (0.024)     (0.026)      (0.026)
              Keeps written track of accounts            0.032       -0.014     0.042       0.137**       0.012       0.013        0.086       -0.023       0.012
                                                        (0.020)     (0.037)    (0.063)      (0.052)      (0.059)     (0.039)      (0.059)     (0.051)      (0.050)
              Withdrew last MFA transfer                 -0.007      0.011      -0.001      -0.064*       -0.014      -0.008       0.030       -0.017       -0.010
                                                        (0.011)     (0.024)    (0.041)      (0.038)      (0.035)     (0.024)      (0.028)     (0.034)      (0.044)
              Accompanied when withdrew                0.062***      0.031      0.046       0.107*        -0.010      0.026        0.064       0.050        0.017
                                                        (0.021)     (0.042)    (0.062)      (0.063)      (0.054)     (0.033)      (0.057)     (0.049)      (0.055)
34




              Has money in MFA account (today)

              Leaves money in MFA account

              Someone helped use ATM

              Feels can teach ATM use

              Has taught someone use ATM

              Has an MFA card



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                          Table 35: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA)


                                                                                          Area                 Region                 Schooling
                                                                       Total      Urban          Rural    Caribe    Pacifico    Primary    Secondary
                                                                        (1)        (2)            (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)
                            Manages household finances                0.018*       -0.002     0.038**      0.014      0.031     0.028*        0.010
                                                                      (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.012)    (0.019)    (0.014)      (0.014)
                            Keeps written track of accounts            0.012       0.003       0.011       0.018      0.004      -0.017       0.035
                                                                      (0.017)     (0.028)     (0.020)     (0.023)    (0.018)    (0.021)      (0.027)
                            Withdrew last MFA transfer                 0.009       -0.018      0.050       -0.001     0.034      -0.002       0.020
                                                                      (0.016)     (0.020)     (0.033)     (0.015)    (0.040)    (0.030)      (0.018)
                            Accompanied when withdrew                  0.044       0.051      0.069*       0.008     0.088*     0.087**       0.010
                                                                      (0.028)     (0.044)     (0.040)     (0.036)    (0.044)    (0.039)      (0.044)
35




                            Has money in MFA account (today)          0.062*       0.073       0.052      0.079*      0.002      0.052       0.077**
                                                                      (0.034)     (0.044)     (0.046)     (0.042)    (0.064)    (0.044)      (0.038)
                            Leaves money in MFA account              0.066**     0.101***      0.044     0.070**      0.054     0.072**      0.071**
                                                                     (0.026)      (0.038)     (0.044)    (0.027)     (0.070)    (0.034)      (0.032)
                            Someone helped use ATM                     0.004       0.064       -0.079      -0.039     0.026      0.041        -0.015
                                                                      (0.039)     (0.066)     (0.054)     (0.053)    (0.058)    (0.056)      (0.063)
                            Feels can teach ATM use                  0.056***      -0.005    0.115***    0.062**      0.038      0.035       0.086**
                                                                      (0.020)     (0.035)     (0.024)    (0.026)     (0.028)    (0.027)      (0.033)
                            Has taught someone use ATM               0.046**       0.018     0.069***      0.036     0.065*      0.029       0.070*
                                                                     (0.022)      (0.035)     (0.024)     (0.029)    (0.033)    (0.020)      (0.037)
                            Has an MFA card                            0.015       -0.015      0.026       0.011      -0.002     0.012        0.017
                                                                      (0.023)     (0.030)     (0.025)     (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.031)      (0.022)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                          Table 36: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA)


                                                                    Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                 Interactions with age quartiles
                                                         Total      Treat     Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4      Treat      Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3    Treat*Q4
                                                          (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)
              Manages household finances                0.018*      0.016       -0.025       0.016        0.019       0.014        0.014        -0.002      0.003
                                                        (0.010)    (0.018)     (0.027)      (0.027)      (0.026)     (0.028)      (0.030)      (0.036)     (0.032)
              Keeps written track of accounts            0.012      0.023       -0.031       0.023        -0.042      0.005        0.057        -0.051      0.019
                                                        (0.017)    (0.033)     (0.047)      (0.059)      (0.055)     (0.039)      (0.057)      (0.054)     (0.045)
              Withdrew last MFA transfer                 0.009     0.071*       -0.085      -0.106*      -0.084*     0.060**       -0.057       -0.047    -0.099***
                                                        (0.016)    (0.036)     (0.052)      (0.058)      (0.047)     (0.026)      (0.037)      (0.044)     (0.037)
              Accompanied when withdrew                  0.044      0.055       0.094        0.033       -0.172*      -0.019       0.032       0.180**      0.034
                                                        (0.028)    (0.058)     (0.084)      (0.076)      (0.091)     (0.060)      (0.076)      (0.079)     (0.082)
36




              Has money in MFA account (today)          0.062*      0.022       0.014        0.094        0.077       0.034        -0.041       0.073       0.085
                                                        (0.034)    (0.059)     (0.081)      (0.081)      (0.079)     (0.056)      (0.069)      (0.070)     (0.077)
              Leaves money in MFA account               0.066**     0.062       0.019        0.008        -0.007      0.039        0.018        0.086       -0.008
                                                        (0.026)    (0.048)     (0.077)      (0.071)      (0.080)     (0.055)      (0.078)      (0.070)     (0.083)
              Someone helped use ATM                     0.004      0.039       -0.070       0.062        -0.137      0.004        -0.079       0.091       -0.033
                                                        (0.039)    (0.067)     (0.093)      (0.110)      (0.122)     (0.092)      (0.142)      (0.110)     (0.119)
              Feels can teach ATM use                  0.056***     0.056       0.056        -0.077       0.020      0.105**       -0.016       -0.037     -0.143**
                                                        (0.020)    (0.041)     (0.067)      (0.065)      (0.072)     (0.047)      (0.060)      (0.060)      (0.064)
              Has taught someone use ATM                0.046**    0.078*       -0.039       -0.107       0.013       0.029        0.087        -0.011      -0.017
                                                        (0.022)    (0.040)     (0.059)      (0.071)      (0.060)     (0.059)      (0.071)      (0.065)     (0.070)
              Has an MFA card                            0.015      0.051       -0.020      -0.089*       -0.062      0.027        -0.026       -0.005      -0.019
                                                        (0.023)    (0.037)     (0.041)      (0.052)      (0.048)     (0.030)      (0.035)      (0.033)     (0.041)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                           Table 37: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA)


                                                                                         Area                Region                 Schooling
                                                                        Total      Urban     Rural      Caribe    Pacifico   Primary     Secondary
                                                                         (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)          (7)
                              Manages household finances                0.007      0.015      -0.004   0.026**      -0.023     -0.005       0.022
                                                                       (0.012)    (0.014)    (0.014)   (0.011)     (0.024)    (0.016)      (0.014)
                              Keeps written track of accounts           0.020      -0.018     0.050     0.030       -0.040     0.003        0.023
                                                                       (0.024)    (0.036)    (0.031)   (0.028)     (0.041)    (0.037)      (0.033)
                              Withdrew last MFA transfer               0.038**     0.024      0.048     0.026       0.045      0.027      0.048***
                                                                       (0.019)    (0.020)    (0.029)   (0.022)     (0.033)    (0.040)      (0.017)
                              Accompanied when withdrew                 0.035      0.048      0.006     0.025       0.043      0.050        0.018
                                                                       (0.030)    (0.045)    (0.044)   (0.036)     (0.058)    (0.038)      (0.036)
37




                              Has money in MFA account (today)          0.044     0.087*      -0.021    0.052       0.013      0.012       0.078*
                                                                       (0.035)    (0.047)    (0.044)   (0.043)     (0.067)    (0.043)      (0.043)
                              Leaves money in MFA account               0.019      0.018      0.019     0.005       0.034      0.033        0.011
                                                                       (0.031)    (0.040)    (0.035)   (0.040)     (0.050)    (0.042)      (0.035)
                              Someone helped use ATM                    0.016      0.073      -0.050    0.024       0.046      0.005        0.030
                                                                       (0.034)    (0.044)    (0.059)   (0.041)     (0.061)    (0.050)      (0.050)
                              Feels can teach ATM use                   -0.012     -0.021     -0.002    -0.008      -0.044     -0.009       -0.005
                                                                       (0.018)    (0.026)    (0.033)   (0.023)     (0.029)    (0.033)      (0.024)
                              Has taught someone use ATM                0.025      0.036      0.017     0.038       -0.012     0.007        0.054
                                                                       (0.022)    (0.032)    (0.030)   (0.028)     (0.031)    (0.025)      (0.033)
                              Has an MFA card                          0.027**    0.017*      0.022     0.011       0.023     0.034**      0.021*
                                                                       (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.018)   (0.025)     (0.021)    (0.013)      (0.011)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                           Table 38: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA)


                                                                    Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                 Interactions with age quartiles
                                                        Total       Treat     Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4      Treat      Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                         (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
              Manages household finances                0.007       -0.026      0.058*        0.033       0.051*      0.005        0.008        0.005       -0.005
                                                       (0.012)     (0.023)      (0.031)      (0.027)      (0.030)    (0.025)      (0.031)      (0.023)     (0.028)
              Keeps written track of accounts           0.020       0.035        -0.094       0.022        0.010      0.020        -0.015       0.007       0.002
                                                       (0.024)     (0.035)      (0.062)      (0.058)      (0.054)    (0.050)      (0.072)      (0.072)     (0.086)
              Withdrew last MFA transfer               0.038**     0.078**       -0.057       -0.064       -0.051     0.023        0.066        0.005       -0.014
                                                       (0.019)     (0.034)      (0.050)      (0.048)      (0.042)    (0.030)      (0.040)      (0.039)     (0.051)
              Accompanied when withdrew                 0.035       0.062        -0.012       -0.056       -0.038     0.005        0.011        0.070       0.035
                                                       (0.030)     (0.044)      (0.069)      (0.075)      (0.063)    (0.051)      (0.058)      (0.060)     (0.069)
38




              Has money in MFA account (today)          0.044       -0.031       0.102        0.092      0.156**      0.023        0.042        0.035       -0.001
                                                       (0.035)     (0.047)      (0.083)      (0.080)     (0.066)     (0.062)      (0.084)      (0.090)     (0.081)
              Leaves money in MFA account               0.019       0.022        -0.025       0.010        -0.001     -0.054       0.073       0.134*       0.079
                                                       (0.031)     (0.045)      (0.089)      (0.071)      (0.070)    (0.057)      (0.083)      (0.076)     (0.078)
              Someone helped use ATM                    0.016       -0.070       0.076        0.053      0.248***     -0.020       0.091        0.007       0.040
                                                       (0.034)     (0.067)      (0.118)      (0.111)      (0.086)    (0.091)      (0.112)      (0.108)     (0.112)
              Feels can teach ATM use                   -0.012      -0.046       0.008        0.081        0.050      -0.049       0.082        -0.025      0.088
                                                       (0.018)     (0.037)      (0.061)      (0.062)      (0.056)    (0.043)      (0.064)      (0.069)     (0.075)
              Has taught someone use ATM                0.025       0.001        -0.002       0.068        0.039      0.019        0.013        -0.041      0.054
                                                       (0.022)     (0.038)      (0.061)      (0.062)      (0.060)    (0.059)      (0.075)      (0.065)     (0.076)
              Has an MFA card                          0.027**    0.056***    -0.073***       -0.010      -0.047*    0.056*       -0.064*       -0.017      -0.029
                                                       (0.010)     (0.018)     (0.020)       (0.026)      (0.027)    (0.031)      (0.036)      (0.031)     (0.032)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                Table 39: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Financial Practices (Budgeting)


                                                                                             Area                   Region                 Schooling
                                                                        Total       Urban           Rural      Caribe     Pacifico   Primary     Secondary
                                                                         (1)         (2)             (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)
                          In case of a 350k emergency
                            Would use savings                          0.171***    0.135***     0.204***      0.202***    0.099**    0.146***    0.192***
                                                                       (0.023)     (0.034)          (0.028)   (0.027)     (0.036)    (0.029)      (0.027)
                            Would use loans                           -0.161***   -0.125***     -0.191***     -0.187***   -0.094**   -0.133***   -0.188***
                                                                       (0.023)     (0.035)          (0.027)   (0.027)     (0.038)    (0.029)      (0.029)
                            Would sell or pawn something                -0.006      -0.002          -0.013     -0.011      -0.000     -0.007      -0.004
                                                                       (0.007)     (0.009)          (0.013)   (0.009)     (0.009)    (0.012)      (0.009)
                            Would look for a job

                          In case of receiving 300k extra
39




                            Would save

                            Would spend on healthcare or education

                            Would build, improve or buy a house

                            Would spend on household expenses

                            Would invest in business

                          Was able to cover household expenses

                          Household weekly expenditure



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                Table 40: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Financial Practices (Budgeting)


                                                                        Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                 Interactions with age quartiles
                                                            Total       Treat     Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4      Treat        Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)
             In case of a 350k emergency
               Would use savings                          0.171***    0.189***      0.013       -0.053      -0.045     0.165***         0.053       -0.009          -0.015
                                                           (0.023)     (0.035)     (0.052)     (0.051)     (0.043)      (0.042)        (0.054)      (0.048)     (0.049)
               Would use loans                            -0.161***   -0.189***     -0.001      0.075        0.053     -0.163***       -0.059        0.038          0.028
                                                           (0.023)     (0.032)     (0.055)     (0.049)     (0.048)      (0.041)        (0.053)      (0.051)     (0.047)
               Would sell or pawn something                -0.006       -0.001      -0.007      -0.014      -0.002      -0.012          0.013       -0.013          0.023
                                                           (0.007)     (0.014)     (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.019)      (0.010)        (0.017)      (0.022)     (0.020)
               Would look for a job

             In case of receiving 300k extra
40




               Would save

               Would spend on healthcare or education

               Would build, improve or buy a house

               Would spend on household expenses

               Would invest in business

             Was able to cover household expenses

             Household weekly expenditure



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
               Table 41: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Financial Practices (Budgeting)


                                                                                             Area                   Region                 Schooling
                                                                        Total       Urban           Rural      Caribe     Pacifico   Primary     Secondary
                                                                         (1)         (2)             (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)
                          In case of a 350k emergency
                            Would use savings                         0.084***     0.066***     0.099***      0.089***    0.067***   0.080***    0.084***
                                                                       (0.010)     (0.017)          (0.015)   (0.013)     (0.020)    (0.012)      (0.017)
                            Would use loans                           -0.109***   -0.104***     -0.101***     -0.123***   -0.068*    -0.107***   -0.113***
                                                                       (0.017)     (0.022)          (0.030)   (0.019)     (0.034)    (0.027)      (0.021)
                            Would sell or pawn something                0.023      0.039**          -0.003     0.034*      -0.009      0.022      0.029**
                                                                       (0.014)     (0.015)          (0.023)   (0.018)     (0.025)    (0.024)      (0.014)
                            Would look for a job                       -0.014**   -0.025***         -0.003     -0.012     -0.021**    -0.014*     -0.015*
                                                                       (0.006)     (0.009)          (0.006)   (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.008)      (0.008)
                          In case of receiving 300k extra
41




                            Would save                                 0.046**      0.030           0.058**   0.052**        0.028   0.068***      0.026
                                                                       (0.018)     (0.029)          (0.023)   (0.023)     (0.028)    (0.022)      (0.022)
                            Would spend on healthcare or education      0.008       0.020           -0.008     -0.003        0.017     0.011       0.003
                                                                       (0.012)     (0.017)          (0.015)   (0.014)     (0.018)    (0.015)      (0.015)
                            Would build, improve or buy a house         -0.019      -0.007          -0.030     -0.014      -0.024     -0.006      -0.025
                                                                       (0.019)     (0.025)          (0.026)   (0.021)     (0.037)    (0.022)      (0.027)
                            Would spend on household expenses          -0.019*      -0.015          -0.022*    -0.021*     -0.008    -0.023**     -0.016
                                                                       (0.010)     (0.017)          (0.012)   (0.011)     (0.023)    (0.011)      (0.013)
                            Would invest in business                    0.013       -0.011          0.033*      0.004        0.034     0.018       0.014
                                                                       (0.015)     (0.022)          (0.018)   (0.017)     (0.032)    (0.016)      (0.019)
                          Was able to cover household expenses         0.036*       0.024            0.042      0.021     0.090**    0.071**       0.011
                                                                       (0.021)     (0.035)          (0.028)   (0.025)     (0.036)    (0.028)      (0.027)
                          Household weekly expenditure                  0.007       0.021           -0.002      0.011        0.022     0.051      -0.056
                                                                       (0.046)     (0.071)          (0.062)   (0.062)     (0.074)    (0.058)      (0.065)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
               Table 42: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Financial Practices (Budgeting)


                                                                         Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                Interactions with age quartiles
                                                             Total       Treat     Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3    Treat*Q4      Treat       Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)
              In case of a 350k emergency
                Would use savings                          0.084***    0.079***     0.050*       -0.010      -0.015      0.021       0.101***       0.047       0.100**
                                                           (0.010)      (0.019)     (0.027)     (0.034)     (0.033)     (0.024)       (0.033)      (0.035)      (0.039)
                Would use loans                            -0.109***   -0.090***    -0.071**     -0.022      0.009      -0.036       -0.096**      -0.098*      -0.091*
                                                           (0.017)      (0.029)     (0.035)     (0.041)     (0.050)     (0.033)       (0.043)      (0.050)      (0.050)
                Would sell or pawn something                 0.023       0.008       0.020       0.027       0.016       0.019         -0.020       0.050       -0.014
                                                           (0.014)      (0.024)     (0.029)     (0.033)     (0.034)     (0.021)       (0.031)      (0.036)      (0.030)
                Would look for a job                       -0.014**    -0.024**      0.022       0.003       0.015      -0.012         -0.002      -0.001       -0.003
                                                           (0.006)      (0.009)     (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.018)     (0.015)       (0.019)      (0.017)      (0.018)
              In case of receiving 300k extra
42




                Would save                                 0.046**      0.061**      -0.009      -0.025      -0.028      0.046         -0.012      -0.036           0.046
                                                           (0.018)      (0.027)     (0.037)     (0.042)     (0.039)     (0.028)       (0.038)      (0.036)      (0.038)
                Would spend on healthcare or education       0.008       0.002       0.006       -0.012      0.022      -0.007         0.000        0.045           0.015
                                                           (0.012)      (0.016)     (0.027)     (0.034)     (0.029)     (0.025)       (0.034)      (0.033)      (0.031)
                Would build, improve or buy a house         -0.019       0.001       -0.030      0.024       -0.068     -0.022         -0.038       0.012           0.040
                                                           (0.019)      (0.026)     (0.046)     (0.048)     (0.042)     (0.031)       (0.044)      (0.045)      (0.042)
                Would spend on household expenses           -0.019*     -0.004       -0.025      -0.022      -0.019     -0.022         -0.001       0.032       -0.016
                                                           (0.010)      (0.015)     (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.024)     (0.019)       (0.024)      (0.027)      (0.028)
                Would invest in business                     0.013       0.019       -0.014      0.036       -0.040      0.018         -0.015      -0.028           0.025
                                                           (0.015)      (0.023)     (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.037)     (0.029)       (0.036)      (0.041)      (0.040)
              Was able to cover household expenses          0.036*       0.029       0.041       -0.021      0.011       0.042         -0.011      -0.009       -0.003
                                                           (0.021)      (0.036)     (0.060)     (0.060)     (0.045)     (0.045)       (0.065)      (0.064)      (0.059)
              Household weekly expenditure                   0.007       0.051       -0.013      -0.052      -0.136      0.030         -0.147      -0.012           0.070
                                                           (0.046)      (0.081)     (0.123)     (0.109)     (0.123)     (0.089)       (0.117)      (0.133)      (0.127)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
               Table 43: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Financial Practices (Budgeting)


                                                                                              Area                   Region                 Schooling
                                                                         Total      Urban            Rural      Caribe     Pacifico   Primary    Secondary
                                                                          (1)        (2)              (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)
                          In case of a 350k emergency
                             Would use savings                         0.061***     0.042**      0.080***      0.063***    0.055***   0.068***    0.055**
                                                                        (0.016)     (0.020)          (0.022)   (0.020)     (0.019)    (0.018)     (0.022)
                             Would use loans                           -0.066***   -0.072***     -0.061**      -0.084***    -0.022    -0.057**   -0.075***
                                                                        (0.020)     (0.023)          (0.030)   (0.025)     (0.027)    (0.025)     (0.027)
                             Would sell or pawn something                0.007      0.021*           -0.007      0.018      -0.014     0.002       0.015
                                                                        (0.010)     (0.011)          (0.015)   (0.013)     (0.012)    (0.013)     (0.013)
                             Would look for a job                       -0.000       0.009           -0.010      0.004      -0.012     -0.005      0.002
                                                                        (0.007)     (0.007)          (0.011)   (0.006)     (0.015)    (0.010)     (0.007)
                          In case of receiving 300k extra
43




                             Would save                                 0.042**      0.022           0.057**   0.034**        0.060   0.076***     0.009
                                                                        (0.017)     (0.020)          (0.026)   (0.016)     (0.040)    (0.025)     (0.019)
                             Would spend on healthcare or education      0.004       0.004            0.006      0.012      -0.010     0.007       0.002
                                                                        (0.009)     (0.016)          (0.012)   (0.012)     (0.011)    (0.008)     (0.015)
                             Would build, improve or buy a house         0.016       0.041           -0.003      0.034      -0.023     0.018       0.012
                                                                        (0.019)     (0.025)          (0.024)   (0.021)     (0.039)    (0.023)     (0.025)
                             Would spend on household expenses          -0.012       0.014           -0.040*    -0.003      -0.030     -0.012      -0.008
                                                                        (0.017)     (0.024)          (0.022)   (0.022)     (0.029)    (0.021)     (0.023)
                             Would invest in business                    0.022       0.013            0.021      0.021        0.024    0.032       0.013
                                                                        (0.014)     (0.018)          (0.018)   (0.016)     (0.033)    (0.020)     (0.016)
                          Was able to cover household expenses         0.075***     0.067**          0.083**   0.061**     0.105**     0.042     0.108***
                                                                        (0.022)     (0.031)          (0.033)   (0.026)     (0.039)    (0.028)     (0.028)
                          Household weekly expenditure                  -0.009       -0.043           0.016     -0.051        0.092    -0.002      -0.038
                                                                        (0.057)     (0.079)          (0.062)   (0.069)     (0.090)    (0.060)     (0.074)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
               Table 44: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Financial Practices (Budgeting)


                                                                         Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles               Interactions with age quartiles
                                                             Total       Treat     Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3    Treat*Q4     Treat       Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)
              In case of a 350k emergency
                 Would use savings                         0.061***     0.075**     -0.049      -0.004       -0.006     0.036         0.061        0.043       -0.003
                                                            (0.016)     (0.030)    (0.037)      (0.043)     (0.039)    (0.028)       (0.045)      (0.036)      (0.033)
                 Would use loans                           -0.066***    -0.052       0.006      -0.035       -0.032     -0.031       -0.103*      -0.064           0.025
                                                            (0.020)     (0.036)    (0.049)      (0.050)     (0.049)    (0.028)       (0.054)      (0.043)      (0.042)
                 Would sell or pawn something                0.007      -0.008       0.017       0.009       0.038      -0.000        0.030        0.013       -0.015
                                                            (0.010)     (0.019)    (0.026)      (0.029)     (0.028)    (0.013)       (0.023)      (0.023)      (0.025)
                 Would look for a job                        -0.000     -0.014       0.019       0.027       0.012      -0.000        -0.004       0.006       -0.002
                                                            (0.007)     (0.015)    (0.020)      (0.018)     (0.019)    (0.009)       (0.020)      (0.014)      (0.020)
              In case of receiving 300k extra
44




                 Would save                                 0.042**    0.091***     -0.073*     -0.072*      -0.067     0.032         0.006        0.043       -0.011
                                                            (0.017)     (0.028)    (0.042)      (0.039)     (0.042)    (0.027)       (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.042)
                 Would spend on healthcare or education      0.004      -0.001       0.018      -0.005       0.011      0.005         -0.008      -0.006           0.009
                                                            (0.009)     (0.015)    (0.020)      (0.022)     (0.027)    (0.012)       (0.018)      (0.016)      (0.018)
                 Would build, improve or buy a house         0.016      -0.001       0.039       0.012       0.023      -0.006        0.041        0.031           0.011
                                                            (0.019)     (0.028)    (0.038)      (0.042)     (0.044)    (0.031)       (0.043)      (0.047)      (0.045)
                 Would spend on household expenses           -0.012     -0.030       0.068       0.024       -0.007     0.009         -0.021      -0.017       -0.046
                                                            (0.017)     (0.031)    (0.045)      (0.043)     (0.052)    (0.035)       (0.044)      (0.036)      (0.043)
                 Would invest in business                    0.022       0.034      -0.005       0.007       -0.049     0.054*        -0.034      -0.029       -0.063*
                                                            (0.014)     (0.026)    (0.030)      (0.033)     (0.038)    (0.028)       (0.036)      (0.042)      (0.034)
              Was able to cover household expenses         0.075***      0.055      -0.025       0.060       0.050     0.107**        0.000       -0.012       -0.110
                                                            (0.022)     (0.038)    (0.064)      (0.066)     (0.055)    (0.050)       (0.070)      (0.068)      (0.066)
              Household weekly expenditure                   -0.009      0.007      -0.093      -0.006       0.018      0.015         0.014        0.037       -0.129
                                                            (0.057)     (0.092)    (0.124)      (0.134)     (0.130)    (0.100)       (0.134)      (0.142)      (0.111)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                        Table 45: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Performance (Self-Reported)


                                                                                         Area                  Region                  Schooling
                                                                     Total       Urban          Rural    Caribe      Pacifico    Primary     Secondary
                                                                      (1)         (2)            (3)      (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                          Panel A: Probability of saving
                             Has formal or informal savings         0.146***    0.136***    0.153***    0.156***    0.123***     0.154***     0.136***
                                                                     (0.023)     (0.030)     (0.028)     (0.030)     (0.029)      (0.025)      (0.026)
                             Has formal savings                     0.030**     0.045**       0.022     0.050***      -0.008       0.021      0.040**
                                                                    (0.013)     (0.018)      (0.016)     (0.018)     (0.015)      (0.016)     (0.018)
                             Has informal savings                   0.148***    0.133***    0.159***    0.155***    0.131***     0.165***     0.130***
                                                                     (0.022)     (0.032)     (0.026)     (0.029)     (0.028)      (0.025)      (0.027)
                             Has savings in a bank                  0.029***     0.026*      0.031**     0.028**     0.034*       0.019*      0.035**
                                                                     (0.009)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.011)     (0.018)      (0.011)     (0.013)
                             Has savings in a cooperative             0.017     0.026**       0.011     0.041***     -0.040**      0.018        0.018
                                                                     (0.011)    (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.014)      (0.016)     (0.015)      (0.014)
45




                             Has savings in piggy bank              0.148***    0.128***    0.167***    0.153***    0.138***     0.159***     0.130***
                                                                     (0.022)     (0.031)     (0.027)     (0.029)     (0.026)      (0.025)      (0.027)
                          Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
                             Total formal and informal savings      0.516***      0.696      0.542*      0.643**      0.335      0.538**      0.775**
                                                                     (0.158)     (0.458)     (0.276)     (0.261)     (0.388)     (0.264)      (0.353)
                             Total formal savings                    1.244*       3.010       -0.803      1.714       -1.643       1.202        -1.071
                                                                     (0.659)     (1.836)     (1.220)     (1.350)     (1.503)      (1.367)      (1.806)
                             Total informal savings                 0.505***      0.581      0.604**     0.703**      0.423        0.298      1.150***
                                                                     (0.161)     (0.506)     (0.292)     (0.339)     (0.327)      (0.301)      (0.401)
                             Savings in a bank                      3.214***      -0.124      0.126       -0.068      0.278        0.196        -0.094
                                                                     (1.070)     (0.237)     (0.132)     (0.142)     (0.200)      (0.132)      (0.237)
                             Savings in a cooperative                 0.860      0.517*       -0.088      0.317       -0.565       0.113        -0.043
                                                                     (2.338)     (0.312)     (0.288)     (0.291)     (0.350)      (0.301)      (0.356)
                             Savings in piggy bank                  0.464***      0.492       0.462      0.705**      0.309        0.158      1.132***
                                                                     (0.169)     (0.527)     (0.285)     (0.352)     (0.323)      (0.294)      (0.407)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                        Table 46: Heterogeneous eects: First follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Performance (Self-Reported)


                                                                    Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                  Interactions with age quartiles
                                                       Total        Treat     Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4       Treat      Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
            Panel A: Probability of saving
               Has formal or informal savings         0.146***    0.177***      -0.012      -0.097*        -0.030     0.060**      0.132***     0.148***      0.057
                                                       (0.023)     (0.033)     (0.049)      (0.052)       (0.047)     (0.030)       (0.043)      (0.048)     (0.048)
               Has formal savings                     0.030**       0.030       0.003        -0.006        0.006       -0.009        0.049      0.073**       0.033
                                                      (0.013)      (0.020)     (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.034)     (0.027)       (0.034)     (0.035)      (0.035)
               Has informal savings                   0.148***    0.188***      -0.000      -0.121**       -0.054    0.103***      0.084**      0.087*        0.006
                                                       (0.022)     (0.034)     (0.050)       (0.053)      (0.053)     (0.028)      (0.041)      (0.051)      (0.048)
               Has savings in a bank                  0.029***      0.020       0.034        0.028         -0.028      0.010         0.037       0.036        0.001
                                                       (0.009)     (0.014)     (0.025)      (0.023)       (0.025)     (0.020)       (0.033)     (0.026)      (0.025)
               Has savings in a cooperative             0.017       0.015       -0.009       -0.011        0.026       -0.010        0.011      0.047*       0.045*
                                                       (0.011)     (0.017)     (0.022)      (0.019)       (0.021)     (0.018)       (0.020)     (0.026)      (0.024)
46




               Has savings in piggy bank              0.148***    0.194***      -0.006      -0.132**       -0.061    0.106***       0.077*      0.085*        0.001
                                                       (0.022)     (0.033)     (0.050)       (0.052)      (0.052)     (0.030)       (0.040)     (0.051)      (0.049)
            Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
               Total formal and informal savings      0.516***    0.624***      -0.270       -0.108        -0.071      -0.026      1.246***     0.581*        0.325
                                                       (0.158)     (0.214)     (0.339)      (0.378)       (0.357)     (0.258)       (0.449)     (0.341)      (0.315)
               Total formal savings                    1.244*       0.367       0.763        1.885         1.763       -0.327        2.473      3.149*        0.547
                                                       (0.659)     (0.982)     (1.558)      (1.668)       (1.907)     (1.445)       (1.702)     (1.683)      (1.822)
               Total informal savings                 0.505***    0.661***      -0.285       -0.259        -0.140      0.121       0.958**       0.187        0.395
                                                       (0.161)     (0.248)     (0.387)      (0.441)       (0.413)     (0.274)      (0.471)      (0.390)      (0.383)
               Savings in a bank                      3.214***      1.650       1.515       6.130*         0.684       0.033         4.862      6.503*        0.872
                                                       (1.070)     (1.684)     (2.436)      (3.339)       (3.063)     (2.356)       (3.410)     (3.364)      (2.806)
               Savings in a cooperative                 0.860       -0.109      2.273        -0.009        2.864       -1.976        2.049       5.064        3.647
                                                       (2.338)     (3.404)     (5.633)      (4.947)       (4.957)     (4.427)       (5.403)     (5.986)      (5.868)
               Savings in piggy bank                  0.464***    0.590**       -0.238       -0.204        -0.103      0.054       1.000**       0.243        0.405
                                                       (0.169)    (0.251)      (0.390)      (0.472)       (0.405)     (0.294)      (0.473)      (0.423)      (0.393)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                       Table 47: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Performance (Self-Reported)


                                                                                         Area                  Region                  Schooling
                                                                     Total       Urban          Rural    Caribe      Pacifico    Primary     Secondary
                                                                      (1)         (2)            (3)      (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                          Panel A: Probability of saving
                             Has formal or informal savings         0.110***    0.105***    0.113***    0.126***     0.072**     0.138***     0.081***
                                                                     (0.018)     (0.030)     (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.028)      (0.025)      (0.025)
                             Has formal savings                       0.008       -0.003      0.012       0.015       -0.023       -0.007       0.018
                                                                     (0.011)     (0.016)     (0.019)     (0.011)     (0.028)      (0.017)      (0.017)
                             Has informal savings                   0.108***    0.099***    0.118***    0.119***    0.090***     0.147***     0.070***
                                                                     (0.019)     (0.030)     (0.022)     (0.024)     (0.030)      (0.025)      (0.023)
                             Has savings in a bank                    -0.003      -0.011      0.001       0.001       -0.025       -0.003       -0.005
                                                                     (0.009)     (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.010)     (0.020)      (0.014)      (0.014)
                             Has savings in a cooperative            0.015*       0.008       0.016      0.016**      0.005        0.003      0.024**
                                                                     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.014)     (0.007)     (0.024)      (0.009)     (0.011)
47




                             Has savings in piggy bank              0.104***    0.092***    0.116***    0.112***    0.091***     0.139***     0.070***
                                                                     (0.018)     (0.029)     (0.020)     (0.023)     (0.031)      (0.026)      (0.024)
                          Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
                             Total formal and informal savings      0.858**       -0.410     1.489**     1.287*       -0.252     1.357**        0.102
                                                                    (0.339)      (1.136)     (0.700)     (0.760)     (0.932)     (0.647)       (0.838)
                             Total formal savings                     0.990       -2.058      4.612       1.723       2.069        3.151        0.920
                                                                     (1.205)     (3.773)     (3.044)     (3.190)     (3.672)      (2.888)      (3.453)
                             Total informal savings                 0.809***      -0.041      0.862      1.175**      -0.503       0.789        0.206
                                                                     (0.267)     (0.854)     (0.534)     (0.558)     (0.725)      (0.568)      (0.600)
                             Savings in a bank                        0.252       -0.489      0.523       0.076       0.152      0.558**        -0.225
                                                                     (2.019)     (0.479)     (0.387)     (0.312)     (0.526)     (0.241)       (0.534)
                             Savings in a cooperative                 4.288       0.136       0.296       -0.000      0.392        -0.033       0.774
                                                                     (3.598)     (0.431)     (0.328)     (0.198)     (0.584)      (0.284)      (0.494)
                             Savings in piggy bank                  0.843***      -0.163      0.650      1.185**      -0.720       0.599        0.141
                                                                     (0.274)     (0.866)     (0.576)     (0.568)     (0.599)      (0.593)      (0.680)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                       Table 48: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Performance (Self-Reported)


                                                                     Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                Interactions with age quartiles
                                                         Total      Treat     Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4      Treat      Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                          (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
              Panel A: Probability of saving
                Has formal or informal savings         0.110***    0.085**       0.081        -0.010       0.027       0.038      0.090*      0.115**       0.080
                                                        (0.018)    (0.039)      (0.053)      (0.057)      (0.061)     (0.037)     (0.053)     (0.051)      (0.059)
                Has formal savings                       0.008       0.023       -0.020       -0.026       -0.021      0.015       0.047        -0.038      -0.035
                                                        (0.011)     (0.025)     (0.038)      (0.035)      (0.036)     (0.021)     (0.034)      (0.033)     (0.030)
                Has informal savings                   0.108***    0.084**      0.090*        -0.010       0.019       0.041       0.065      0.114**       0.090
                                                        (0.019)    (0.038)      (0.047)      (0.056)      (0.060)     (0.038)     (0.053)     (0.055)      (0.060)
                Has savings in a bank                    -0.003      0.022       -0.029       -0.033       -0.049      -0.001      0.027        -0.018      -0.016
                                                        (0.009)     (0.021)     (0.030)      (0.030)      (0.030)     (0.018)     (0.026)      (0.025)     (0.024)
                Has savings in a cooperative            0.015*       0.012       -0.006       0.004        0.015      0.024*       0.008        -0.023      -0.019
                                                        (0.008)     (0.015)     (0.019)      (0.022)      (0.022)     (0.014)     (0.021)      (0.026)     (0.022)
48




                Has savings in piggy bank              0.104***    0.080**      0.093*        -0.013       0.016       0.040       0.071       0.100*       0.082
                                                        (0.018)    (0.037)      (0.048)      (0.055)      (0.060)     (0.036)     (0.052)      (0.052)     (0.058)
              Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
                Total formal and informal savings       0.858**      0.850       0.743        -0.179       -0.442      0.162       0.725       1.131*       0.976
                                                        (0.339)     (0.585)     (0.815)      (0.912)      (0.929)     (0.532)     (0.851)      (0.682)     (0.896)
                Total formal savings                     0.990       2.649       -0.147       -4.784       -1.799      1.324       3.356        -1.498      -3.875
                                                        (1.205)     (2.399)     (4.698)      (3.367)      (3.440)     (2.715)     (3.875)      (3.656)     (4.213)
                Total informal savings                 0.809***      0.525      0.942*        0.330        -0.013      0.326       -0.075      0.979*      1.237*
                                                        (0.267)     (0.433)     (0.535)      (0.699)      (0.620)     (0.426)     (0.576)      (0.578)     (0.733)
                Savings in a bank                        0.252       6.693       -4.915    -11.721**      -10.284      0.248       5.682        -1.265      -5.582
                                                        (2.019)     (4.131)     (7.262)     (5.811)       (7.062)     (4.300)     (6.013)      (4.957)     (6.298)
                Savings in a cooperative                 4.288       1.052      14.351        -1.477       6.570       5.877       2.668       -2.588       -6.657
                                                        (3.598)     (5.420)    (10.859)      (8.368)      (7.010)     (7.386)     (9.562)     (10.701)     (10.993)
                Savings in piggy bank                  0.843***      0.362     1.549***       0.436        0.083       0.428       -0.081       0.823       1.084
                                                        (0.274)     (0.414)     (0.539)      (0.678)      (0.626)     (0.439)     (0.637)      (0.622)     (0.731)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                        Table 49: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Performance (Self-Reported)


                                                                                          Area                 Region                  Schooling
                                                                      Total       Urban          Rural    Caribe     Pacifico   Primary     Secondary
                                                                       (1)         (2)            (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)
                           Panel A: Probability of saving
                             Has formal or informal savings         0.115***    0.094***     0.146***    0.131***    0.085*     0.095***     0.132***
                                                                     (0.022)     (0.026)      (0.032)     (0.026)    (0.047)     (0.032)      (0.023)
                             Has formal savings                      0.026*       0.011      0.043**     0.029**      0.011       -0.001      0.047**
                                                                     (0.014)     (0.017)     (0.019)     (0.014)     (0.032)     (0.021)      (0.019)
                             Has informal savings                   0.103***    0.083***     0.130***    0.107***    0.095**    0.111***     0.090***
                                                                     (0.021)     (0.025)      (0.032)     (0.024)    (0.045)     (0.031)      (0.026)
                             Has savings in a bank                    0.010       -0.011     0.038**       0.018      -0.014      0.004        0.016
                                                                     (0.012)     (0.016)     (0.017)      (0.013)    (0.025)     (0.015)      (0.017)
                             Has savings in a cooperative           0.022***    0.030***      0.011      0.019**      0.024       0.003      0.037***
                                                                     (0.008)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.009)     (0.016)     (0.010)      (0.011)
49




                             Has savings in piggy bank              0.094***    0.077***     0.123***    0.104***    0.087**    0.101***     0.086***
                                                                     (0.017)     (0.024)      (0.030)     (0.019)    (0.040)     (0.027)      (0.024)
                           Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
                             Total formal and informal savings      0.907***      0.694      1.927**      1.078*      1.844     1.779***       0.786
                                                                     (0.283)     (0.634)     (0.836)      (0.651)    (1.195)     (0.676)      (0.765)
                             Total formal savings                     1.534       -0.256      2.767        0.213      2.192       1.426        1.978
                                                                     (1.002)     (2.990)     (2.765)      (2.635)    (3.176)     (3.388)      (2.286)
                             Total informal savings                 1.040***      0.950      1.938***    1.284**     2.097**    1.905***       1.062
                                                                     (0.250)     (0.613)      (0.716)    (0.594)     (0.997)     (0.533)      (0.843)
                             Savings in a bank                        1.033      -0.703*      0.517        -0.141     0.289       0.229        -0.043
                                                                     (1.272)     (0.409)     (0.324)      (0.260)    (0.454)     (0.270)      (0.387)
                             Savings in a cooperative                7.509**     0.922*       0.252        -0.111     0.771       0.329        0.305
                                                                     (3.097)     (0.539)     (0.495)      (0.249)    (0.806)     (0.614)      (0.479)
                             Savings in piggy bank                  0.788***      0.520      1.437***    1.329***     0.801     1.372***       0.519
                                                                     (0.158)     (0.445)      (0.477)     (0.448)    (0.563)     (0.435)      (0.483)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                        Table 50: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet eect on Financial Performance (Self-Reported)


                                                                    Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                  Interactions with age quartiles
                                                       Total        Treat     Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4       Treat      Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
            Panel A: Probability of saving
               Has formal or informal savings         0.115***    0.135***      -0.010       -0.008        -0.059    0.104***        0.056       0.000        -0.008
                                                       (0.022)     (0.048)     (0.055)      (0.060)       (0.056)     (0.039)       (0.062)     (0.053)      (0.056)
               Has formal savings                      0.026*       0.021       0.011        -0.009        0.015       0.030         0.032       -0.032       -0.015
                                                       (0.014)     (0.029)     (0.037)      (0.042)       (0.037)     (0.031)       (0.039)     (0.038)      (0.037)
               Has informal savings                   0.103***    0.122***      -0.011       0.005         -0.070     0.086**        0.045       0.009        0.012
                                                       (0.021)     (0.044)     (0.052)      (0.057)       (0.052)     (0.040)       (0.063)     (0.054)      (0.061)
               Has savings in a bank                    0.010       0.016       0.014        -0.030        -0.004      0.002         0.014       0.008        0.008
                                                       (0.012)     (0.025)     (0.032)      (0.032)       (0.032)     (0.026)       (0.036)     (0.033)      (0.033)
               Has savings in a cooperative           0.022***      0.001       0.015        0.040         0.029      0.035*         0.006      -0.043*       -0.012
                                                       (0.008)     (0.014)     (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.023)     (0.018)       (0.025)     (0.024)      (0.025)
50




               Has savings in piggy bank              0.094***    0.106***      0.009        0.009         -0.069      0.049         0.094       0.041        0.045
                                                       (0.017)     (0.038)     (0.052)      (0.055)       (0.049)     (0.039)       (0.062)     (0.059)      (0.057)
            Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
               Total formal and informal savings      0.907***    1.352**       -0.962       -0.584        -0.362      0.499         0.943       0.263        0.443
                                                       (0.283)    (0.664)      (0.773)      (0.795)       (0.732)     (0.431)       (0.629)     (0.560)      (0.540)
               Total formal savings                     1.534       1.690       0.502        -1.500        0.712       1.092         3.761       -1.720       -0.502
                                                       (1.002)     (2.258)     (2.953)      (3.011)       (3.072)     (1.883)       (2.454)     (2.448)      (2.662)
               Total informal savings                 1.040***    1.519***     -1.132*       -0.194        -0.694     0.692*         0.308       0.439        0.668
                                                       (0.250)     (0.555)     (0.593)      (0.636)       (0.642)     (0.421)       (0.647)     (0.605)      (0.567)
               Savings in a bank                        1.033       2.309       1.485        -4.466        -0.884      -0.255        3.470       0.755        0.614
                                                       (1.272)     (2.444)     (3.810)      (3.211)       (3.849)     (2.682)       (3.687)     (3.673)      (3.665)
               Savings in a cooperative               7.509**       2.007        3.338       10.318        5.157       8.792         6.439      -11.601      -0.527
                                                      (3.097)      (8.212)     (11.734)     (11.349)     (11.413)     (6.415)       (8.680)     (8.890)     (10.186)
               Savings in piggy bank                  0.788***    1.018***      -0.331       -0.130        -0.544      0.247        0.863*       0.425       0.901**
                                                       (0.158)     (0.347)     (0.457)      (0.454)       (0.422)     (0.289)       (0.470)     (0.497)      (0.448)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                            Table 51: Heterogeneous eects: Impact of LISTA on Financial Performance - Administrative Data


                                                                            May-Jun       Jun-Jul       Jul-Aug      Aug-Sep      Sep-Oct      Oct-Nov       Nov-Dec
                    Subsample: Atlantic region
                       Number of monthly withdraws (a)                        -0.012     -0.092***      -0.088*        -0.028       -0.039    -0.061***      -0.162**
                                                                             (0.009)      (0.023)       (0.046)       (0.027)      (0.033)     (0.022)        (0.069)
                       Number of other debit transactions (b)                 -0.030      -0.151**      -0.173**       -0.110       -0.062       -0.037       -0.028
                                                                             (0.020)       (0.070)       (0.071)      (0.086)      (0.074)      (0.046)      (0.060)
                       Number of total debit transactions (a) + (b)           -0.016     -0.155***     -0.165***      -0.077*       -0.055    -0.075***     -0.177***
                                                                             (0.010)      (0.043)       (0.059)       (0.044)      (0.041)     (0.026)       (0.065)
                       Number of active credits (c)                         0.106***        0.050        -0.011        0.034      0.109**       0.110**       -0.014
                                                                             (0.036)       (0.040)      (0.040)       (0.037)     (0.043)       (0.040)      (0.040)
                       Number of monthly deposits (d)                         -0.004        -0.030       -0.064        -0.016       0.009        -0.005       -0.029
                                                                             (0.017)       (0.024)      (0.048)       (0.023)      (0.031)      (0.028)      (0.049)
                       Total transactionality (a) + (b) + (c) + (d)           -0.014     -0.123***     -0.150***       -0.057       -0.018     -0.054**     -0.156***
                                                                             (0.015)      (0.032)       (0.045)       (0.036)      (0.034)      (0.021)      (0.055)
                       Average monthly account balance                      -0.015**        0.007       0.058**      0.064***     0.054**       0.064*        0.039
51




                                                                             (0.007)       (0.016)      (0.023)       (0.023)     (0.024)       (0.033)      (0.035)
                    Subsample: Pacific region
                        Number of monthly withdraws (a)                      0.021**      0.183***     0.088***      0.116***     0.206***      0.041**       -0.017
                                                                             (0.007)       (0.017)      (0.021)       (0.016)      (0.015)      (0.016)      (0.023)
                       Number of other debit transactions (b)                 0.000         0.000        0.000         -0.000       -0.000       0.000       0.014***
                                                                             (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
                       Number of total debit transactions (a) + (b)          0.017**      0.171***     0.092***      0.114***     0.202***     0.047***       -0.006
                                                                             (0.007)       (0.017)      (0.021)       (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.023)
                       Number of active credits (c)                         -0.168***    -0.282***       -0.038      0.336***     0.255***     0.107***      0.542**
                                                                             (0.015)      (0.041)       (0.031)       (0.018)      (0.019)      (0.006)      (0.256)
                       Number of monthly deposits (d)                        0.019**      0.109***     0.119***      0.024***     -0.007**     0.021***      0.080***
                                                                             (0.008)       (0.013)      (0.015)       (0.007)      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.007)
                       Total transactionality (a) + (b) + (c) + (d)          0.012*       0.155***     0.115***      0.104***     0.139***      0.034**      0.043*
                                                                             (0.006)       (0.014)      (0.018)       (0.013)      (0.008)      (0.014)      (0.023)
                       Average monthly account balance                        -0.002      0.049***       0.008         -0.006       0.020        -0.017       0.035
                                                                             (0.008)       (0.016)      (0.025)       (0.029)      (0.027)      (0.028)      (0.030)

     Note: Average savings are standardized using the mean and the variance from January 2014. Controls include: randomization blocks, account is from Banco Agrario, two-month
     moving average savings up to April 2015, number of financial institutions in the district, and a set of socioeconomic covariates at the municipal level. Clustered standard errors
     in parenthesis. * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.
                    Table 52: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Psychosocial Indicators


                                                                                          Area                Region                 Schooling
                                                                      Total       Urban          Rural   Caribe    Pacifico    Primary    Secondary
                                                                       (1)         (2)            (3)     (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)
                             Optimism                                0.095**     0.158**      0.044      0.128**    0.071      0.146**       0.055
                                                                     (0.043)     (0.060)     (0.067)     (0.050)   (0.068)     (0.067)      (0.054)
                             Pessimism                              -0.119***     -0.075    -0.170**     -0.093*   -0.242**    -0.169**      -0.065
                                                                     (0.044)     (0.055)     (0.068)     (0.047)    (0.086)     (0.065)     (0.048)
                             People trust                             -0.013      0.000     -0.027**      -0.003   -0.036*      -0.010       -0.013
                                                                     (0.009)     (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.010)   (0.019)     (0.014)      (0.013)
                             More trustworthy of other people        0.080*       0.100       0.064       0.094     0.081       0.082        0.076
                                                                     (0.044)     (0.062)     (0.060)     (0.059)   (0.058)     (0.057)      (0.052)
52




                             Interested in savings program            0.055       0.101       -0.012      0.091     -0.063      0.056        0.047
                                                                     (0.055)     (0.074)     (0.059)     (0.071)   (0.072)     (0.066)      (0.070)
                             There are lots of ways around            0.025       -0.010      0.068       0.001     0.083       0.064        -0.016
                             any problem that I am facing now        (0.059)     (0.060)     (0.091)     (0.061)   (0.122)     (0.077)      (0.055)
                             Is meeting her goals                    0.088*       0.009      0.153**      0.072     0.123      0.147*        0.034
                                                                     (0.052)     (0.059)     (0.074)     (0.055)   (0.106)     (0.080)      (0.052)
                             Self-e cacy

                             Future orientation

                             Social capital



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                    Table 53: Heterogeneous eects: Second follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Psychosocial Indicators


                                                                    Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                 Interactions with age quartiles
                                                        Total      Treat     Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3      Treat*Q4      Treat      Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3    Treat*Q4
                                                         (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)
              Optimism                                0.095**       0.036       -0.016       0.173        0.094       0.089        -0.044       0.064       0.010
                                                      (0.043)      (0.066)     (0.097)      (0.114)      (0.133)     (0.084)      (0.121)      (0.118)     (0.114)
              Pessimism                              -0.119***      -0.085      0.099       -0.231*       -0.011      -0.072       -0.075       -0.094      -0.018
                                                      (0.044)      (0.071)     (0.106)      (0.137)      (0.109)     (0.083)      (0.127)      (0.121)     (0.106)
              People trust                              -0.013     -0.033*      0.025        0.020        0.043       -0.015       -0.005       0.013       -0.002
                                                       (0.009)     (0.019)     (0.026)      (0.027)      (0.029)     (0.020)      (0.027)      (0.028)     (0.026)
              More trustworthy of other people         0.080*       0.078       0.089       -0.188*       0.101      0.209**       -0.113       -0.149     -0.244*
                                                       (0.044)     (0.074)     (0.098)      (0.108)      (0.121)     (0.083)      (0.122)      (0.122)     (0.135)
53




              Interested in savings program             0.055       0.016       0.039        0.070        0.074       0.083        0.047        -0.112      -0.048
                                                       (0.055)     (0.087)     (0.121)      (0.121)      (0.148)     (0.100)      (0.127)      (0.116)     (0.119)
              There are lots of ways around             0.025       0.014       -0.030       0.057        -0.018      0.069        -0.034       -0.034      -0.100
              any problem that I am facing now         (0.059)     (0.097)     (0.108)      (0.109)      (0.127)     (0.097)      (0.105)      (0.128)     (0.123)
              Is meeting her goals                     0.088*     0.161**       -0.063       -0.151       -0.106     0.193**       -0.037       -0.154     -0.212*
                                                       (0.052)    (0.078)      (0.102)      (0.101)      (0.108)     (0.087)      (0.107)      (0.120)     (0.118)
              Self-e cacy

              Future orientation

              Social capital



     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
                     Table 54: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Psychosocial Indicators


                                                                                        Area                Region                 Schooling
                                                                      Total     Urban          Rural   Caribe    Pacifico    Primary     Secondary
                                                                       (1)       (2)            (3)     (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)
                              Optimism                                0.027      -0.025     0.077       0.004     0.099        0.086        -0.031
                                                                     (0.046)    (0.060)    (0.070)     (0.056)   (0.086)      (0.072)      (0.048)
                              Pessimism                               -0.055     0.079    -0.182**      0.020    -0.248**      -0.133       0.012
                                                                     (0.060)    (0.071)    (0.076)     (0.074)    (0.104)     (0.086)      (0.058)
                              People trust                            -0.024     -0.005    -0.041*      -0.007   -0.040*    -0.054***       0.006
                                                                     (0.015)    (0.018)    (0.022)     (0.019)   (0.022)     (0.019)       (0.019)
                              More trustworthy of other people
54




                              Interested in savings program

                              There are lots of ways around
                              any problem that I am facing now
                              Is meeting her goals

                              Self-e cacy                             0.048     0.108*      -0.011     0.098*     -0.080       0.056        0.041
                                                                     (0.053)    (0.064)    (0.072)     (0.055)   (0.126)      (0.070)      (0.066)
                              Future orientation                      0.065    0.105**      0.017       0.076     0.021      0.151**        0.001
                                                                     (0.044)   (0.049)     (0.069)     (0.048)   (0.091)     (0.067)       (0.053)
                              Social capital                          0.085      0.036     0.129*       0.050     0.130       0.124*        0.037
                                                                     (0.055)    (0.070)    (0.076)     (0.068)   (0.094)      (0.069)      (0.070)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (7) show coe cients of the
     treatment in the regression for each sub-sample.
                     Table 55: Heterogeneous eects: Third follow-up Tablet (Pooled Treatment) eect on Psychosocial Indicators


                                                                   Interactions with SISBEN points quartiles                 Interactions with age quartiles
                                                       Total      Treat      Treat*Q2     Treat*Q3      Treat*Q4     Treat      Treat*Q2    Treat*Q3     Treat*Q4
                                                        (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
               Optimism                                0.027       0.139        -0.119       -0.130      -0.263*      0.144       -0.159       -0.144      -0.153
                                                      (0.046)     (0.094)      (0.112)      (0.126)      (0.145)     (0.091)     (0.114)      (0.106)     (0.112)
               Pessimism                               -0.055      -0.127       -0.031       0.191        0.164       -0.066      0.010        0.005       0.026
                                                      (0.060)     (0.103)      (0.119)      (0.135)      (0.132)     (0.090)     (0.119)      (0.120)     (0.132)
               People trust                            -0.024   -0.066***       0.017      0.061**      0.110***      -0.018      -0.017       0.003       -0.008
                                                      (0.015)    (0.023)       (0.040)     (0.029)       (0.030)     (0.028)     (0.039)      (0.040)     (0.040)
               More trustworthy of other people
55




               Interested in savings program

               There are lots of ways around
               any problem that I am facing now
               Is meeting her goals

               Self-e cacy                             0.048       0.094        -0.131       -0.033       -0.029      0.093       -0.060       -0.105      -0.019
                                                      (0.053)     (0.089)      (0.108)      (0.113)      (0.120)     (0.083)     (0.109)      (0.106)     (0.118)
               Future orientation                      0.065      0.122*        0.038       -0.210*       -0.070     0.138*       0.033     -0.286***      -0.027
                                                      (0.044)     (0.072)      (0.122)      (0.119)      (0.107)     (0.073)     (0.103)     (0.100)      (0.120)
               Social capital                          0.085       0.056        0.080        0.020        0.015       -0.013      0.087        0.121       0.179
                                                      (0.055)     (0.088)      (0.128)      (0.120)      (0.119)     (0.095)     (0.115)      (0.118)     (0.122)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the
     municipality level in parenthesis. Column (1) shows regression coe cient of the treatment for the whole sample (average eect). Columns (2) to (5) and (6) to (9) show
     coe cients of the regression that includes interaction terms of the treatment variable with SISBEN points and age, respectively.
8    Results: SMS vs. Tablet Only Treatment
The evaluation's second intervention consisted of sending SMS nudge messages to a selection of
treated beneficiaries of the LISTA program. Evidence indicates that text messages augmented in
some areas the eects of the tablet program. There was a positive impact on the acquisition of
financial knowledge and self-reported financial performance. However, there is a limited eect on
the practice adoption and general attitudes.


No impact is found on financial preferences and attitudes. A possible explanation is that the
text message content did not target the CCT recipients' attitudes towards financial institutions,
with only one of the text messages discussing banks (and the message conveyed was that of saving
in formal entities as the safest alternative).


Financial practices. The SMS's eect on the adoption of financial practices appears limited.
There was no eect on saving or budgeting practices, ranging from having a savings goal to keeping
written accounts. However, there may be an impact on MFA-related practices. The SMS treatment
increased the probability of leaving the card with family members and friends. Even if this result
is not ideal from an MFA program perspective (i.e., MFA cards should be personal and nontrans-
ferable items), it might reflect LISTA's impact on beneficiaries teaching someone else to use an
ATM. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that having been part of the SMS treatment group
decreases the probability of being accompanied by someone to use the ATM by 13 percentage points.


Financial performance. Analysis suggests that the SMS intervention had a positive and sig-
nificant eect on self-reported financial performance. There is an impact of SMS treatment on
beneficiary's total and informal amount of savings, including savings at home. These results are
consistent with the SMS content, in the sense that most of the messages encourage saving practices.
When considering the financial practices and performance results together, there is indication that
the SMS treatment had an eect at the intensive rather than the extensive margins. It appears
to have increased the magnitudes of those who acquired more knowledge and were already saving,
but it did not increase the number of people who saved compared to the tablet-only treatment,
suggesting that what sparked the savings habit was the tablet app itself.


Psychosocial Indicators. No impact was detected impact on the attitudes and preferences
of the treated beneficiaries for the SMS intervention. Once again, this may be due in large part
to the content of these messages, which did not target directly these behavioral or empowerment
components, although one could hypothesize that with increased knowledge and informal savings
the beneficiary may indirectly increase her sense of self-e cacy and optimism.




                                                 56
                                            Table 56: Impact of LISTA SMS (vs. Tablet only) on Financial Knowledge


                                                                     First follow-up                    Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                              Obs     Control    Treatment       Obs     Control    Treatment       Obs     Control     Treatment
                       Knowledge: total score                 938      2.357        0.034       1,127      5.635     0.213***      1,010      5.405        0.082
                                                                                   (0.068)                            (0.064)                             (0.084)

                       Knowledge: savings section             938      0.989       0.114*       1,127      2.277     0.215***      1,010      2.132        0.053
                                                                                   (0.058)                            (0.060)                             (0.080)
                                                                                   [0.144]                            [0.000]                             [0.732]
                       Knowledge: budget section              938      0.681        -0.034      1,127      1.607       0.103       1,010      1.600        0.012
                                                                                   (0.070)                            (0.064)                             (0.059)
                                                                                   [0.812]                            [0.211]                             [0.836]
                       Knowledge: debt section                938      0.687        -0.043      1,127      1.750       0.040       1,010      1.673        0.089
                                                                                   (0.077)                            (0.074)                             (0.083)
                                                                                   [0.812]                            [0.594]                             [0.614]
                       Knowledge extended: total score                                          1,127      8.736     0.194***      1,010      7.953        0.037
                                                                                                                      (0.065)                             (0.079)
57




                       Knowledge extended: savings                                              1,127      3.159     0.262***      1,010      2.992        0.077
                                                                                                                      (0.062)                             (0.084)
                                                                                                                      [0.000]                             [0.729]
                       Knowledge extended: budget                                               1,127      2.305       0.069       1,010      2.073        -0.012
                                                                                                                      (0.057)                             (0.055)
                                                                                                                      [0.477]                             [0.968]
                       Knowledge extended: debt                                                 1,127      3.272       0.042       1,010      2.887        0.005
                                                                                                                      (0.065)                             (0.075)
                                                                                                                      [0.533]                             [0.968]
                       Knowledge extended: math                                                 1,127      1.647       -0.081
                                                                                                                      (0.063)
                                                                                                                      [0.477]

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the "mother
     leader" level in parenthesis.
                                             Table 57: Impact of LISTA SMS (vs. Tablet only) on Financial Attitudes


                                                                                First follow-up                        Second follow-up                        Third follow-up
                                                                        Obs      Control      Treatment         Obs      Control      Treatment         Obs      Control      Treatment
      Has a savings goal                                               1,497      0.242          0.038         1,127      0.321          0.002         1,010      0.368          0.018
                                                                                                 (0.024)                                 (0.044)                                 (0.037)
                                                                                                 [0.955]                                 [0.995]                                 [0.948]
      Believes can leave money in MFA account                          1,063      0.341         -0.049*         695       0.722          -0.014         688       0.781          -0.062
                                                                                                 (0.029)                                 (0.042)                                 (0.037)
                                                                                                 [0.347]                                 [0.995]                                 [0.417]
      Trust in bank                                                     659       1.289          0.023          777       2.796          -0.030         711       2.643          -0.050
58




                                                                                                 (0.061)                                 (0.077)                                 (0.110)
                                                                                                 [0.955]                                 [0.995]                                 [0.915]
      Comfort with banks                                                647       1.124          -0.029         769       2.487          0.037          708       2.642          0.108
                                                                                                 (0.068)                                 (0.094)                                 (0.068)
                                                                                                 [0.955]                                 [0.995]                                 [0.417]
      Preference: money in bank vs. cash                                660       1.658          -0.044         796       2.959          0.010          727       3.132          -0.069
                                                                                                 (0.049)                                 (0.069)                                 (0.075)
                                                                                                 [0.788]                                 [0.995]                                 [0.792]
      Intertemporal preference: today vs. one month                                                             795       3.021          0.026          724       2.899          -0.054
                                                                                                                                         (0.089)                                 (0.095)
                                                                                                                                         [0.995]                                 [0.915]

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the "mother
     leader" level in parenthesis.
                                    Table 58: Impact of LISTA SMS (vs. Tablet only) on Financial Practices (ATM, MFA)


                                                                         First follow-up                  Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                                 Obs      Control    Treatment      Obs     Control    Treatment      Obs    Control     Treatment
                     Manages household finances                   654      0.957      -0.029**      769      0.921        0.004       704      0.942        0.015
                                                                                       (0.012)                           (0.016)                           (0.018)
                                                                                       [0.057]                           [0.998]                           [0.945]
                     Keeps written track of accounts             1,030     0.118        0.043       729      0.175        -0.007      677      0.326        0.075
                                                                                       (0.030)                           (0.035)                           (0.051)
                                                                                       [0.369]                           [0.998]                           [0.659]
                     Withdrew last MFA transfer                  1,035     0.367        -0.016      768      0.791        0.030       682      0.847        -0.007
                                                                                       (0.019)                           (0.031)                           (0.022)
                                                                                       [0.629]                           [0.928]                           [0.978]
                     Accompanied when withdrew                    977      0.192        0.006       490      0.521        0.005       669      0.447        -0.001
                                                                                       (0.042)                           (0.063)                           (0.040)
                                                                                       [0.872]                           [0.998]                           [0.978]
                     Has money in MFA account (today)                                               605      0.382        0.053       611      0.504        0.036
59




                                                                                                                         (0.054)                           (0.045)
                                                                                                                         [0.928]                           [0.945]
                     Leaves money in MFA account                                                    687      0.397        0.002       667      0.444        0.014
                                                                                                                         (0.050)                           (0.052)
                                                                                                                         [0.998]                           [0.978]
                     Someone helped use ATM                                                         257      0.663       -0.137*      297      0.578        0.031
                                                                                                                         (0.077)                           (0.057)
                                                                                                                         [0.462]                           [0.957]
                     Feels can teach ATM use                                                        760      0.428        0.061       702      0.556        0.060
                                                                                                                         (0.053)                           (0.039)
                                                                                                                         [0.869]                           [0.649]
                     Has taught someone use ATM                                                     760      0.242        0.037       702      0.269       0.083**
                                                                                                                         (0.035)                           (0.039)
                                                                                                                         [0.913]                           [0.248]
                     Has a MFA card                                                                 768      0.847        0.007       684      0.970        0.010
                                                                                                                         (0.023)                           (0.011)
                                                                                                                         [0.996]                           [0.921]

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the "mother
     leader" level in parenthesis.
                                       Table 59: Impact of LISTA SMS (vs. Tablet only) on Financial Practices (Budget)


                                                                      First follow-up                     Second follow-up                        Third follow-up
                                                               Obs     Control    Treatment       Obs       Control       Treatment      Obs        Control       Treatment
             In case of a 350k emergency
                Would use savings                              918      0.420        0.009       1,088       0.143           -0.017       985        0.144           -0.007
                                                                                    (0.032)                                 (0.033)                                 (0.028)
                                                                                    [0.915]                                 [0.802]                                 [0.969]
               Would use loans                                 918      0.533        0.003       1,088       0.734           0.028        985        0.764           0.007
                                                                                    (0.030)                                 (0.031)                                 (0.029)
                                                                                    [0.926]                                 [0.611]                                 [0.961]
               Would sell or pawn something                    918      0.033        -0.010      1,088       0.115           -0.003       985        0.051           -0.006
                                                                                    (0.010)                                 (0.024)                                 (0.019)
                                                                                    [0.598]                                 [0.881]                                 [0.965]
               Would look for a job                                                              1,101       0.026          -0.013*       995        0.029           0.008
                                                                                                                            (0.008)                                 (0.012)
                                                                                                                            [0.232]                                 [0.832]
             In case of receiving 300k extra
60




               Would save                                                                        1,127       0.892           -0.001      1,009       0.863           0.021
                                                                                                                            (0.027)                                 (0.026)
                                                                                                                            [0.995]                                 [0.862]
               Would spend on healthcare or education                                            1,127       0.097           -0.038      1,007       0.966           -0.004
                                                                                                                            (0.024)                                 (0.012)
                                                                                                                            [0.430]                                 [0.926]
               Would build, improve or buy a house                                               1,120       0.782           -0.011      1,004       0.831           -0.027
                                                                                                                            (0.028)                                 (0.024)
                                                                                                                            [0.969]                                 [0.754]
               Would spend on household expenses                                                 1,127       0.050           0.001       1,008       0.814           -0.016
                                                                                                                            (0.012)                                 (0.030)
                                                                                                                            [0.995]                                 [0.926]
               Would invest in business                                                          1,124       0.856           -0.026      1,007       0.899           0.010
                                                                                                                            (0.027)                                 (0.018)
                                                                                                                            [0.784]                                 [0.926]
             Was able to cover household expenses                                                1,028       0.388          -0.058*       922        0.432           -0.021
                                                                                                                            (0.032)                                 (0.033)
                                                                                                                            [0.133]                                 [0.758]
             Household weekly expenditure                                                        1,028    137,060.984        -0.063       904     151,549.219        -0.040
                                                                                                                            (0.067)                                 (0.063)
                                                                                                                            [0.357]                                 [0.758]

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the "mother
     leader" level in parenthesis.
                               Table 60: Impact of LISTA SMS (vs. Tablet only) on Financial Performance (Self - Reported)


                                                                         First follow-up                  Second follow-up                 Third follow-up
                                                                  Obs     Control   Treatment      Obs     Control    Treatment     Obs     Control    Treatment
                         Panel A: Probability of saving
                         Has formal and informal savings         1,541     0.045       0.018      1,127      0.043      -0.017     1,010     0.082       -0.030
                                                                                      (0.019)                          (0.016)                          (0.021)
                         Has formal savings                      1,541     0.059       0.016      1,127      0.085      -0.019     1,010     0.132       -0.029
                                                                                      (0.022)                          (0.020)                          (0.024)
                         Has informal savings                    1,541     0.327       0.035      1,127      0.417      0.043      1,010     0.472        0.006
                                                                                      (0.028)                          (0.035)                          (0.036)
                         Saves money in piggy bank               1,540     0.324       0.034      1,126      0.408      0.030      1,010     0.438        0.001
                                                                                      (0.028)                          (0.035)                          (0.037)
                         Saves money in bank account             1,534     0.032       0.024      1,127      0.051      -0.014     1,006     0.082      -0.047**
61




                                                                                      (0.016)                          (0.015)                          (0.020)
                         Saves money in cooperative              1,541     0.034       -0.000     1,126      0.039      -0.010     1,009     0.061        0.004
                                                                                      (0.016)                          (0.015)                          (0.017)
                         Panel B: Tobit estimates for savings
                         Total formal and informal savings        938     58,144       0.253      1,127    129,173      0.264      1,010    187,946       0.031
                                                                                      (0.168)                          (0.514)                          (0.378)
                         Total formal savings                     938     22,015       1.584      1,127     57,269      -0.804     1,009     79,574      -1.783
                                                                                      (1.091)                          (2.109)                          (1.557)
                         Total informal savings                   938     34,458       0.210      1,127     60,091      0.400       967     101,905       0.356
                                                                                      (0.159)                          (0.393)                          (0.361)
                         Savings in a piggy bank                  938     27,912       0.280      1,127     48,842      0.404       967      77,257       0.135
                                                                                      (0.177)                          (0.372)                          (0.298)
                         Savings in a bank                        938     11,537       2.040      1,127     30,828      -1.731     1,005     34,678     -4.234**
                                                                                      (1.395)                          (3.486)                          (1.953)

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the "mother
     leader" level in parenthesis.
                                           Table 61: Impact of LISTA SMS (vs. Tablet only) on Psychosocial Indicators


                                                                      First follow-up                    Second follow-up                   Third follow-up
                                                               Obs    Control     Treatment      Obs      Control    Treatment       Obs     Control     Treatment
                      Optimism                                                                   1,096      5.868       0.063        985      5.813         0.054
                                                                                                                       (0.051)                             (0.084)
                                                                                                                       [0.764]                             [0.942]
                      Pessimism                                                                  1,104      2.284       -0.011       975      2.817         -0.063
                                                                                                                       (0.070)                             (0.084)
                                                                                                                       [0.986]                             [0.942]
                      People trust                                                               1,115      0.050       0.008       1,007     0.095         0.017
                                                                                                                       (0.015)                             (0.023)
                                                                                                                       [0.961]                             [0.942]
                      More trustworthy of other people                                           1,122      1.874       0.065
                                                                                                                       (0.081)
                                                                                                                       [0.923]
                      Interested in savings program                                              1,091      2.958       -0.032
62




                                                                                                                       (0.074)
                                                                                                                       [0.961]
                      There are lots of ways around                                              1,127      5.679       0.005
                                                                                                                       (0.080)
                      any problem that I am facing now                                                                 [0.986]
                      Is meeting her goals                                                       1,127      5.331       0.087
                                                                                                                       (0.096)
                      Self-e cacy                                                                                      [0.891]
                                                                                                                                    1,010     3.050        -0.123*
                                                                                                                                                           (0.072)
                      Future orientation                                                                                                                   [0.385]
                                                                                                                                    1,010     3.284         -0.029
                                                                                                                                                           (0.075)
                      Social capital                                                                                                                       [0.942]
                                                                                                                                    1,010     1.721         0.011
                                                                                                                                                           (0.078)
                                                                                                                                                           [0.942]

     Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10% (based on p-values unadjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing). Clustered standard errors at the "mother
     leader" level in parenthesis.
9    SMS Messages
The following messages were sent during the second intervention. Original messages were written
in Spanish and were sent out on a weekly basis from November 2015 to March 2016.


Message 1: LISTA program. Hello, from now on you will receive text messages from the program.
We invite you to read them all. Thank you for your time and attention.
Message 2: LISTA program. The M´
                               as Familias en Acci´
                                                  on incentive is almost here. Save part of
this money for your GOAL by leaving it in your account.
Message 3: LISTA program. Just as you've seen in the tablet, saving is easier than what you
believed. Set a GOAL, manage your household accounts, start today.
Message 4: LISTA program. Remember your goal and think before buying on impulse. The
money you save can be used to increase the amount of money in your account or in your piggy
bank.
Message 5: LISTA program. Take care of your own and your family's health. Eat fruit, vegeta-
bles, grains and drink enough clean water, this way you can save on medical expenses.
Message 6: LISTA program. Remind your family that turning the lights o in your house and
closing the water taps is SAVING, it is also a way to take care of our planet.
Message 7: LISTA program. Saving is also buying quality goods with a warranty. Always keep
your receipts and warranties in a safe place.
Message 8: LISTA program. You can program your saving every day, week, fortnight or month.
The important thing is that after a year you are closer to your GOAL.
Message 9: LISTA program. Hello, did you know that it is more expensive to buy on credit or
by borrowing, than by saving. With credit you pay up to three times the actual price of the good.
Message 10: LISTA program. When you save, think where you will be saving your money. In a
cooperative or in a bank your money is safe, in your house however, it is easily accessible to all.
Message 11: LISTA program. The M´
                                as Familias en Acci´
                                                   on incentive is almost here. Save part
of this money for your GOAL, by leaving it in your account. If you also happen to need a loan, it
will be easier to get one with money in your account.
Message 12: LISTA program. If you have a loan, don't commit to another one. You should only
borrow money you can repay. If you always pay what you owe, people will lend you money.
Message 13: LISTA program. Take care of everything you have. Your health, family and house-
hold belongings. Always have spare money in case of an emergency.
Message 14: LISTA program. If you are thinking of starting a business or improving your own,
use part of your MFA incentive to do so.




                                                 63
