                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHY UNIONS SURVIVE:
      UNDERSTANDING HOW UNIONS OVERCOME THE FREE-RIDER PROBLEM

                                       Richard Murphy

                                     Working Paper 25924
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25924


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




I thank Sandy Black, Alex Bryson, Justin Gallagher, Claudia Hupkau, Steve Machin, Brendon
McConnell, Emma Pickering, Imran Rasul, Felix Weinhardt, as well as the participants of the
CEP Labour Workshop, CESifo Education Group, Lancaster University, UT Austin and UC
Irvine. All remaining errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Richard Murphy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Why Unions Survive: Understanding How Unions Overcome The Free-Rider Problem
Richard Murphy
NBER Working Paper No. 25924
June 2019
JEL No. I20,J45,J51

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper provides evidence for why individuals join unions instead of free-riding. I model
membership as legal insurance. To test the model, I use the incidence of news stories concerning
allegations against teachers in the UK as a plausibly exogenous shock to demand for such
insurance. I find that, for every five stories occurring in a region, teachers are 2.2 percentage
points more likely to be members in the subsequent year. These effects are larger when teachers
share characteristics with the news story and can explain 45 percent of the growth in teacher
union membership between 1992 and 2010.


Richard Murphy
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway, C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
richard.murphy@austin.utexas.edu
1. Introduction

    Currently, many US States are attempting to limit the power of unions through legislative
action, reducing their collective bargaining rights and ability to charge union dues. One
example of these efforts is the implementation of `right-to-work' legislation, which allows
individuals to work in an industry without being required to join the union or pay dues. 1 This
brings up the longstanding question: why would employees choose to pay for membership, if
they can benefit from better wages and working conditions generated through collective
bargaining regardless (Olson, 1965; Freeman and Medoff 1984; Bryson and Forth, 2010)?
Does the rise of such legislation signal the end of trade unions?
    Not necessarily. Arguments have been put forward for why individuals may continue join
unions in situations where it is possible to free ride. These are reputation concerns (Akerlof,
1980; Booth, 1985; Naylor & Cripps, 1993), the appreciation of the benefits that unions provide
(Jermeir et. al., 1986) and the existence of excludable benefits (Olson, 1965; Albanese and Van
Fleet, 1985). 2 However, these theories have not been tested using modern empirical approaches
beyond cross-sectional analysis. This paper tests that the existence of an excludable benefit can
maintain, and even increase the demand for union membership in situations where individuals
are able to free-ride.
    Teacher trade unions in the UK offer legal protection and advice to individuals who were
members at the time when the allegation was made and when it was alleged to have occurred.
If the perceived risk of having an allegation being made increases, then the demand for
insurance against such risks would increase. In this paper I model union membership as a form
of legal insurance, which is a private and excludable benefit for members. Therefore, as the
subjective perceived risk of allegations increases, the latent demand for union membership
among teachers will also increase. Moreover, individuals may react to new information about
allegations differently depending on how relevant they perceive it to be to their situation.
Ultimately, the provision of such services means that unions could continue to exist, even if
employees are not required to pay union dues.


1
  Right-to work laws ban a particular type of employment contract that requires all employees ­ union or not ­ to
pay fair share provisions, to cover the costs of negotiating and enforcing their contract. There are currently 27
right-to-work states in the US. The four most recent are Kentucky (2017), West Virginia (2016)
Wisconsin (2015),. In 2018 the Supreme Court issued a ruling that government employee unions cannot require
represented workers to pay a cent in union dues or fees (Janus v. AFSCME).
2 For a discussion of the categorisation of the reasons, see Chaison and Dhavale (1992).


                                                          1
   I present a simple model where teachers have expectations regarding the likelihood of an
allegation being made against them and the likelihood of being found innocent both with and
without union representation. Each state of the world has an associated utility. Individuals
choose between joining the union and paying their dues or not, but they receive the same wages
regardless. From these assumptions I construct a series of comparative statics, showing, for an
arbitrary teacher type, that the demand for union membership is increasing in the perceived
risk of allegations. This model of rational decision-making forms the basis of a discrete choice
estimation strategy, where individuals have expected utility from being a union member or not
determined by their characteristics, idiosyncratic tastes and their perceived risk of allegations.
This is directly translated into a logit model where the parameter of interest is the increased
likelihood of union membership from an increase in perceived risk.
   To test the model, I use the UK teacher labour market. This labour market is comparable
to a right-to-work state due to the 1990 Employment Act, which made it unlawful for any
workplace to exclude from employment non-union members. Additionally, UK employees are
not required to pay a union, even if that union is lobbying for higher wages and working
conditions in their occupation, as is the case for teachers, who agree upon wages and conditions
at the national level. Despite these facts, the UK has seen an increase in union density over the
last thirty years against a background of de-unionisation in the economy as a whole (Neumann
and Rissman, 1984; Blanchflower and Bryson, 2008).
   To examine whether this increase in union membership relates to the insurance role of
unions, I require plausibly exogenous shocks to the perceived threat of an allegation being
made. For this I use the number of newspaper stories concerning allegations against school
teachers collected from Lexis Nexis over a twenty-year period. I exploit variation in the timing
and location of these stories as exogenous shocks to the perceived threat to all teachers in that
region. While I cannot observe how many or which newspapers an individual teacher reads, I
assume changes in newspaper reporting reflect general changes in perceived threat, regardless
of source (e.g., TV, internet, gossip). Therefore, the focus of the paper is not the impact of
newspaper coverage per se, but how the perception of risk of allegations impacts union
membership.
   I combine this measure for perceived threat with individual level characteristics and union
membership data from the Quarterly Labour Force Surveys (QLFS) between 1992 and 2010. I
find that unionisation rates increase with media coverage at the regional and national
level. Conditional on individual characteristics plus year and region effects, five additional
                                                  2
relevant news stories in a region increase the probability of union membership by 2.2
percentage points in the subsequent year. Additionally, the size of the effect is dependent on
the relevance of the story to the individual teacher. Teachers from secondary schools react to
stories involving other secondary school teachers, but not significantly to stories involving
primary school teachers. Similarly, the demand for union membership increases amongst male
teachers when there is news coverage concerning other male teachers, but not female teachers.
These heterogeneous effects suggest that it is something specific about the nature of the stories
driving demand and not a spurious correlation. Estimating the latent demand for union
membership, I find that 45 percent of the growth between 1992 and 2010 can be explained by
the increased threat proxied by media coverage.
    The finding that the provision of legal services has maintained and even increased the
demand for teacher unions is in itself important given the impact unions have on student
outcomes. Hoxby (1996), using the passage of duty-to-bargain laws, finds that unions are
effective at diverting funds to teachers by increasing their salaries and reducing pupil-teacher
ratios. Accordingly, Lovenheim and Willén (2016) find that attending school in a state that has
a duty-to-bargain laws reduces earnings by $800 per year and decreases hours worked by 0.5
hours per week, culminating in a total annual cost to the US economy of $199 billion. 3
    The main contribution of this paper is the establishment of a new source of demand for
union representation, in the form of legal insurance. By doing so it illustrates that, despite the
outlawing of `closed-shops' in the UK, teacher unions persist and even flourish by offering and
promoting a private and excludable service that is growing in demand. Previous papers have
examined the excludable benefits of union membership in different forms of unemployment
insurance. A set of international comparison papers have found union density to be higher in
countries with the Ghent system, where unions provide finance to members during periods of
unemployment, than in neighbouring countries (Holmlund & Lundborg, 1999; Clasen &
Viebrock, 2008; Bryson et. al., 2011). However, the concern with such comparisons is that they
are potentially confounded by other cross-country differences. Blanchflower et. al. (1990) look
within a country using cross sectional data to test another form of unemployment insurance,
assuming that being a member reduces the risk of becoming unemployed. They find that the


3
  Other papers have use regression discontinuity approaches to estimate the impact of union presence in private
sector firms and find small impacts on business survival, employment, wages (DiNardo and Lee, 2004) and stock
prices (Lee and Mas, 2012).


                                                         3
local unemployment rate has a positive impact on demand for union membership. This paper
builds on the existing literature using repeated cross-sectional data and estimating the change
in union density within UK regions over time as the perceived benefit from legal insurance
changes.
    While the focus of the paper is explaining the continued demand for union membership, it
also adds to the growing literature on the impact of news media on individuals' expectations
                                                                                                 4
and decision making (see Della Vigna & La Ferrara (2015) for a review).                              This paper
contributes to the literature by showing that individuals react more according to how similar
the story is to their own situation (by exploiting the characteristics of the teachers involved in
each story, such as gender, school type and region).
    There are two non-mutually exclusive possible channels for this heterogeneity. First,
teachers are rational and react more to incidents which share their characteristics because they
are indicative of an increased threat of allegations made against teachers like them in the future.
Second, teachers may simply react more strongly to stories where they share characteristics as
such news stories are more salient to them. I provide indicative evidence in support of the first
explanation. The likelihood of a newspaper story about a new allegation regarding a certain
teacher type increases in the number of different reported cases of that type originating in that
region in the previous year. That is, if there are more cases about male teachers in the press in
one year, then there are generally more new cases against males in the press the next year. This
is suggestive of teachers reacting to the news reports in a rational manner, on the assumption
that increased news coverage relates to increased actual threat. However, this doesn't rule out
the possibility that teachers react to stories that involve teachers with similar characteristics to
them due to higher salience. To understand whether the scale of the overall response reflects
rational behaviour by teachers, I use data on actual allegations between 2007 and 2011 to
calculate that the average teacher employed for 35 years has a 24 percent chance of having an
unfounded allegation made against them. 5


4
  Gentzkow & Della Vigna (2010) discuss media persuasive communication where the sender has potential interest
in changing the behaviour of the consumer. For the purpose of this paper, I am assuming that the newspapers
themselves have no interest in the actions of teachers (aside from buying newspapers). Therefore, unlike the
literature on persuasion, my focus is not on determining persuasion rates, for which I would need exposure rates.
5
  These allegation data are only available from 2007 and for a limited number of regions and therefore could not
be used for the main analysis. A horserace between actual and media-reported allegations is presented in the




                                                          4
    The policy implication is that even in a right-to-work state, the demand for union
membership can still remain, if unions provide a private service that is wanted and is not readily
supplied by the private market. 6 However, if a government were to provide the support to
employees protecting them from allegations, this would crowd out some of the demand for
union membership. Without such support, a rational action by teachers would be to join a union
and be covered in the event of an allegation.
        The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides institutional details of
teacher unions in the UK, along with anecdotal evidence of the increasing demand for unions
as form of legal insurance. Section 3 formalises a model for union demand dependent on
perceived threat of allegation and how it relates to the econometric specification. Section 4
describes the data sources and how the media coverage data was collected. Section 5 presents
estimates of the impact of media coverage on demand for union membership, presents
falsification exercises and explores the impact of actual versus reported allegations. Section 6
concludes.

2. Institutional Detail

    This section describes the institutional setting of teacher unions in the UK, with particular
attention paid to the validity of the assumptions required for the hypothesis: that it is possible
to free-ride on traditional union benefits, that unions provide a source of legal insurance, and
that the demand for this service is likely to be increasing.

A: Union Membership in the UK

    As with most developed countries, the UK has experienced a large decline in union
membership. Total membership in 1979 stood at 13.2 million. Twenty years later it had fallen
to 7.9 million (DfB, 2009). This was a combination of the de-industrialisation of the economy,
technological advances automating many traditional union occupations, and policy changes
(Bryson and Forth, 2010). During the 1980's the UK government passed a series of


Appendix Table 8. I find that, while the two measures are correlated, only the media reports have a significant
relationship with subsequent unionisation rate.
6
  There is currently no private teacher insurance market available in the UK. The possible reasons for this are
discussed in Section II.C.




                                                         5
Employment Acts diminishing the bargaining power of unions. Much of this legislation
restricted the use of `closed-shops,' where employers were required to employ only union
members. 7 The culmination was the 1990 Employment Act, which made it unlawful for any
workplace to exclude non-union members from employment, effectively making all
workplaces `open-shops.' A by-product of this legislation is that a single workplace may have
multiple unions present, and it is possible for individuals to be members of more than one union
should they choose to do so. It is typical for teacher unions to offer free membership while
teachers are in initial teacher training and for teachers to join multiple unions only to quit them
at the end of the training period.
    This fall in union membership has occurred both across and within occupational groups.
Over 90 percent of occupational groups have seen a fall in union membership since 1979, but
some occupations have experienced a rise in union membership. The five occupations with the
highest percentage point increases in union density between 1992 and 2010 are educational
assistants (28.7), secondary school teachers (12.5), primary school teachers (8.5), the police
(6.7) and nurses (6.4). 8 The fact that teachers were already one of the most unionised
occupations makes these additional gains even more remarkable. 9 In 1993, 76.5 percent of
teachers were unionised, and by 2005 this had reached a peak of 87.0 percent (10.5 percentage
point gain). As Figure 1 shows, in the same period, the remainder of the UK workforce saw a
6 percentage point decline in union density.
    The occupational groups that experienced an increase share a common theme of employees
having prolonged unsupervised interactions with vulnerable groups. This pattern is consistent
with the notion that, as society has become increasingly litigious, occupations at most risk of
accusations will respond most strongly. There will likely be many repercussions on labour
markets, but one rational response by employees in such occupations would be to increase their
demand for insurance against these risks. In this paper I document the reaction in the UK


7
  The 1982 Employment Act banned pre-entry closed shops, and closed shops were only permitted with 85 percent
support. The 1988 Employment Act outlaws industrial action to establish or preserve closed shops and gave union
members the right to ignore strikes.
8
  Author's calculations are based on the QLFS of all three-digit occupational groups with at least 100 employees
per year. The unionisation rate amongst the clergy also increased rapidly, reaching a peak in 2005 of 14.3 percent,
up from a base of 2.8 percent in 1992, but had fewer than 100 observations for 5 of the 18 years.
9
  Educational assistants from 20.4% to 48.1%, secondary school Teachers from 76.1% to 88.6%, primary school
Teachers from 82.3% to 90.8%, police from 76.8% to 83.5%, and nurses from 79.2% to 85.6%.




                                                           6
teacher labour market, as it is a well-defined occupational group with a large number of
employees that has also received considerable press attention regarding allegations over the
last two decades. 10

B: Teacher Unions in the UK

     Teacher unions have representatives in schools to defend the contractual working
conditions of all teachers at the school level. Negotiations regarding teacher pay, pensions, and
contractual conditions (e.g. hours worked, curriculum, pupil teacher ratios), however, are held
at the national level. This means that it is impossible for unions to bargain only for their
members, as non-union teachers employed in public sector schools will also receive any gains.
Despite being able to gain from the union negotiations, non-members are not required to pay
union dues.11 These factors make the UK teacher labour market a classic example of the trade
union free-rider problem: why would teachers choose to pay the costs of union membership if
their pay and working conditions are determined centrally? This is reflected summary statistics
from the QLFS. Since 2001, only 75 percent of teachers thought their pay and working
conditions were affected by trade unions, but more than 87 percent of teachers were union
members. 12 There must be other benefits from being a union member.

C: Unions as an Insurance Provider

A rational explanation for some teachers being union members despite being able to free-ride
on union negotiated pay and conditions (or even if they think unions provide no such benefits),
is that teacher unions provide other benefits that are excludable to non-members. One such


10
   Some occupations are required to purchase indemnity insurance through joining a professional body. UK
doctors are required to become members of the British Medical Association, which is the registered trade union
for doctors. Physiotherapists and Radiologists each have a professional body which provides insurance coverage
as well as professional and legal advice (Royal College of Radiologists, and Chartered Society of Physiotherapy).
11
   Union dues are set by each union at a national level, in contrast to some other countries where the level of dues
reflect the bargaining power at the local (school/district/state) level. There is a regional pay scale to account for
the cost of living around London, but this differential is still negotiated at the national level. The annual
membership fee for a full time teacher in 2015 for the two largest teacher unions in the UK were £167 NASUWT
and £170 NUT, and have been constant in nominal terms since 2010.
12
   One reason for not all teachers saying that their pay and conditions are affected by unions is that, since the
dissolution of the Burnham Committee in 1986, teacher unions no longer had a seat on the teacher pay committee.
This was replaced by the School Teachers Review Body (STRB), which is made up of academics and
professionals who make pay recommendations to the government. Unions can submit evidence to the STRB but
do not hold a seat.



                                                            7
benefit, which is highly promoted by the unions, is the legal advice and protection provided in
the event of an allegation being made. 13 Teachers who are union members when the allegation
is made and at the time of the alleged incident receive an official representative for the internal
disciplinary meetings and legal representation in the event of an escalation.
     The teacher trade unions consider this service to be the major driver of union demand. 14 As
part of the terms and conditions of membership, many unions reserve the right to use the facts
of successful cases to publicise their criminal representation scheme (NASUWT, 2014).
Moreover, in a survey of 176 teachers that I conducted in 2010-11, I found that in answering
the question "What were the MAIN reasons why you initially joined a teacher union?", 85
percent of the respondents stated "support in the event of allegations from pupils" compared
with 56 percent saying "to improve terms and conditions" (Appendix Table 1).
     There are currently no private insurance companies offering legal insurance to teachers in
the UK. 15 This begs the question, if there is a demand for private legal insurance, why doesn't
a market exist in which teachers can buy the service without the additional bundled costs
involved with union membership? There are two likely reasons. First, were an insurer to enter
into the market where the only benefit was risk insurance, it would risk adverse selection of
consumers. The unions currently in the insurance market have a first mover advantage, in that
they have a large non-negatively selected pool of enrolees because they also offer benefits that
are not related to insurance (e.g., information on teaching practice and conforming to social
norms). Second, the regulations regarding internal school hearings prevent teachers from
employing representation for themselves. The only forms of representation a teacher is allowed
at these hearings are themselves or a union representative/attorney. Note that a corresponding
situation exists in the US, where union members have `Weingarten Rights,' meaning that they
can request union representation at meetings that could lead to disciplinary action. 16 In either


13
   Other excludable benefits offered by teacher unions include continuing professional development, group
discounts, social status, and contributing to the union movement.
14
   Paddy Marshal, Head Recruitment Officer NUT, in April 2009 stated in a phone interview in relation to the
legal insurance that "the safety net is the biggest potential benefit." Tracy Twist, Assistant General Secretary of
NASUWT stated in a meeting with me that "a lot of teachers join because of these concerns."
15
   Ascertained by requesting these services over the phone from the top five insurance companies (AIG, Aviva,
RSA, AXA, Direct Line) in the UK, each year from 2011-16.
16
   These rights have existed since a 1975 Supreme Court case National Labor Relations Board vs. Weingarten
(Brennan & Supreme Court of The United States, 1975). Non-union employees have no equivalent rights. In 2000,
non-union employees were allowed to have co-workers in such meetings but "do not have the right to legal




                                                           8
country, teachers can still employ a lawyer if the incident proceeds beyond internal disciplinary
matters. However, in both countries, union membership comes with access to legal counsel and
liability coverage. 17
    If the internal hearings deem the situation serious enough to warrant external authorities,
either the police of the General Teaching Council (GTC) would be informed. In criminal cases
this would be the police. Teachers found guilty of one of 42 offences, such as indecent assault
on a child under 16, are automatically put on List 99. This prevents the individual from ever
working or volunteering to work with young people. For less serious cases teachers can be
referred to the GTC, which would convene a panel consisting of two teachers, one lay member
and a legal representative. Teachers found guilty of professional misconduct here can also be
added to the list if the offence is deemed grievous enough. Examples include falsifying
qualifications and assisting students with exams. In either case teachers can pay for their own
legal representation, but these costs are not refundable even with a not guilty verdict. As a
result, many teachers choose to be represented by trade unions.

D: Nature of the Risk

    For the fear of allegations to explain the rise in demand for union membership, the threat
of allegations also needs to have risen over this time period. There are no comparable records
directly measuring the threat of allegations annually. However, the largest union in the UK
(NASUWT) reported dealing with 71 cases of alleged sexual or physical abuse in 1991, 134 in
1992 and 158 in 1993 (Independent, 1994) and then estimated dealing with 800-900 per year
in 2009 (Keates, 2009). 18
     To obtain a more detailed and comprehensive measure of the threat against teachers, I use
the number of national newspaper stories involving accusations of teachers. A detailed
explanation of how this number is generated is provided in Section 4. There has been a large
increase in the number of newspaper stories concerning allegations against teachers over time.


counsel, union representatives, or other individuals who are not co-workers," and even these rights were rescinded
in 2004 (IBM, 2004).
17
   For example, the California Teachers' Association provides $1,000,000 coverage for legal defence costs in civil
suits arising out of educational employment activities and up to $35,000 reimbursement of attorney fees and costs
to defend employment-related criminal proceedings (CTA, 2019).
18
   NASUWT membership over this period increased by 63 percent (Certification Office, 2010) whilst the number
of allegations against its members increased by 1,167 percent.



                                                          9
Figure 3 shows that between 1992 and 1998 the average per year was 6.6, increasing to 37.9 in
the period 1999 to 2005. Post 2005, there was a fall in the number of news stories in national
newspapers. This coincides which a change in the law which gave more protection to teachers
to prevent their case from being reported before a case had gone to term (HM Government,
2006). 19
     Would a fear of allegations be rational for a teacher working in the UK today? To establish
this basic tenet, I collected information on the actual allegations made against public sector
employees who work with children and young people through use of the Freedom of
Information Act. After contacting all 152 Local Authorities in England, I received responses
from 118 (See Appendix 1 for detailed list). Unfortunately, it was compulsory only for Local
Authorities to record this information from 2007 to 2011, and therefore the data span a
relatively short period of time.
     The information received included which occupational sector the allegation was made
against and the nature of the allegation. 20 The education sector received more than half of all
allegations, with 52.6 percent despite representing only 42 percent of the workforce that work
with children and young people (DCSF, 2008). Of these allegations, 56.9 percent are physical
in nature and 23.9 percent sexual, which is comparable to allegations for all non-educational
occupational groups with 52.5 percent and 25.1 percent, respectively (Table 1). These data also
provide a count of the outcomes of allegations over the previous twelve months, which I have
codified into four categories: (1) Not Upheld, (2) Police Involvement, (3) Disciplinary
Procedures and (4) Referral. 21 These outcomes cannot be connected to occupations, but in
general 46.1 percent of all allegations are not upheld (Table 2).


19
   In accordance with the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) guidance, the police will not normally
provide any information to media that might identify a teacher who is under investigation, unless and until the
person is charged with a criminal offence. In exceptional cases where the police might depart from that rule (e.g.,
an appeal to trace a suspect), the reasons should be documented and partner agencies should be consulted
beforehand.
20
   There are 15 occupational groups: Social, Care, Health, Education, Foster Carers, Connexion, Police, YOT,
Probation, CAFCASS, Secure Estate, NSPCC, Voluntary Youth Organisations, Faith Groups, Armed Forces,
Immigration/Asylum Support Services, and Other. There are five abuse categories: Physical, Emotional, Sexual,
Neglect and Other.
21
   The 16 outcome categories are: Not Upheld ­ No further action after initial consideration, Being unfounded,
Being unsubstantiated, Being malicious, Acquittal; Police Involvement ­ Criminal investigation, Conviction;
Disciplinary Procedures ­ Disciplinary Action, Suspension, Dismissal, Resignation, Cessation of use, Inclusion
on barred/restricted employment list; Referral - Section 47 investigation, Referral to DCSF, Referral to
Regulatory Body.



                                                          10
     To obtain a measure of actual threat, I calculate the number of allegations per teacher per
year in the responding Local Authorities using total teacher employment taken from the School
Workforce in England (2011). In 2007, this figure was 1.49 allegations per 100 teachers per
year and had marginally increased to 1.5 by 2010. Combining this with the proportion of
allegations that are not upheld, I derive an approximate objective measure of risk of a teacher
having a non-upheld allegation made against them. Assuming that these allegations are evenly
concentrated over teachers and over time and that 46.1 percent of allegations are not upheld,
an average teacher over a career of 35 years can expect a 24.2 percent chance to have a non-
upheld allegation made against them. This one-in-four chance of a non-upheld allegation
provides credit towards the notion that teachers are reacting to a credible threat and not acting
irrationally. This is especially true given that to be covered a teacher needs to be a union
member at the time of the alleged allegation and when the allegation is made. As union dues
and the decision to remain in a union are made on an annual basis, the annual probability of a
non-upheld allegation being made is 0.69 percent.

3. Demand for Union Membership Model

A: Model and Assumptions

     Teacher unions provide a unique service in the form of legal advice and protection against
allegations made by students. I model union membership as form of legal insurance that
teachers can chose to pay for with annual dues. The benefit is that the expected outcome in the
event of an allegation is better if the teacher is a member of a trade union. The framework is
parallel that of Blanchflower et. al (1990) who model union membership as a form of
unemployment insurance.
     To formalise this decision process, the following assumptions are made. There are multiple
types of teachers that vary in their risk aversion, their actual risk of allegations being made
against them and other characteristics that are correlated with the net benefits of union
membership. All of these teacher types are summarised by a term . 22
     A teacher's utility is a function of consumption income  and type , (, ), which has
decreasing marginal benefits from income. Teachers are employed in schools which are `open
shops,' so union and non-union members are both employed and earn the same wages  > 0.


22
  Note that this allows for some types of teachers to potentially commit offences. If all teachers were innocent all
the time, there would be no market for insurance as all teachers would be presumed not guilty.
                                                          11
There is only one trade union, and, if a teacher decides to join the union, she pays annual cost
c>0. Therefore, teacher wages can either be spent on union fees or left as consumption income,
 =  - .
     If an allegation is made against a teacher, the teacher incurs cost  >  regardless of the
subsequent outcome, reflecting the social costs and potential damage to career prospects.
Similarly, there is an additional cost  if a teacher is found guilty of an allegation such that  
, reflecting the high cost of being put on List 99 or for more serious offences being imprisoned.
We can now rank utilities for any given state of the world for all types :
                (, ) >   ( -  , ) >   ( -  , ) >   ( -  -  , ) >
                                 ( -  -  , ) >   ( -  -  -  , )                                                  (1)

where   and             are the utilities of non-members and members respectively with no
allegation against them. The second superscript relates to the outcome of the allegation:   is
the utility after winning a case;   , losing a case. These utility levels depend on union status.
For union members,   = ( -  - , ) and   = ( -  -  - , ). Non-union
members utilities   and   follow a similar structure but do not incur membership cost  .
Therefore, the state with the highest utility is a non-member with no allegations against them
  and the worst state is a union member who lost their case   .
     The teacher type  can contain a taste for investing in a public good, such as union
membership, independent of the allegation threat. For simplicity, I assume tastes for union
membership cannot be large enough to change the direction of these preference inequalities.
     The perceived subjective probability of an allegation being made against a teacher with
characteristics  from region  in year  is  (-1 ). This an increasing function of previous
news stories s in the first derivative and negative in the second, reflecting the diminishing
marginal impact of the news stories in a region. 23 By having  be a function only of news
stories and not current union membership, I assume that there is no strategic behaviour by the
accuser (e.g., being less likely to accuse a union teacher), as students will not likely know the
union status of any given teacher.


23
  The perceived threat can also be a function of other factors in addition to news stories, such as the actual number
of allegations. Section 5.4 investigates the use of this and other less salient measure of threat. Imposing a linear
relationship between news stories and the decision to join a union provides qualitatively similar results.



                                                           12
    If an allegation is made, the probability of a teacher being exonerated is () which is
increasing in the amount of resources devoted to their defence x. Therefore, the expected utility
of a teacher once an allegation is made, , is a convex combination of winning and losing
utilities given their union membership status.
                                  = (  )  + (1 - (  ))                                          (2)
                                  = (  )  + (1 - (  )) 

    The individual teacher has only one decision to make: to join the union or not. A marginal
individual of type   is indifferent between joining a union or not, and so have no marginal
benefits of joining: when  = 0.
                       = () -  () = 0
        =  ()  + 1 -  ()( -  ,   ) -  ()  + 1 -  ()(,   ) = 0 (3)

For a marginal member to exist, it must hold that that the expected utility, once an allegation
is made, is greater for a union member than for a non-union member (  >   ), as
( - ,   ) < (,   ), and  () is independent of membership status. This provides the
first implication of the model. Since the only difference between   and   comes from (),
if there are any union members, then we require that unions provide more resources for defence
(  ) > (  ). This result reflects the restrictions that exist for teachers in employing private
representation, making it difficult to transform income into defensive resources efficiently.
    Taking the first derivative of (3) with respect to the number of news stories, it can also be
shown that the expected gain from membership for the marginal member is an increasing
function of news reports.
                    
                    
                       =   ()(  -   ) + ()[( ,   ) - ( -  ,   )]                                (4)


Given the assumptions that   () > 0,   -   > 0 and ( -  ,   ) < (,   ), it follows
       
that   
          >0. For an indifferent teacher with taste for risk   , the marginal benefit of unions is

increasing the number of news stories.

B: Comparative Statics

    I now present comparative statics to illustrate that a teacher of type   would choose to be
a union member when the perceived risk of an allegation is high, but not when the perceived
risk is low.
                                                   13
   Panel A of Figure 2 shows her utility function, (,   ), and the utility levels specified in
(1). A teacher will make her decision by evaluating her utility if no allegations are made, her
expected utility if an allegation is made, and the probability of that allegation being made in
the first place. The expected utility of a union member once an allegation has been made is
represented by the chord linking the points   and   (similarly for the points   and
  for non-members). The exact point on the chord is determined by the probability of
success, (). As (  ) > (  ), the union member will be higher up their chord than the
non-union member, so we can plot   >   .
   A union (non-union) teacher will compare their outcomes should no allegation be made
( -  ,   ) ((,   )) to her expected utility in the event of an allegation   (  ).
Therefore, the expected utility before an allegation is made is a combination of these two
outcomes. These combinations for union and non-union members can be seen in Panels B and
C of Figure 2. The lower chord that links the intersection of the utility curve with   to the
intersection with  represents the expected utility space of a teacher who is not a union
member. Similarly, before an allegation is made, a union teacher is at a point on the upper
chord between ( -  ,   ) and   .
   The location of a teacher along this new chord is dependent on her expectations of an
allegation being made against her. Panel B of Figure 2 shows a high threat scenario,  ()=0.5,
and the individual will be at the midpoint of each chord. With this high perceived threat level,
the expected utility from membership is greater than that of non-membership,   >   . In
contrast, Panel C shows that the same teacher with the same taste for risk and type   and same
amount of union dues c would choose not to be in a union if the risk level were low,  ()=0.1.
This basic example demonstrates that the demand for union membership is directly related to
the perceived threat of allegations,  ( ).


C. Econometric Specification

   This basic model of rational decision making by the teacher forms the basis of the
estimation strategy. A teacher i from region j in time period t will choose to join the union if
the expected benefits of joining the union are positive:    
                                                          -  > 0. Each of these

expected utilities will be a function of many factors in addition to perceived threat of an
allegation being made and will be related to the teachers type . This can be summarised by
the two following equations.

                                                14
                                       
                    =  +  -1  +   +  +  + 
                                          
                                                                                           (5)

                                       
                    =  +  -1  +   +  +  + 
                                          
                                                                                           (6)


where  (-1 ) is the perceived threat in region j in time period t caused by news stories s in
the previous period. The expected benefits for a union member per unit of perceived threat is
represented by  . The remaining parameters account for the other characteristics of a teacher
type . The general benefits for being a union (non-union) member for any individual in any
time period is   (  ). The benefits of union (non-union) membership can also vary according
to a vector of observable individual characteristics  , such as age, qualifications, sector of
employment and gender. The additional gains for being a union member in region j, are
                                                                               
represented by  , which could reflect taste for unions in a particular region.  allows for
varying gains from union membership each year, which impacts all teachers in the same way,
such as any general decline in union power. Individuals also have an idiosyncratic taste for
union (non-union) membership that varies overtime,  . The probability that any individual i
in region j at time period t will be a trade union member is    
                                                              >  , using the

standard result (McFadden, 1976) we can combine equations 5 and 6 into the following
expression:
                                       exp(+-1 + +  +  )
                 
               >   =                                                                       (7)
                                     1+(+ -1+ +  +  )



where each parameter is now the marginal benefit for individual i to join the union (e.g.,  =
 -  ). As I do not have a measure of perceived risk, only the incidence of media stories, I
am not able to separately identify the perceived threat from each story  and the marginal gain
 from a unit of perceived threat. Instead, I will estimate the combination of the two, the
expected marginal gain for union members per story.
  Given that, by assumption, -1  is decreasing and concave, it will be parameterised into
the effect per story 1, and its square 2. The demand for union membership can then be
estimated using a logistic regression, where the parameters of interest are 1 + 22 -1
representing the marginal effect of an additional story at the mean news coverage on union
membership, of the form:
                                  2
                    =  + 1 -1 + 2 -1 +  +  +  +                                            (8)



                                               15
where U is an indicator variable if individual i in period t is a union member or not, and -1
is the number of stories in region j in time period t-1. I include a series of regional and year
fixed effects,  and  respectively. This specification assumes that media coverage of region
j has no impact on the perceived benefits of union membership in a different region. To allow
for correlation in the residual demand for union membership, the standard errors throughout
the paper are clustered at this regional level. 24 To allow for spillovers and to obtain estimates
of the total impact of news stories on union membership, I will estimate an alternate
specification which additionally includes a measure for total news stories nationally each year,
 , and replace the year effects term with a national time trend :
               2
 =  + 1 -1 + 2 -1 + 3  -1 + 4  -1
                               2
                                  +  +  +  +                                                                   (9)


    Following similar reasoning that teachers are more likely to be affected by news stories
originating in their region, one may expect certain stories to have a larger impact on certain
teachers who share characteristics with the teacher involved in the media coverage. For
example, a news story involving false allegations against a male teacher may be more relevant
to other male teachers compared to female teachers. I investigate this by allowing the threat to
vary by the characteristics of the teacher in the story  and estimate the impact when the
characteristics of the teacher are the same or different to the characteristics of the story,  =
 and    . Any differences in the effect may be due either to the threat of a given
story generates being greater, -1  >   -1  when  = -1 and   -1 ,
or to the expected marginal gain driven by the story being larger, =-1 >  -1 .
Again, I cannot separately identify these effects but will instead estimate the marginal effect of
a similar or less similar story as follows:



     24
        Due to the relatively small number of regions (20), there is reason for concern due as the standard cluster
robust variance estimator (CRVE) is based on the number of clusters going to infinity. A typical solution would
be to use wild cluster bootstrap (Cameron et al., 2008). However, Kline and Santos (2012) state that this is not
appropriate when implementing maximum likelihood estimation, and propose a score-bootstrap to be used in its
stead. A follow-up paper by Roodman et. al. (2018) claims that this score-bootstrap cannot fully capture the
nonlinearity of the estimator in nonlinear models and suggest that "score-bootstrap not be relied upon without
evidence that it works well in the case of interest." Therefore, I have replicated the main results with score-
bootstrap p-values and found that it leads to very similar results, indicating that the inference using CRVE is
robust (Appendix Table 3).




                                                          16
                               2
                   =  +   -1 +    -1 +  +  +  +                                                                (10)


Data and Descriptive Statistics

A. Union Membership

     Information on teachers and their union status is obtained from the Quarterly Labour Force
Surveys (QLFS) over the period 1992 through 2010. The QLFS is conducted by the Office of
National Statistics and follows approximately 60,000 households every quarter. Individuals are
asked for employment and personal characteristics. This allows me to condition on factors that
have been shown to be important determinants of union status (Machin, 2006): age, tenure,
gender, occupation, public sector employee, qualifications and region. Information relating to
union membership is collected only in the autumn quarter, so only observations from this
quarter can be used. 25 The estimates are generated over the period 1993 to 2010, as some
individual characteristics are not available in 1992.
     Teachers are identified through three-digit occupation codes, which allows teachers who
work in primary schools, secondary schools and Special Schools to be separately identified.
This results in a final sample used for estimation of 30,392 teachers, with on average 1,782
teachers per year, 827 of whom teach at primary schools, 817 teach at secondary schools and
the remaining 138 teach at specialist schools. Summary statistics of teachers in comparison to
the workforce in general can be found in Table 3. As one may expect, teachers differ
considerably, 88.6 percent are employed in the public sector compared with 24.6 percent in the
wider economy. Teachers are also more likely to be female (72.5 percent versus 47.5 percent)
and be a graduate (74.3 percent versus 18 percent). Regarding the main characteristic of
interest, the unionisation rate of teachers is 84 percent compared with 27.6 percent for non-
teachers and 59.4 percent in the public sector as a whole. This paper uses the twenty detailed
Government Office Regions as the region of analysis, which is derived from Local Authority


25
   The QLFS is a continuously rotating panel of households interviewing over five quarters, and information
relating to union membership is obtained every autumn. Therefore, a quarter of individuals are asked twice about
their union status. Unfortunately, the number of repeated teacher observations is too small to run auxiliary analysis
on this sample. The standard errors are clustered at the regional level and no teacher in the sample is observed
changing regions between surveys.




                                                           17
residence. These larger regions allow for news stories to have wider impacts outside of their
immediate vicinity. 26

B. Media Coverage

    Many different factors may influence the perceived threat of an allegation being made
against a teacher. This paper uses the impact of media coverage originating in the region in
which teacher i resides as a measure for overall threat. In order for this to be exogenous, I
require two assumptions.
First, the impact of moral hazard of teachers committing more incidents when being a union
member cannot be sufficient to generate an increase in the number of news stories. Workplace
health insurance schemes have been found to illicit moral hazard by workers (Kruger, 1990;
Meyer et. al., 1995). One may hope that the actions of teachers would not be reactive, but, for
the number of news stories to remain exogenous, we would only require the weaker assumption
of the incidents of news stories not changing. Therefore, the main measure is only going to
count coverage where the teacher is found to be innocent and so could not be driven by moral
hazard. Second, areas with high union density cannot be more likely to generate news stories.
Without these assumptions, the incidence of media reports is endogenous, as higher union
membership would increase the number of stories. These assumptions are tested by means of
an event study in the robustness section, where failure would result in increases in the
likelihood of membership before the news story event.
    It would be very difficult to have a measure of all news coverage. Therefore, like other
papers (Carroll, 2003; Lamla and Lein, 2008; van der Wiel, 2009), I will be using the number
of articles in national newspapers as a proxy for all media coverage. The data on news stories
is obtained from LexisNexis, an online database of media published in the UK. In order to have
a consistent measure of press coverage, only newspapers that were present in LexisNexis
throughout the entire period were used for the analysis. 27 I searched for all articles which
contained the word `teacher' in the headline and included any of the following terms (or


26
   Use of the restricted access QLFS with Local Authority information is not possible before 2002. These files
have been converted to the new calendar framework and as union questions were only asked in the Autumn they
have been removed.
27
   Newspapers that were omitted due to only appearing for part of the sample period were: The Morning Star, The
Express, The Daily Telegraph, Sunday Express, Sunday Telegraph, The News of the World, and The People.
Their exclusion does not change the interpretation of the results. Results are available upon request. This also
prevents the use of local newspapers, as they only started appearing in the LexisNexis data from 2002, and not
consistently across regions.
                                                        18
derivatives) in the headline or preliminary paragraphs of the main text (as defined by Lexis
Nexis); teacher, damages, sued, litigation, allegation, jail, court, dismissed or fired, over the
period September 1991 to August 2010. Using the date of the QLFS interview and media
publication date, I allocate media coverage from the twelve months prior to the interview to
the teacher. The length of this recall period is varied in the robustness section.
    Each of these news stories were categorised by rubric (a full description of the categories
can be found in Appendix Table 2). This coding frame classified news stories into four levels
according to how relevant they would be to influence a teacher's perceived benefit of joining
a union: Extremely Relevant (e.g., teacher found innocent and case thrown out of court); Highly
Relevant (e.g., a teacher currently on trial); Little Relevance (e.g., guilty of a lesser offence);
Not Relevant (e.g., teacher admits guilt of extreme sexual abuse). This effectively means that
the more "relevant" articles are measures of less bad behaviour (or no bad behaviour at all),
but are "relevant" to someone who worries that they might be falsely accused. Moreover,
counts of relevant stories would not be impacted by moral hazard by teachers. In contrast,
stories involving teachers admitting bad behaviour are coded as low relevance, including any
moral hazard on behalf of teachers. Note that it is possible for a single case to appear in different
levels as the newspaper stories develop over time. In total, 1,709 stories were coded, of which
623 were classified as extremely relevant and 548 as highly relevant. To limit the subjective
nature of classifying the news stories, I follow Woolley (2000) in pre-defining the rubric before
the search was conducted.
    The newspaper stories are further categorised by story type according to whether they
involve: Allegations, Being Sued, Suing, Being Attacked, Criminal Activity, Being Sacked,
Employment Tribunal and Teacher Union Activity. For the main analysis, I define an accusation
story to be one of the following story types `Allegations', `Being Sued', and `Criminal Activity',
with parallel analysis using all story types. The total number of stories of this type in the
balanced panel of newspapers that are extremely or highly relevant is 439. Table 4 summarises
the total number of stories by level and type. Figure 3 shows the large increase in the number
of news stories since the late 1990's, alongside the growth in union density.
    In addition to the relevance and nature of the news stories, I also extracted information on
the type teacher involved in the story and its region of origin (Table 5). The name of the teacher,
or pronoun used in each story was used to determine the gender of the teacher. References to
the school name or the age of the pupils involved determined if the teacher was teaching in a
Primary or Secondary school. In this way I was able to assign gender in 96.6% of stories and
                                                   19
school level in 82.4% of stories. For stories where the gender or school level of the teacher
were not mentioned, the story was not counted for either group. Stories where no region is
mentioned are counted only towards the total number of stories nationally; 82% of these stories
are trade unions highlighting the growing issue of false allegations being made against teachers.
Stories involving secondary school teachers are the most common, representing 66.3% of
highly relevant stories. The balance between the genders is more equal with 50.7% of highly
relevant stories involving male teachers and 46.5% involving female teachers.

4. Results

A. Aggregate Trends

   Between 1993 and 2005, the union density amongst teachers increased by 10.5 percentage
points, whilst amongst non-teachers it fell by 6 percentage points (Figure 1). This increase in
unionisation rate has occurred across all teacher age groups, which implies that this growth rate
is not solely due to improvement in recruitment rates amongst newly qualified teachers but a
general increase in demand for union membership across all teaching age groups (Appendix
Figure 1). Union density started to decline after the government restriction on media reporting
in 2005 (Figure 3). This decline was not reversed with the increase in unemployment rate
associated with the Great Recession from 2008 onwards, which would be expected if
individuals joined unions as a form of unemployment insurance Blanchflower et. al. (1990). In
summary these aggregate trends are indicative that there has been a general increase in demand
for union membership among teachers since 1993, which peaked in 2005 and trends with the
number of news stories nationally.

B. Main Results

   We now turn to analyse the aggregate trends of Figure 3 through the regression framework
developed in Section 3. The basic estimating equation is given by specification (8). I use the
number of national news stories that originated in a region from the previous twelve months as
a shock to the perceived threat of an accusation being made. These within-region logistic
estimates are presented in Table 6. To aid interpretation, the estimates have been transformed
from the logistic parameters to the marginal effect multiplied by 100, and so can be thought of
as a percentage point change in probability (e.g., a coefficient of 0.5 would reflect a half a
percentage point increase in the probability of union membership).

                                                 20
     Column 1 of Panel A shows a positive significant raw correlation of 0.548 between the
number of extremely relevant stories involving an accusation originating in a region on the
likelihood of union membership. Column 2 conditions on individual characteristics, with little
change in the coefficient which implying that there is little correlation between the incidence
of news stories and these characteristics (0.588). Column 3 additionally allows for varying
union demand in each region and is therefore using the within region variation in news stories
over time. The final column additionally includes year effects which allows for the average
unionisation rate to increase over time, which is the smallest of the estimates at 0.502 but
remains significant at the 5 percent level.
     The quadratic term is negative and significant, implying that each additional story beyond
the first has a smaller impact. Evaluating the marginal effect at the mean, I find that each
additional highly relevant story increases the probability of being a union member by 0.425
percentage points. Panel B shows the same specifications on the same sample, but uses both
extremely and highly relevant stories, instead of just the most relevant. The coefficients do not
change significantly, but, due to the additional variation, the standard errors are smaller.
Therefore, all remaining analyses employ this measure of relevant stories. 28 29
     The final panel of Table 6 reports the impact of stories relating to teachers defined as having
little to no relevance for an innocent teacher on union membership. This serves two purposes.
First, one may be concerned that these effects could be a spurious correlation between the
number of stories about teachers generally in a region and union status. Second, insurance from
allegations means there is the possibility of moral hazard among union teachers with
malevolent preferences. However, the rubric codes stories of teachers found guilty of an
allegation to be of Little to No Relevance. Therefore, testing for a relationship between union
membership and the number of low relevance stories is approaching a test for moral hazard.


28
   I have run a parallel set of estimations which instead use a measure of news impact, derived from the number
of words per story normalised by mean story length in that newspaper in that year. These results mirror these
findings and are available upon request.
29
   As described in Section 3, I allow for a decreasing marginal impact of stories through the inclusion of a squared
term. This is important as there are a handful stories that created a large amount of national press coverage over
the course of a year, producing media counts more than two standard deviations above the mean. Appendix Table
4 presents estimates from five different functional forms for media coverage; linear; linear capped at the 95%
percentile; inverse hyperbolic sign (which approximates to logarithmic but can include zero), capped inverse
hyperbolic sign, and quadratic. With the exception of the uncapped-linear specification all the specifications are
positive significant and not statistically significantly different from each other at the 95 percent level. This
highlights the importance of not enforcing constant impact of media coverage.



                                                          21
Reassuringly, Panel C of Table 6 shows no relationship between stories of Little to No
Relevance and union membership. 30
    These estimates do not capture the total impact of news stories annually on national
membership, as they are using the variation at the regional level whilst accounting for national
year effects. This is estimating only the relative effect of a news story originating in that region
compared to other regions. To obtain a national impact, I replace the year effects terms with a
national linear time trend. The total number of stories nationally per year parameter reflects the
additional growth due to media coverage in excess of the long run unionisation trend. The
corresponding estimates are found in Table 7. The number of the most relevant stories
nationally has an additional impact above and beyond the number of regional stories, although
the impact is smaller (0.108, versus 0.485). Using the average number of stories locally and
nationally I calculate the mean total effect of newspaper stories on union demand. Compared
to years with no relevant news stories, the mean number of stories in the past year increases
the probability of union membership by 0.98 percentage points above the average growth
rate. 31

C. Media Impact by Relevance of Coverage

    The model describes a teacher's decision process in choosing to become a union member,
highlighting the role of the threat of allegation driven by news stories on the marginal benefit
of joining the union. If a teacher shares more characteristics with the teacher in the story one
may expect that the story is more relevant in her updating process.
    Table 8 presents results according to the school type the teacher works for (primary school
or secondary school) in the columns and by the school type reported in the media in the rows.
To simplify the presented results, I report the marginal impact of stories at mean, conditioning


    30
        Another concern may stem from the subjective nature of the news story classifications. All news stories
matched the search terms were categorised, but not all are directly relevant to the hypothesis of the paper. In
keeping with this hypothesis of teachers demanding union membership for insurance reasons, I am only counting
stories which involve accusations (`Allegations', `Being Sued', and `Criminal Activity'). Appendix Table 5
repeats the analysis using all news story types and shows that the effect is muted but remains significant. The table
also presents estimates successively removing types of news, and the impact of each type of news story. This
shows that the effects are driven by stories about allegations. Stories about teachers being attacked are statistically
significant, but their removal from the total story count has limited impact due to their rarity. For the remainder
of the analysis, I use the broader definition of stories about accusations.
     31
        Appendix Table 6 presents the results sequentially dropping one region at a time from the sample. The
estimates move slightly in each case, but they tell a consistent story with an effect size around 0.37 percentage
point increase in the likelihood of being a union member per story.


                                                            22
on individual characteristics and year and regional effects (original estimates appear in Online
Appendix Table 1). Column 1 uses the subsample of secondary school teachers; Column 2,
primary school teachers. Panel A shows that the estimates of all relevant news stories, whether
school type was mentioned or not. It shows that secondary school teachers react to media
coverage, but there is no significant reaction from primary school teachers. This finding
coincides with there being more relevant stories involving secondary school teachers (from
Table 3: 285 secondary stories versus 90 primary stories).
     Panels B and C instead use only the stories involving secondary and primary school
teachers respectively. I find that demand for union membership amongst secondary school
teachers significantly reacts to each story involving other secondary school teachers (0.892
percentage points) but not to stories involving primary school teachers (Column 1). For primary
school teachers, for whom there are far fewer stories, neither effect is statistically significant;
however, the coefficient relating to primary school stories is higher than the one for secondary
schools. These results are replicated in Columns 3 and 4, which instead use all relevant news
stories, not just those relating to accusations. As before, this produces similar results to the
highly relevant stories, in which secondary school teachers react more in general and react
more to secondary school stories than primary school stories. With this broader news story
definition, I find a marginally significant effect of primary news stories on primary school
teachers.
     Table 9 has the same structure as Table 8 but focuses on the similarity of the teachers'
gender to that of the story. We see that only female teachers react significantly to relevant news
stories in general. This could be indicative of female teachers being more risk averse in their
type , so, for any given increase in perceived threat, the increase in demand for insurance
would be larger. Once we examine the impact by story type, male teachers do significantly
react to news stories involving other male teachers (0.587) but not to those relating to female
teachers (-0.070). Female teachers also react more to stories involving male teachers rather
than female teachers (0.886, 0.398). 32 These findings are repeated using all story types
(Columns 3 and 4), rather than those just relating to accusations against the teacher and produce
similar results.


32
  A possible explanation for these results is that female teachers, despite ostensibly having more in common with
other female teachers mentioned in the press, may believe the incidence of false allegations to be higher in cases
involving men and therefore react more to these types of stories.


                                                         23
    With the exception of female teachers, the heterogeneity by school type and gender shows
that individuals who share more characteristics with the story react more strongly. Although
these differences are not always statistically significant, they suggest that something specific
about the nature of the stories is driving demand and not a spurious correlation. There are two
primary channels for this heterogeneity. First, this might be rational as the news story would
be indicative of higher future allegation risk for teachers with the specific characteristics.
Second, teachers might react more strongly as such news stories are more salient even though
the news story might not be indicative of differential increases in allegation risks between
teacher characteristics.
    To examine the first channel, I test if the first occurrence of a particular story and type
(region, school type, or gender) is predictive of similar first occurrences of stories in the next
year. Any significant positive correlation implies that teachers may be reacting rationally to an
increased threat, assuming news stories are a reliable and stable measure of accusations. If
journalists are more likely to report on a certain story type because there was a similar story
the year before, then any effect could be interpreted as an increase in the threat of an allegation
being reported in the news.
    Table 10 presents estimates from five OLS regressions between the number of new news
stories in a region and the number of new news stories in the same region in the subsequent
year. This is estimated at the regional level conditional on year and regional effects. We see
that for every new story there are 0.34 new stories in the following year. Panels B and C again
split the stories by school level and teacher gender respectively, testing if there is a link between
the types of stories reported in subsequent years. Column 1 of Panel B presents how the number
of new stories involving primary school teachers significantly increases by 0.12 for each new
story involving a primary teacher in the previous year, but insignificantly by 0.04 for new
stories involving secondary school teachers. Again, the amount of new news stories involving
secondary school teachers significantly relates to the number of news stories about secondary
schools, but not primary schools.
    For gender, we find that the number of new stories about males in the previous year is
significantly positively related to the number of stories relating to male and female teachers.
However, the stories involving female teachers in the previous year is not significantly related
to the number of news stories regarding males or females in the next year, although both have
a positive coefficient. This could rationalise the lack of reactions of female teachers to stories
about teachers in the year before.
                                                   24
   To recap, the incidence of new story types follows that of the impact of media stories on
the likelihood of union membership. The incidence of primary school stories is correlated with
the future number of primary school stories and union membership, and similarly for secondary
schools. The incidence of new male stories is correlated with the future number of stories of
both genders and union membership. In contrast, new stories involving female teachers is
related to neither the number of stories in the next year nor the likelihood of union membership
of either gender. Regardless of the nature of threat to which they are responding, actual
allegations or the reporting of allegations, this result implies that teachers are responding
rationally to the occurrences of news stories in their region. This does not exclude the
possibility that teachers also react more strongly to stories that they share characteristics with
because they are also more salient.

D. Media Impact on Other Occupations

    As a robustness check that these reports are reflecting a change to the perceived threat to
teachers and not to general union demand, I now estimate the impact of news stories on
individuals from other related and unrelated occupations. Table 11 shows the impact of these
stories on occupations that are increasingly dissimilar to teachers: educational assistants, higher
education professionals, non-teacher public sector graduates, and non-teacher graduates. The
coefficients of interest are not significant for any of the other occupational groups. However,
there is evidence of an effect on education assistants which has a larger marginal effect at the
mean compared to the teachers but is insignificantly determined (0.622 versus 0.377 percentage
points). Moreover, the insignificant effects decrease in size as the occupations become less
similar to teachers, with the effect of teacher news stories being a tenth of the size on non-
teacher graduates in general.

E. Longer Run Media Impact

    All the estimates presented so far have been estimating the impact of media coverage that
occurred in the twelve months prior to the interview, thereby restricting the impact of news that
occurred before this time to have no influence on an individual's decision. Table 12 presents
the impact of regional highly relevant media in six-month periods up to 36 months before the
survey interview. I find that individuals react in a similar way to stories from the last six to
twelve months, and effects continue to exist from stories that happened between a year and
eighteen months ago, but stories prior to that have no significant impact. This implies that, for
                                                  25
those marginal members who were otherwise indifferent to joining, being a union member is
not an absorbing state. Alternatively, it could be interpreted that if a potential union member
hasn't joined within the first eighteen months of a story being published then that story is not
going to impact her decision. 33
In addition to extending the period over which previous news stories can impact current
unionisation rates, I use this event study approach to test an important assumption: that media
stories are not endogenous. One can imagine if a union has more members in a region at a point
in time, that union would be able to generate more news stories or publicity. This would
generate a reverse causality (i.e., increased union membership increases the number of news
stories). To test for this possibility, I estimate the impact of news stories that have yet to be
reported on current membership status. Positive significant estimates of future stories would
imply that increased union density generates more stories. This could be generated also through
increased likelihood of moral hazard by the teachers. Figure 4 presents an event study showing
the impact of news stories occurring up to 36 months the after the interview and 30 months
before. We again see past news stories affecting the current likelihood of union membership,
but, importantly, stories that have yet to occur have no significant impact.
     Having established that there are effects of news stories up to eighteen months beforehand,
I now estimate the total impact of media coverage on union membership over time. Allowing
for separate effects for the amount of news stories in each six-month period up to 36 months
prior to the QLFS interview, both nationally and regionally, I predict the probability of union
membership for the years between 1993 and 2010. These estimates are plotted in Figure 5. The
predicted probabilities from the model fit closely to the plotted series of actual union density,
rarely diverging from the 95% confidence interval band. This model provides a better fit to the
data compared to a specification that omits perceived threat parameters. This series is also
plotted in Figure 5 and fails to reflect the growth in density from 1998 and the fall that occurred
post 2005, the year in which new regulations were introduced that made it harder to report on
stories before they arrived to court.
      To estimate the aggregate impact that increased perceived threat has had on union
membership, I use these estimates to re-predict union membership for each year fixing the total
news coverage to zero. This provides a counterfactual time series of what would have occurred


33
   Appendix Table 7 shows the impact of extending the period of analysis from six months out to 36 months out
in six-month steps.

                                                       26
had there been no increase in the threat of allegations. The figure shows that, without media
coverage, union membership would have been relatively stable at around 81 percent from 1996
onwards, instead of steadily rising to 87.5 percent. In the period from 1999 through 2009, union
density is significantly greater than estimates from where there was no media coverage.
Between 2002 and 2008, this estimated difference in union membership is 5 percentage
points. 34

5. Conclusions

     This paper examines the role that the threat of accusations has had in the demand for trade
union membership amongst teachers in the UK. I find that teachers from regions where news
stories of accusations against other teachers originate are more likely to join a union in the
following eighteen months. For every ten stories in a region, a teacher is 4 percent more likely
to join. These effects are larger if teachers share characteristics with the teacher mentioned in
the story (e.g., secondary school teachers react more to stories involving other secondary school
teachers; similarly for male teachers). That the incidence of new news stories making the
national news follows these same patterns, coupled with the finding that the average teacher
over a career of 35 years has a 24 percent chance to have a non-upheld allegation made against
them, is evidence that these actions are rational.
     While national newspaper coverage is not a complete measure of media exposure, we
should think of it as a proxy for media coverage more generally. It accurately predicts the
changes in union membership since 1993. Setting media stories to zero throughout the period,
I forecast that union membership would remain steady at approximately 81 percent rather than
increasing to 87 percent as seen in the data and, therefore, accounts for 45 percent of the growth
in union density between 1992 and 2010.
This paper provides evidence as to why individuals choose to join a trade union even if they
have the opportunity to free-ride on the traditional benefits of union membership, such as
higher pay and better working conditions. Unions offering a private excludable service can
maintain demand for membership, as long as demand for that service remains intact. The policy


     34
        The paper uses media coverage as the determinant of the threat of an accusation alternatively. It may be
the case that these news stories reflect a growing number of actual allegations. Using the data on actual allegations,
over a shorter time period with fewer regions, I find a positive correlation between news stories and allegations.
However, in a horserace between these two on a greatly reduced sample (3,399 observations), only news stories
are significant (Appendix Table 8).

                                                           27
implication is that the introduction of `right to work' legislation will not necessarily reduce
demand for union membership to zero. Additionally, there may be an increasing unmet demand
for union membership in previously under-unionised service sectors where the threat of
litigation is increasing. Finally, if regulations are introduced that protect individuals from
allegations, then the demand for union services, and hence membership, will decline.




                                                28
  References

Akerlof G.A (1970). "The Market for `Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and The Market
  Mechanism", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84:488­500.
Akerlof G.A (1980). "A Theory of Social Custom, of Which Unemployment May Be One
  Consequence", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94:749­775
Albanese, R., and Van Fleet, D.D. (1985) "Rational Behavior in Groups: The Free-Rider
  Tendency." Academy of Management Review 10 (April 1985): 244-55.
Brennan, W. J. & Supreme Court Of The United States. (1974) U.S. Reports: NLRB v.
  Weingarten, 420 U.S. 251. [Periodical] Retrieved from the Library of Congress,
  https://www.loc.gov/item/usrep420251/
Blanchflower, D. and Bryson. A. (2008). "Union Decline in Britain", IZA, Discussion Paper 3436,
   April 2008
Blanchflower, D. Crouchley. R. Estrin, S. and Oswald, A., (1990). "Unemployment And The
   Demand For Unions", Centre for Labour Economics, Working Papers 372, London School of
   Economics.
Booth, A.L., (1985). "The free-rider problem and a social custom model of trade union
  membership", Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 253-261.
Bryson. A. and Forth J. (2010). "Trade Union Membership and Influence 1999-2009", Centre for
  Economic Performance, Discussion Paper 1003.
Bryson, A. Ebbinghaus, B. Visser J. Van Rie, T. Marx I. and Horemans, J. (2011) "Ghent
  revisited: Unemployment insurance and union membership in Belgium and the Nordic
  countries" European Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol 17, Issue 2, pp. 125 ­ 139,
  10.1177/0959680111400895
Cameron, A.C. Gelbach, J.B. & Miller, D.L. (2008) "Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
  Inference with Clustered Errors," The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol.
  90(3), pages 414-427, August.
Carroll, C. D. (2003), "Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional
  Forecasters", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), pp.269-298.
Chartered Society of Physiotherapists. (2013). Last              accessed   27    May    2015,
  http://www.csp.org.uk/membership/membership-benefits
Clasen, J., & Viebrock, E. (2008). "Voluntary Unemployment Insurance and Trade Union
   Membership: Investigating the Connections in Denmark and Sweden", Journal of Social
   Policy, 37(3), 433-451. doi:10.1017/S0047279408001980
CTA (2019) "California Teachers Association, Legal Services" Available online at
  https://www.cta.org/en/Member-Services/Legal-Services.aspx
DCSF (2008) "2020 Children and Young People's Workforce Strategy: The evidence base"
  Department for Children, Schools and Families, December 2008, Available online at:
  http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130321051941/https://www.education.gov.uk/p
  ublications/eOrderingDownload/CYP_Workforce-Strategy_Evidence.pdf [Last Accesed
  16/10/2017]


                                                 29
Della Vigna S. and La Ferrara E. (2015) "Economic and Social Impacts of the Media", NBER
  Working paper 21360
DellaVigna S. & Gentzkow, M. (2010) "Persuasion: Empirical Evidence," Annual Review of
  Economics, Annual Reviews, vol. 2(1):643-669, 09
Department for Business Enterprise & Regulatory Reform (2009) "Trade Union Membership
  2008", Office of National Statistics
Department for Education, 2012, School workforce in England: November 2011, Last accessed
  27 May 2014, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/school-workforce-in-england-
  november-2011
DiNardo, J. & Lee, D. (2004) "Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private Sector
  Employers: 1984­2001" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.119(4): 1383­1441
Freeman, R. B. and Medoff. J. L. (1984). "What Do Unions Do?" New York: Basic Books, 1984
Gallagher, J. (2014). "Learning about an Infrequent Event: Evidence from Flood Insurance Take-
  up in the US", American Economic Journal: Applied 6(3): 206-33 .
Gentzkow, M, Shapiro, J.M. and Sinkinson, M (2011) "The Effect of Newspaper Entry and Exit
  on Electoral Politics." American Economic Review, 101(7): 2980-3018.
Holmlund, B. and Per Lundborg P. (1999) "Wage bargaining, union membership, and the
  organization of unemployment insurance" Labour Economics 6 1999 397­415
HM Government. (2006) "Working Together to Safeguard Children", The Stationery Office.
  Hoxby, C. (1996) "How Teachers' Unions Affect Education Production," The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3): 671-718.
NLRB (2004) "International Business Machines Corp. 341 N.L.R.B. No. 148, slip op. at 7"
  Retrieved from the National Labor Relations Board https://www.nlrb.gov/case/11-CA-019324
Jabbar, H (2017) Personal Interview regarding "It's Who You Know: Teacher Preferences, Social
   Networks, and the Job Search Process", January 2017
Jermier, J.M., Cohen, C.F., Powers, K.J., and Jeannie Gaines (1986) "Paying Dues: Police
   Unionism in a Right-to-Work Environment." Industrial Relations 25 (Fall 1986): 265-75.
Keates C, (2009), General Secretary of NASUWT interview on "File on Four" BBC Radio 4,
  April 2009.
Kline, P., and A. Santos. 2012. A score based approach to wild bootstrap inference. Journal of
  Econometric Methods 1: 23­41.

Kruger, A. (1990) "Incentive Effects of Workers' Compensation Insurance" Journal of Public
  Economics 41 (February), 73-99.
Lamla, M. and Lein, S. (2008), "The Role of Media for Consumers' Inflation Expectation
  Formation", KOF Working Papers 201, KOF Swiss Economic Institute.
Lee, D. & Mas A. (2012) "Long Run Impacts of Unions On Firms: New Evidence From Financial
  Markets, 1961-1999" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(1): 333­378.
Lovenheim, M. and Willén A. (2016) "The Long-run Effect of Teacher Collective Bargaining on
  Educational Attainment and Labor Market Outcomes", CESifo Working Paper Series 5977,
  CESifo Group Munich
                                                  30
McGuigan. M. McNally. S. and Wyness G. (2016). "Student Awareness of Costs and Benefits of
  Educational Decisions: Effects of an Information Campaign", Journal of Human Capital, 10
  (4) 482-519
Meyer, B. Viscusi, W.K. & Durbin D. (1995) "Workers' Compensation and Injury Duration:
  Evidence from a Natural Experiment" American Economic Review, 85, 322-340
Murphy, R. (2011). "Impact of UK Resilience Programme training on Staff." Hertfordshire
  Council, Programme Report.
NASUWT. (2006) "Legal Assistance Scheme: Alleged Criminal Offence", NASUWT Terms and
  Conditions,          Last          accessed           27          May           2015
  http://www.nasuwt.org.uk/consum/groups/public/@legalandcasework/documents/nas_downl
  oad/nasuwt_000791.pdf
Naylor, R., Cripps, M., (1993) An economic theory of the open shop trade union. European
  Economic Review 37, 1599­1620.
Neumann. G. R., and Rissman E.R. (1984) "Where Have All the Union Members Gone?" Journal
  of Labor Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, Essays in Honor of Melvin W. Reder (Apr., 1984), pp. 175-
  192.
Olson, M., (1965). "The logic of collective action", Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Roodman, D., MacKinnon, J.G., Nielsen, M.Ø. & Webb, M.D. (2018) "Fast and Wild:
  Bootstrap Inference in Stata Using boottest," Working Papers 1406, Queen's University,
  Department of Economics.

van der Wiel, K. (2009) "Have You Heard the News? How Real-Life Expectations React to
  Publicity", IZA Discussion Papers, 4064, Institute for the Study of Labor
Viscusi, W. K. and Hakes, J. (2008), "Risk Beliefs and Smoking Behavior", Economic Inquiry
  46(1), pp 45-59.
Woolley J.T (2000) `Using Media-Based Data in Studies of Politics' American Journal of Political
 Science, 44(1), pp 156-173.




                                                  31
Figures

Figure 1: Union Density Time Series by Occupation




        Source: QLFS 1992-2010. Proportion of all adults reporting an occupation who are union members.
        Teachers defined by occupational codes 2314, 2315, 2316




                                                         32
Figure 2: Illustration of Union Membership Decision

Panel A: Utility curve of teacher (,  ) with wages , union dues .
                                                      Notes:   (  ) is the utility of a union
                                                      member who has had an allegation made
                                                      against them and won (lost) their case.
                                                      Similarly   for   non-members      (  ).
                                                        (  ) represents the expected utility once
                                                      an allegation has been made for a union (non-
                                                      union) member.  represents the cost of an
                                                      allegation and  the additional cost of being
                                                      found guilty.


                                                                       

                                                                        


Panel B: Expected utilities of teacher (,  ) with a high perceived risk ()=0.5
                                                        Notes:   (  ) represents the expected
                                                        utility of a union (non-union) member for a
                                                        given threat level ().


                                                        When the risk is high (s)=0.5, at the
                                                        midpoint of each cord, then   >   .

                                                                       

                                                                        




Panel C: Expected utilities of teacher (,  ) with a low perceived risk ()=0.1
                                                         Notes:   (  ) represents the expected
                                                         utility of a union (non-union) member for a
                                                         given threat level ().


                                                         When the risk is low (s)=0.1, teachers are at
                                                         a higher point on each cord and then   >
                                                           .
                                                                       

                                                                        




                                             33
Figure 3 Union Density and Relevant News Stories over time




       Source: QLFS 1992:2010, Lexis Nexus 1992-2010 Notes: Annual union density based on mean union
       membership of teachers based on QLFS reporting year. News story total based on total relevant news
       stories about teachers concerning Allegations; Being Sued, and Criminal Activity over a calendar year.



Figure 4 Event Study of Union Membership and Media Coverage
                     2
           Impact of Relevant News
              0      -1        1




                                     25-30   19-24   13-18   12-7       0-6     0-6   7-12 13-18     19-24   25-30   31-36
                                     Prior   Prior   Prior   Prior     Prior Post     Post    Post    Post    Post    Post
                                                                     Timing of Media Coverage
                                                                              Months

                          Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Predictions of probability union from a logit
                          regression for each year. Impact in terms of percentage point impacts e.g. 1 is a
                          percentage point increase. Allows separate effect of news stories regionally (and their
                          square), for each six-month period up to 36 months post or prior to the interview.
                                                                             34
Figure 5 Predicted Union Density with and without Media Reports




Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Predictions of union status from a logit regression, allowing separate effect of news stories
regionally and nationally (and their square), for each six month period up to 36 months prior to the interview. The
counterfactual estimates are generated with the same parameters apart from setting the media terms to zero. Accusation stories
are stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Stories Regionally is a count of the number of news stories
that originated in the region that the teacher resides in the previous 6 months, 7-12 months, 13-18 months, 19-24 months, 25-
30 months, and 31-36months. Similarly, Stories Nationally is a count for the number of all news stories, including stories that
could not be allocated to a specific region. Standard errors, in italics, are clustered at the regional level.




                                                                35
Tables
Table 1: Allegations by Employer and Type of Allegation
                                                      Type of Allegation
     All Reporting Local Authorities 2007-2011
     Employer                        Physical Emotional Sexual       Neglect                      Other      Total
     Education                         6,267     932       2,642       316                         862       11,019
     Foster Carers                     1,512     305        388        255                          70        2,530
     Social Care                       1,085     169        356        176                         112        1,898
     Secure Estate                      384       15         26          0                          6          431
     Health                             257       42        177         66                          41         583
     Voluntary Youth Organisations      203       34        342         23                          48         650
     Faith                              177        8         96          1                          12         294
     Police                             142       33         72          9                          12         268
     Immigration                         39        2         39          6                          0           86
     Connexions                          14        4         14          3                          5           40
     Youth Offending Teams               10        8         19          6                          9           52
     Armed Forces                         6        0         25          1                          0           32
     Probation                            5        0          2          1                          0            8
     NSPCC                                4        1          2          0                          1            8
     CAFCASS                              1        2          2          1                          1            7
     Other                             1,380     247        941        233                         247        3,048
     Total by type                    11,486    1,802      5,143      1,097                       1,426      20,954
    Source: Freedom of Information Requests to English Local Authorities. Note: Lists of responding Local
    Authorities and balanced Panel of Local Authorities is in Appendix 1




Table 2: Total Recorded Outcomes of Allegations
                                                                    Allegation Outcome
 All Reporting Local Authorities 2007-2011
                                                         Police          Disciplinary
                                     Not Upheld       Involvement        Procedures          Referral            Total
 Total                                 4,680             1,030              3,058             1,373             10,141
 Percent of total                      46.1%             10.2%             30.2%              13.5%
Source: Freedom of Information Act Requests to English Local Authorities. Notes: Not Upheld ­ No further action after initial
consideration, Being unfounded, Being unsubstantiated, Being malicious, Acquittal ; Police Involvement ­ Criminal
investigation, Conviction; Disciplinary Procedures ­ Disciplinary Action, Suspension, Dismissal, Resignation, Cessation of
use, Inclusion on barred/restricted employment list; Referral - Section 47 investigation, Referral to DCSF, Referral to
Regulatory Body. Total outcomes do not equal total number of cases as not all cases had an outcome in the last 12 months.




                                                               36
Table 3: Employee Summary Statistics
                                                     Teachers                 All Employees
                                                Mean       Std. Dev.        Mean      Std. Dev.
                                                 (1)          (2)            (1)         (2)

       Union Member                             0.840         0.367         0.276         0.447
       Public Sector                            0.886         0.317         0.246         0.431
       Male                                     0.275         0.447         0.525         0.499
       Full Time                                0.786         0.410         0.738         0.440
       University Qualification                 0.743         0.437         0.180         0.384
       A-Level Qualification                    0.761         0.426         0.304         0.460
       Age                                      42.67         10.32         40.29         12.78

       Tenure
       less than 3 months                       0.066         0.249         0.058         0.235
       3 months but less than 6                 0.016         0.125         0.047         0.211
       6 months but less than 12                0.026         0.158         0.068         0.252
       1 year but less than 2                   0.082         0.275         0.107         0.309
       2 years but less than 5                  0.188         0.390         0.207         0.405
       5 years but less than 10                 0.205         0.403         0.193         0.395
       10 years but less than 20                0.241         0.428         0.196         0.397
       20 years or more                         0.176         0.381         0.123         0.329

       Government Region
       Tyne and Wear                            0.015         0.122         0.018         0.132
       Rest of North East                       0.025         0.155         0.024         0.154
       Greater Manchester                       0.037         0.190         0.039         0.194
       Merseyside                               0.022         0.145         0.019         0.138
       Rest of North West                       0.049         0.217         0.050         0.218
       South Yorkshire                          0.021         0.142         0.021         0.144
       West Yorkshire                           0.038         0.191         0.037         0.190
       Rest of Yorkshire & Humberside           0.028         0.165         0.029         0.167
       East Midlands                            0.073         0.260         0.074         0.262
       West Midlands Metropolitan County        0.041         0.198         0.039         0.193
       Rest of West Midlands                    0.048         0.213         0.050         0.218
       East of England                          0.097         0.296         0.099         0.299
       Inner London                             0.030         0.170         0.034         0.180
       Outer London                             0.068         0.252         0.066         0.248
       South East                               0.145         0.352         0.147         0.354
       South West                               0.079         0.269         0.088         0.283
       Wales                                    0.050         0.217         0.046         0.208
       Strathclyde                              0.039         0.193         0.035         0.185
       Rest of Scotland                         0.057         0.232         0.055         0.228
       Northern Ireland                         0.040         0.195         0.030         0.170

       Observations                            30,392                      988,256
      Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Autumn Survey, sample of all employees 18-64 Notes: Teachers defined as
      Standard Occupational Classification codes (1993-2000):233, 234, 235 and Standard Occupational
      Classification Codes (2001-2010): 2314, 2315, 2316




                                                     37
Table 4: Summary Statistics ­News Coverage 1991-2010
                                                                                                 Story Type
          Panel A: All Newspaper Stories
                                                                                   Being         Criminal                     Employment         Union
           Relevance of Story      Allegations     Being Sued        Suing                                        Sacked                                         Total
                                                                                  Attacked       Activity                      Tribunal          Activity
          Extremely Relevant            322             45            100             4             12              15            61               64             623
          Highly Relevant               179             28             52            45             53              36            43              112             548
          Little Relevance              155             12              3            19            123              14            12               56             394
          Not Relevant                   55              1              2            10             68              4              0                4             144
                  Total                 711             86            157            78            256              69           116              236            1709

          Panel B: Balanced Newspaper Panel Stories
                                                                                   Being         Criminal                     Employment         Union
           Relevance of Story      Allegations     Being Sued        Suing                                        Sacked                                         Total
                                                                                  Attacked       Activity                      Tribunal          Activity
          Extremely Relevant            222             27             78             3              6              9             48               48             441
          Highly Relevant               115             22             36            29             37              16            35               78             368
          Little Relevance               95              5              1            10             77              8              9               46             251
          Not Relevant                   38              1              2             1             32              0              0                2              76
                  Total                 470             55            117            43            152              33            92              172            1136
        Source: LexisNexis 1991-2010. News search of national newspapers with the following term: headline(teacher) and court or damages or sued or jail or litigation or
        dismissed or fired or allegations and #GC329# (The code for a story originating in the UK). The stories were categorised using the rubric shown in Appendix Table 2.
        Panel A shows the total number of news stories in national newspapers in the LexisNexis database. Panel B shows the number of news stories from National Newspapers
        who were in the database throughout the entire period. National Newspapers: Daily Mail, Daily Star, Mail on Sunday, Morning Star, The Express, Sunday Express, The
        Daily Telegraph, Sunday Telegraph, The Sun, The News of the World, The Guardian, The Independent, The Observer, The People, The Times, The Sunday Times. The
        Balanced Panel of Newspaper Stories: Daily Mail, Mail on Sunday, The Guardian, The Independent, The Mirror, Daily Star, Observer, The Times, The Sunday Times.




                                                                                           38
Table 5: Total News Coverage by Story Subject
           Panel A: All Newspaper
           Stories 1992-2010
                                                       Relevant Stories               Any Relevance Stories
           News Story Subject                       Story Type All Types              Story Type All Types
                                                    Accusation                        Accusation
           By School Type
           Secondary School                             435            661                706            975
                                                      (68.1%)        (66.2%)            (67.0%)        (66.1%)
           Primary School                               126            186                184            249
                                                      (19.7%)        (18.6%)            (17.5%)        (16.9%)
           By Teacher Gender
           Male Teacher                                 327            469                 591            762
                                                      (51.1%)        (46.9%)            (56.1%)        (51.6%)
           Female Teacher                               303            521                 455            705
                                                      (47.4%)        (52.2%)            (43.2%)        (47.8%)
           All Stories                                  639            999                1053           1476

           Panel B: Balanced Newspaper
           Panel Stories 1992-2010
                                                       Relevant Stories               Any Relevance Stories
           News Story Subject                       Story Type All Types              Story Type All Types
                                                    Accusation                        Accusation
           By School Type
           Secondary School                             285            439                443            620
                                                      (66.3%)        (63.9%)            (65.0%)        (63.7%)
           Primary School                                90            142                128            182
                                                      (20.9%)        (20.7%)            (18.8%)        (18.7%)

           By Teacher Gender
           Male Teacher                                 218            315                381            490
                                                      (50.7%)        (45.9%)            (55.9%)        (50.4%)
           Female Teacher                               200            362                289            471
                                                      (46.5%)        (52.7%)            (42.4%)        (48.4%)
           All Stories                                  430            687                677            973
        Source: LexisNexis 1991-2010 of National Newspapers, Balanced Panel. Note: Percentages in parentheses
        represent proportion of all stories of that type on that subject. Story Type: Accusation includes- Allegations,
        Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Union Activity not included under All Types as is only counted in
        national totals as not based in one region or reflect a specific teacher type. Total stories do not equal those
        from Table 3 as some stories are double counted when both male and female teachers are mentioned, or both
        primary and secondary schools are mentioned.




                                                                39
Table 6: Union Membership on News Coverage
              Panel A: Extremely Relevant News Stories of Accusations
              P(Union Membership)        (1)         (2)            (3)                           (4)
              Stories Regionally      0.548**     0.588***       0.674**                       0.502**
                                        0.235       0.206         0.325                         0.251
              Stories Regionally       -0.024     -0.034**      -0.047**                      -0.046***
              Squared                   0.018       0.015         0.019                         0.014

              Marginal Effect at               0.509**        0.529***        0.594***         0.425**
              Mean                              0.208           0.181           0.187           0.193

              Panel B: All Relevant News Stories of Accusations
              P(Union Membership)          (1)           (2)                      (3)             (4)
              Stories Regionally       0.841***      0.783***                 0.758***        0.455***
                                         0.158         0.139                    0.200           0.148
              Stories Regionally       -0.041***     -0.039***                -0.034***       -0.026***
              Squared                    0.008         0.007                    0.008           0.007

              Marginal Effect at              0.715***        0.659***        0.650***        0.377***
              Mean                              0.133           0.115           0.121           0.133

              Panel C: Little/No Relevance News Stories of Accusations
              P(Union Membership)         (1)           (2)          (3)                          (4)
              Stories Regionally         0.098        0.169         0.222                       -0.151
                                         0.202        0.177         0.153                        0.147
              Stories Regionally         0.015        0.003        -0.004                        0.005
              Squared                    0.012         0.01         0.005                        0.005

              Marginal Effect at                0.120           0.174           0.216           -0.145
              Mean                              0.189           0.166           0.189            0.202

              Teacher Characteristics                                                             
              Regional Effects                                                                    
              Year Effects                                                                        
              Observations                     30,392          30,392           30,392          30,392
          Source: QLFS 1993-2010. Notes: Estimates from a logit regression of individual decision to join a
          union. Reporting the marginal effects at mean. All coefficients and standard errors are multiplied
          by 100 for ease of interpretation, so can be read a percentage change in probability. Accusation
          stories are stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Stories Regionally is a
          count for the number of news stories that originated in the region that the teacher resides. Standard
          errors, in italics, are clustered at the regional level.




                                                             40
Table 7: Union Membership on Regional and National News Coverage of Accusations
                                                                  Story Relevance
                                                Extremely              Relevant            Little/No
                                                 Relevant               Stories            Relevance
                                                  Stories
               P(Union Membership)                  (1)                   (2)                  (3)
               Stories Regionally               0.485*                 0.442***             -0.159
                                                 0.265                   0.147              0.137
               Stories Regionally             -0.042***               -0.022***             0.005
               Squared                           0.015                   0.007              0.004

               Stories Nationally              0.108**                   0.030              -0.261
                                                0.051                    0.044               0.236
               Stories Nationally              -0.002*                   0.000             0.005***
               Squared                          0.001                    0.001               0.001

               Marginal Effect at                 0.472*               0.408**              -0.285**
               Mean                               0.244                 0.133                 0.143

               Total Effect at Mean              0.980**               0.941**               -2.022

               Teacher Characteristics                                                         
               Regional Effects                                                                
               Time Trend                                                                      
               Observations                       30,392                30,392               30,392
            Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Estimates from a logit regression of individual decision to
            join a union. Reporting the marginal effects at mean. All coefficients and standard errors are
            multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation, so estimates can be read a percentage change in
            probability. Accusation stories are stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal
            Activity. Stories Regionally is a count for the number of news stories that originated in the
            region that the teacher resides in the previous 12 months. Stories Nationally is a count for the
            number of all news stories in the previous 12 months, including stories that could not be
            allocated to a specific region. Standard errors in italics, clustered at the regional level.




                                                             41
Table 8: Union Membership on Union Membership by Teacher and Story School Type
                                                     Stories of Accusations                  All Story Types
                                                     Secondary     Primary             Secondary      Primary
                                                       School      School                School       School
                                                      Teachers    Teachers              Teachers     Teachers
           P(Union Membership)                           (1)         (2)                   (3)          (4)
           Panel A: Relevant Stories
           Total Marginal Effect            0.683***                   0.045            0.431**          0.090
                                              0.198                    0.130             0.156           0.111
           Panel B: Relevant Secondary School Stories
           Total Marginal Effect            0.892***                   0.051             0.388*          0.129
                                              0.196                    0.274             0.208           0.191
           Panel C: Relevant Primary School Stories
           Total Marginal Effect              0.114                    0.633              0.047         0.633*
                                              0.634                    0.662              0.312          0.314

           Teacher Characteristics                                                                        
           Regional Effects                                                                               
           Year Effects                                                                                   
           Observations                                13,949         14,076             13,949         14,076
      Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Estimates from a logit regression of individual decision to join a union on
      news stories. Reporting the marginal effects at mean after accounting for quadratic terms. All coefficients
      and standard errors are multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation, so estimates can be read a percentage
      change in probability. Accusation stories are stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity.
      Relevant Stories include both Extremely and Highly relevant news stories. Stories Regionally is a count for
      the number of news stories that originated in the region that the teacher resides in the previous 12 months.
      Standard errors, in italics, are clustered at the regional level.


Table 9: Union Membership on Union Membership by Teacher and Story Gender
                                                        Stories of Accusations                 All Story Types
                                                          Male         Female               Male       Female
                                                        Teachers      Teachers             Teachers   Teachers
          P(Union Membership)                              (1)           (2)                 (3)          (4)
          Panel A: Relevant Stories
          Total Marginal Effect                 0.031                   0.508***             0.134        0.296***
                                                0.135                     0.170              0.149          0.114
          Panel B: Relevant Male Teacher Stories
          Total Marginal Effect                0.587*                   0.886***            0.539*         0.471*
                                                0.339                     0.293             0.330          0.241
          Panel C: Relevant Female Teacher Stories
          Total Marginal Effect                -0.070                      0.398             0.073          0.134
                                                0.288                      0.372             0.192          0.195

          Teacher Characteristics                                                                          
          Regional Effects                                                                                 
          Year Effects                                                                                     
          Observations                                   8,361         22,031              8,361         22,031
      Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Estimates from a logit regression of individual decision to join a union on
      news stories. Reporting the marginal effects at mean after accounting for quadratic terms. All coefficients and
      standard errors are multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation so estimates can be read a percentage change in
      probability. Accusation stories are stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant
      Stories include both Extremely and Highly relevant news stories. Stories Regionally is a count for the number
      of news stories that originated in the region that the teacher resides in the previous 12 months. Standard errors,
      in italics, are clustered at the regional level.

                                                                 42
  Table 10: Persistence of Story Types

                     Number of Stories (t)                                      (1)                     (2)
                     Panel A: Prior Stories
                     All Stories (t-1)                                       0.342***
                                                                               0.055

                                                                         Primary Teacher           Secondary
                     Panel B: Prior Stories by School Type                   Stories             Teacher Stories
                     Primary Teacher Stories (t-1)                          0.122***                 0.157
                                                                              0.059                  0.111
                     Secondary Teacher Stories (t-1)                          0.044                0.263***
                                                                              0.030                  0.056

                                                                            Male Teacher        Female Teachers
                      Panel C: Prior Stories by Gender                        Stories               Stories
                     Male Teacher Stories (t-1)                              0.284***              0.101***
                                                                               0.058                 0.039
                     Female Teacher Stories (t-1)                              0.056                 0.080
                                                                               0.097                 0.064

                     Teacher Characteristics                                                             
                     Regional Effects                                                                    
                     Year Effects                                                                        
                     Observations                                               360                     360
           Source: Lexus-Nexis 1992-2010 Notes: Estimates from five OLS regressions of number of new news stories last
           year on number of new news stories this year, conditional on year and regional fixed effects. Accusation stories are
           stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant Stories include both Extremely and
           Highly relevant news stories. This only uses the first incidence of a story.


  Table 11: Union Membership on Union Membership by Occupation
         Occupation Group                 Teachers          Education           Higher         Non Teacher        Non Teacher
                                                            Assistants         Education       Public Sector       Graduates
                                                                                                Graduates
         P(Union Membership)                 (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)                 (5)
         Relevant Stories                 0.455***            0.688              0.235            0.196               0.064
         Regionally                         0.148             0.577              0.422            0.261               0.147
         Relevant Stories                -0.026***            -0.021             -0.018           -0.001              -0.001
         Regionally Squared                 0.007             0.023              0.018            0.010               0.007

         Marginal Effect at               0.377***            0.622              0.185             0.133              0.051
         Mean                               0.133             0.582              0.425             0.204              0.091

         Teacher Characteristics                                                                                       
         Regional Effects                                                                                              
         Year Effects                                                                                                  
         Observations                      30,392             10,022             9,007             49,671            154,932
Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Reporting the marginal effects at mean from a logit estimate. All coefficients and standard errors are
multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation, so estimates can be read a percentage change in probability. Accusation stories are stories
involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant Stories include both Extremely and Highly relevant news stories.
Stories Regionally is a count for the number of news stories that originated in the region that the teacher resides in the previous 12
months. SOC codes: Educational Assistants 652, 6124; Higher Education 230, 231, 2311, 2312. Standard errors in italics, clustered
at the regional level.

                                                                       43
Table 12: Union Membership on Union Membership by News Lag Period
                         News Lag period            Marginal Effects         Total Marginal
                                                                                 Effect
                     P(Union Membership)                    (1)                    (2)
                     Stories Last 6 Months               0.487**                0.416**
                                                          0.214                  0.189
                     Stories Last 6 Months              -0.053***
                     Squared                              0.019

                     Stories 7-12 Months                 0.508***                0.444***
                     Previous                              0.148                   0.133
                     Stories 7-12 Months                -0.037***
                     Previous Squared                      0.008

                     Stories 13-18 Months                0.948***                0.845***
                     Previous                              0.348                   0.313
                     Stories 13-18 Months               -0.078***
                     Previous Squared                      0.030

                     Stories 19-24 Months                 -0.182                  -0.162
                     Previous                             0.217                   0.195
                     Stories 19-24 Months                 0.010
                     Previous Squared                     0.013

                     Stories 25-30 Months                 -0.319                  -0.275
                     Previous                             0.326                   0.292
                     Stories 25-30 Months                 0.035
                     Previous Squared                     0.032

                     Stories 31-36 Months                 -0.385                  -0.341
                     Previous                             0.296                   0.282
                     Stories 25-30 Months                 0.025
                     Previous Squared                     0.010

                     Teacher Characteristics                                        
                     Regional Effects                                               
                     Year Effects                                                   
                     Obs                                  30,392                  30,392
           Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Estimates from a logit regression. Reporting the marginal
           effects All coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation.
           Accusation stories are stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant
           Stories include both Extremely and Highly relevant news stories. Standard errors, in italics, are
           clustered at the regional level.




                                                            44
Appendix Figures & Tables

Appendix Figure 1: Union Density by Age Group over time




   Source: QLFS 1992:2010 Notes: Annual union density based on mean union membership of teachers based on QLFS
   reporting year.


Appendix Table 1: Reasons for Union Membership
                    "What were the MAIN reasons why you initially joined a teacher
                    union?"
                       Belief in the union movement                                40%
                       To improve job security                                     44%
                       To improve terms and conditions                             56%
                       For solidarity with other workers                           24%
                       Advice/opinion on educational policy                        62%
                       Support in the event of allegations from pupils             85%
                       No particular reason                                        3%
                    Observations                                                   176

             Source: Online Survey of Hertfordshire Teachers 2010/11 for unrelated evaluation of UK
             Resilience Programme on teaching staff (Murphy 2011)




                                                         45
Appendix Table 2: Media Rubric
                                               Being                         Being        Criminal                            Employment           Union
                             Allegations                     Suing                                             Sacked                                            Total
                                               Sued                        Attacked        Activity                             Tribunal          Activity
             Extremely       Found           Teacher       Sues for       Pupil         Manslaughter       For health and     Legitimate        Discuss
             Relevant        innocent,       sued for      damages/       attacks       of pupil           safety or          Unfair            threat of
                             case            school        libel          teacher in    charges            allegations        dismissal         allegations/
                             thrown out      activity                     classroom                                                             being sued


              Stories            322            45             100             4             12                  15                61                64            623
             Highly          Currently       May be        Lose           Parent-       Criminal           Inappropriate      Other Unfair      As above
             Relevant        on trial, no    sued,         case,          Pupil         accusations        behaviour, not     dismissal,        but brief
                             verdict         could be      indirectly     attacks       from pupil         up to              inappropriate     mention or
                                             sued          related to     teacher                          standards          behaviour         union
                                                           school         outside of                                                            demands
                                                                          school
               Stories            179           28             52             45              53                  36                43              112            548
             Little          Guilty of       School/       Threats to     Attacked      School             Miscellaneous      Union back        Comment
             Relevance       lesser          Council       sue for        by ex         related crime      school related     the dismal        on
                             offence, on     sued          indirect       pupil                            activity                             education
                             trial of hard                 teaching                                                                             policy
                             offence
              Stories             155            12             3             19             123                  14                12              56             394
             No              Admits          Non           Non            Non           Child              Non-school         Non-school        Anti-union
             Relevance       guilt of        school        school         school        pornography        related            related           members
                             extreme         related       related        related       /murder            activity           activity
                             sexual          activity      activity       activity
                             abuse
                Stories           55              1             2             10               68                 4                  0                4            144
                Total             711            86            157            78              256                 69                116             236           1709
              Source: LexisNeuxs (UK) Results of all stories from national newspapers with the word `teacher' in the headline and included any of the following terms (or
            derivatives) in the headline or preliminary paragraphs of the main text (as defined by LexisNexis); teacher, damages, sued, litigation, allegation, jail, court,
            dismissed or fired, over the period September 1991 to August 2010.




                                                                                            46
Appendix Table 3: Table 6 with Score-Bootstrap P-values in parentheses and robust clustered
standard error in italics

             Panel A: Extremely Relevant News Stories of Accusations
              P(Union Membership)          (1)         (2)           (3)                             (4)
             Stories Regionally       0.548**     0.588***      0.674**                         0.502**
                                        0.235       0.206        0.325                            0.251
                                      [0.019]      [0.004]      [0.002]                          [0.023]
             Stories Regionally        -0.024     -0.034**     -0.047**                        -0.046***
             Squared                    0.018       0.015        0.019                            0.014
                                      [0.213]      [0.026]      [0.007]                          [0.009]

             Marginal Effect at Mean           0.509**         0.529***        0.594***          0.425**
                                                0.208            0.181           0.187            0.193
                                               [0.011]          [0.005]         [0.001]          [0.027]

             Panel B: All Relevant News Stories of Accusations
             P(Union Membership)          (1)           (2)                        (3)             (4)
             Stories Regionally        0.841***      0.783***                   0.758***        0.455***
                                         0.158         0.139                      0.200           0.148
                                        [0.000]       [0.000]                    [0.000]         [0.002]
             Stories Regionally       -0.041***     -0.039***                  -0.034***       -0.026***
             Squared                     0.008         0.007                      0.008           0.007
                                        [0.000]       [0.000]                    [0.000]         [0.002]

             Marginal Effect at Mean          0.715***        0.659***         0.650***         0.377***
                                                0.133           0.115            0.121            0.133
                                               [0.000]         [0.000]          [0.000]          [0.002]

             Panel C: Little/No Relevance News Stories of Accusations
             P(Union Membership)          (1)          (2)           (3)                            (4)
             Stories Regionally         0.098        0.169         0.222                          -0.151
                                        0.202        0.177         0.153                          0.147
                                       [0.640]      [0.329]       [0.249]                        [0.477]
             Stories Regionally         0.015        0.003         -0.004                         0.005
             Squared                    0.012         0.01         0.005                          0.005
                                       [0.204]      [0.764]       [0.666]                        [0.667]

             Marginal Effect at Mean            0.120            0.174           0.216            -0.145
                                                0.189            0.166           0.189            0.202
                                               [0.483]          [0.271]         [0.273]          [0.489]

             Teacher Characteristics                                                               
             Regional Effects                                                                      
             Year Effects                                                                          
             Observations                      30,392           30,392           30,392          30,392
                 Source: QLFS 1993-2010. Notes: Estimates from a logit regression of individual
            decision to join a union. Reporting the marginal effects at mean. All coefficients and standard
            errors are multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation, so can be read a percentage change in
            probability. Accusation stories are stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal
            Activity. Stories Regionally is a count for the number of news stories that originated in the
            region that the teacher resides. Standard errors, in italics, are clustered at the regional level.
            Score-bootstrap p-values in brackets.




                                                              47
Appendix Table 4: Union Membership Alternate Functional Forms for Media Coverage
            Panel A: Linear
            P(Union Membership)                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
            Stories Regionally                 0.148            0.121           0.156*           -0.016
                                               0.113            0.096            0.070            0.059

            Panel B: Linear Capped at 95th Percentile
            P(Union Membership)         (1)           (2)                        (3)             (4)
            Stories Regionally       0.545**      0.518***                    0.591***         0262***
                                      0.240          0.178                      0147            0.113

            Panel C: Inverse Hyperbolic Sine
            P(Union Membership)         (1)                     (2)              (3)              (4)
            Stories Regionally        0.508*                  0533***          0694***          0.271*
                                       0.262                   0.202            0.160            0.142

            Panel D: Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Capped at 95th Percentile
            P(Union Membership)         (1)         (2)           (3)                             (4)
            Stories Regionally        0632**     0.690***      0.895***                        0.439***
                                       0.316       0.235         0.207                           0.152

            Panel E: Little/No Relevance News Stories of Accusations
            P(Union Membership)          (1)         (2)           (3)                            (4)
            Stories Regionally        0.841***    0.783***     0.758***                       0.455***
                                        0.158       0.139        0.200                          0.148
            Stories Regionally       -0.041***   -0.039***     -0.034***                      -0.026***
            Squared                     0.008       0.007        0.008                          0.007

            Marginal Effect at               0.715***         0.659***        0.650***         0.377***
            Mean                               0.133            0.115           0.121            0.133

            Teacher Characteristics                                                               
            Regional Effects                                                                      
            Year Effects                                                                          
            Observations                      30,392           30,392           30,392          30,392

           Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Reporting the marginal effects at mean, all coefficients and
           standard errors are multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation. Estimates can be read a
           percentage change in probability. Accusation stories are stories involving Allegations, Being
           Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant Stories include both Extremely and Highly relevant news
           stories. Standard errors, in italics, are clustered at the regional level. This table presents five
           different functional forms for media coverage; linear, linear capped at 95% percentile; inverse
           hyperbolic sign (which approximates to logarithmic which can include zero), capped inverse
           hyperbolic sign, and quadratic.




                                                             48
Appendix Table 5: Union Membership by News Coverage Type
                             News Type              None           - Union      -Attacked       -Sacked       -Tribunal       -Suing      - Criminal        -Sued
                             Removed                              Activity
                                                     (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
                             Marginal             0.255***        0.259***       0.249**        0.240**       0.260***      0.377***       0.394***       0.511***
                             Effect at Mean         0.099           0.100         0.102          0.103          0.100         0.133          0.141          0.157

                             News Types          Allegations       Union         Attacked        Sacked       Tribunal        Suing        Criminal         Sued
                             Separately                           Activity
                                                     (9)            (10)           (11)           (12)           (13)          (14            (15)           (16)
                             Marginal             0.511***         0.703         1.261**         0.719          0.238         0.194          0.617          0.288
                             Effect at Mean         0.157          1.102          0.502          0.711          0.546         0.364          0.765          0.542
Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Reporting the marginal effects at mean calculated. Estimates 1-8 sequentially remove a story types, starting with all types (1) and ending with only allegations.
Estimates 9-16 estimate the impact for each type of news story separately. Relevant Stories include both Extremely and Highly relevant news stories. Stories Regionally is a count for the number
of news stories that originated in the region that the teacher resides in the previous year. Standard errors, in italics, are clustered at the regional level.
Appendix Table 6: Union Membership Excluding Regions Sequentially
                       Excluded Region                                   All          Inner          Outer                         South         Tyne &         Rest of
                                                        None                                                     South East
                                                                      London         London         London                         West           Wear          N.East
                                                         (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
                       Marginal Effect               0.377***         0.357**       0.351***       0.394***       0.499***       0.357***       0.372***       0.380***
                                                       0.133           0.147          0.134          0.145          0.148          0.132          0.133          0.133
                       Observations                   30,392           27,409        29,487         28,314         25,998         27,996         29,932         29,644
                       Excluded Region               G.Manch-         Mersy-         Rest of       S.Yorks-         West          Rest of          East         Met-W.
                                                       ester            side         N.West           hire        Yorkshire      Yorkshire      Midlands       Midlands
                                                         (9)            (10)           (11)           (12)           (13)           (14)           (15)           (16)
                       Marginal Effect               0.411***        0.390***       0.446***       0.381***       0.443***       0.375***       0.383***       0.356***
                                                       0.139           0.135          0.137          0.134          0.137          0.133          0.133          0.135
                       Observations                   29,258          29,737         28,891         29,767         29,237         29,539         28,173         29,147
                       Excluded Region                 West             East                        Strath-        Rest of       Northern
                                                                                      Wales
                                                     Midlands        England                         clyde        Scotland        Ireland
                                                        (17)            (18)           (19)           (20)           (21)           (22)
                       Marginal Effect               0.380***        0.370***        0.295**       0.365***       0.393***       0.369***
                                                       0.136           0.137          0.145          0.138          0.142          0.136
                       Observations                   28,948          27,440         28,880         29,211         28,658         29,191
Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Reporting the marginal effects at mean. All coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation. Estimates can be read a percentage
change in probability. Accusation stories are stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant Stories include both Extremely and Highly relevant news stories. Standard
errors, in italics, are clustered at the regional level.
                                                                                                  49
Appendix Table 7: Union Membership by News Coverage Period
       News Coverage period            In last 6       In last 12      In last 18     In last 24    In last 30    In last 36
                                        months          months          Months         Months        Months        Months
      P(Union Membership)                 (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
      Relevant Stories                 0.540**         0.449***        0.521***       0.331***        0.141         0.065
      Regionally                        0.260            0.149           0.107          0.119         0.103         0.104
      Relevant Stories                -0.058***       -0.026***       -0.024***       -0.014**       -0.005        -0.001
      Regionally Squared                0.019            0.007           0.004          0.005         0.004         0.004

      Marginal Effect at                0.472*         0.380**           0.429***     0.258**         0.112         0.055
      Mean                              0.261           0.150              0.425       0.204          0.106         0.109

      Teacher Characteristics                                                                                         
      Regional Effects                                                                                                
      Year Effects                                                                                                    
      Observations                      30,392          30,392            30,392       30,392         30,392        30,392
     Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Reporting the marginal effects at mean. All coefficients and standard errors are
     multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation so estimates can be read a percentage change in probability. Accusation
     stories are stories involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant Stories include both Extremely
     and Highly relevant news stories. Stories Regionally is a count for the number of news stories that originated in the
     region that the teacher resides in the previous X months. Standard errors, in italics, are clustered at the regional level.


Appendix Table 8: Union Membership on News Coverage of Accusations and Actual
Allegations
         News Relevance                          Extremely Relevant Stories                         Relevant Stories

    P(Union Membership)                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)

    Stories Regionally                                 0.348**           0.335***                       0.220           0.197
                                                         0.140             0.109                        0.173           0.168
    Stories Regionally Squared                         -0.055**          -0.040**                      -0.050          -0.046
                                                         0.021             0.019                        0.093           0.065

    Allegations Per 100 Teachers         -0.310*                          -0.355       -0.310*                         -0.388
                                          0.227                           0.215         0.227                           0.253

    Teacher Characteristics                                                                                              
    Regional Effects                                                                                                     
    Year Effects                                                                                                         

           Observations                     3,399      3,399         3,399           3,399          3,399         3,399
Source: QLFS 2008-2010 Notes: Estimates from a logit regression. Reporting the marginal effects All coefficients and
standard errors are multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation. Accusation stories are stories involving Allegations, Being
Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant Stories include both Extremely and Highly relevant news stories. Standard errors, in
italics, are clustered at the regional level.




                                                                    50
Appendix for Online Publication

Online Appendix 1: Local Authorities who responded to the Freedom of information
request regarding allegations

All Local Authorities who responded (Years of data):


Local Authority (Years), Barnet (2) Barnsley (3), Bath and North East Somerset (3), Bedford (1), Bexley (2),
Blackburn with Darwen (3), Bolton (3), Bracknell Forest (2), Bradford (3), Brent (4), Bristol City (3), Bromley
(3), Buckinghamshire (4), Calderdale (3), Cambridge (2), Camden (3), Central Bedfordshire (1), Cheshire East
Council (1), Cheshire West and Chester (2), Cornwall (1), Croyden (3), Cumbria (3), Derby (1), Derbyshire
(3), Devon (1), Doncaster (3), Dorset (3), Dudley (3), Durham (3), East Riding of Yorkshire (4), East Sussex
(2), Essex (4), Gateshead (3), Gloustershire (2), Greenwich (4), Hackney (1), Hammersmith and Fulham (2),
Hampshire (3), Haringey (2), Havering (4), Hertfordshire (2), Hillingdon (3), Hounslow (2), Isle of Scilly (4),
Isle of Wight (3), Islington (4), Kensington and Chelsea (2), Kent (4), Kingston Upon Hull (3), Kingston Upon
Thames (4), Kirklees (3), Knowsley (3), Lancashire (4), Leeds (4), Leicester (3), Lewisham (4), Lincolnshire
(1), Liverpool (1), Luton (2), Manchester (2), Medway (3), Milton Keyenes (1), Newham (1), Norfolk (3),
North East Lincolnshire (3), North Lincolnshire (1), North Somerset (4), North Yorkshire (3), Northumberland
(4), Nottingham City (4), Nottingham County (2), Oldham (4), Oxfordshire (4), Peterborough (1), Plymouth
(4), Poole (3), Reading (4), Redbridge (3), Richmond (1), Rochdale (3), Rotherham (1), Rutland (4), Salford
(4), Sandwell (3), Scilly Isles (4), Sheffield (2), Shropshire (1), Slough (2), Solihull (4), Somerset (4), South
Glouster (2), Southampton (2), Southend (3), St Helens (4), Stockport (4), Suffolk (3), Surrey (2), Sutton (2),
Swindon (2), Telford and Wrekin (2), Thurrock (4), Torbay (3), Trafford (2), Wakefield (3), Walsall (4),
Waltham Forest (3), Wandsworth (4), Warrington (2), West Berkshire (2), West Sussex (3), Wigan (2),
Wiltshire (2), Winsor and Maidenhead (2), Wirral (4), Wokingham (2), Wolverhampton (2), Worcestershire
(4), York (3), All (323)


Balanced Panel of Local Authorities 2008-2010:


Barnsley, Bath and North East Somerset, Blackburn with Darwen, Bolton, Bradford, Brent, Bristol City, Bromley,
Buckinghamshire, Calderdale, Camden, Croydon, Cumbria, Derbyshire, Doncaster, Dorset, Dudley, Durham, East
Riding of Yorkshire, Essex, Greenwich, Hampshire, Havering, Hillingdon, Isle of Scilly, Isle of Wight, Islington,
Kent, Kingston Upon Hull, Kingston Upon Thames, Kirklees, Lancashire, Leeds, Leicester, Lewisham, Medway,
North East Lincolnshire, North Somerset, North Yorkshire, Northumberland, Nottingham City, Oldham,
Oxfordshire, Plymouth, Poole, Reading, Redbridge, Rutland, Salford, Sandwell, Sicily Isles, Solihull, Somerset,
Southend, St Helens, Stockport, Suffolk, Thurrock, Torbay, Wakefield, Walsall, Waltham forest, Wandsworth,
West Sussex, Wirral, Worcestershire




                                                         51
Online Appendix Table 1: Union Membership by Teacher and Story School Type ­ Showing
Quadratic Terms
                                                 Accusation Stories                   All Story Types
           Probability of Union               Secondary      Primary            Secondary       Primary
           Membership                           School       School               School        School
                                               Teachers     Teachers             Teachers      Teachers
                                                  (1)          (2)                  (3)           (4)
           Panel A: Relevant Stories
           Stories Regionally                   0.803***           0.069          0.529***        0.128
                                                  0.238            0.146            0.192         0.133
           Stories Regionally Squared           -0.036**          -0.009         -0.020***        -0.009
                                                  0.010            0.007            0.007         0.006
           Panel B: Relevant Secondary School Stories
           Secondary Stories                    1.002***           0.066           0.453*         0.154
                                                  0.223            0.302            0.240         0.217
           Secondary Stories Squared            -0.050**          -0.008          -0.021**        -0.009
                                                  0.010            0.015            0.010         0.010
           Panel C: Relevant Primary School Stories
           Primary Stories                        0.092            0.699           -0.021         0.713*
                                                  0.6563           0.670            0.450         0.352
           Primary Stories Squared                0.037          -0.109*            0.069        -0.079*
                                                  0.069            0.069            0.063         0.035
           Observations                           13,949         14,076            13,949         14,076
          Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Estimates from a logit regression of individual decision to join
          a union on news stories. Reporting the marginal effects at mean. All coefficients and standard
          errors are multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation. Estimates can be read a percentage change
          in probability. All estimates conditional on teacher characteristics Accusation stories are stories
          involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant Stories include both
          Extremely and Highly relevant news stories. Stories Regionally is a count for the number of
          news stories that originated in the region that the teacher resides in the previous 12 months.
          Standard errors, in italics, are clustered at the regional level.


Online Appendix Table 2: Union Membership by Teacher and Story School Type ­ Showing
Quadratic Terms
                                                    Accusation Stories                  All Story Types
           Probability of Union                  Male          Female              Male          Female
           Membership                           Teachers      Teachers            Teachers      Teachers
                                                  (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)
           Panel A: Relevant Stories
               Stories                      0.067                0.606***           0.205        0.370***
                                            0.151                  0.199            0.174          0.135
               Stories Squared            -0.014**               -0.031**         -0.017**       -0.016**
                                            0.006                  0.009            0.006          0.005
           Panel B: Relevant Male Teacher Stories
               Male Stories                0.721*                1.100***          0.666**        0.606*
                                            0.398                  0.370             0.416        0.353
               Male Stories Squared       -0.105**               -0.151***          -0.068        -0.068
                                            0.047                  0.055             0.051        0.057
           Panel C: Relevant Female Teacher Stories
               Female Stories              -0.053                 0.445            0.1117          0.159
                                            0.309                 0.412             0.212          0.220
               Female Stories Squared      -0.014                 -0.029           -0.019*         -0.010
                                            0.016                 0.022             0.008          0.009

                  Observations                      8,361       22,031             8,361         22,031
         Source: QLFS 1993-2010 Notes: Estimates from a logit regression of individual decision to join a
         union on news stories. Reporting the marginal effects at mean. All coefficients and standard errors
         are multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation. Estimates can be read a percentage change in
         probability. All estimates conditional on teacher characteristics Accusation stories are stories
         involving Allegations, Being Sued and Criminal Activity. Relevant Stories include both Extremely
         and Highly relevant news stories. Stories Regionally is a count for the number of news stories that
         originated in the region that the teacher resides in the previous 12 months. Standard errors, in
         italics, are clustered at the regional level.
                                                            52
