                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               EVIDENCE FOR THE EFFECT OF MONITORING COSTS ON
                         FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

                                      Bruce A. Blonigen
                                       Anca D. Cristea
                                       Donghyun Lee

                                     Working Paper 25933
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25933


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




We thank Ron Davies, Nick Sly, and participants of seminars at the Baruch College and the
University of Oregon for helpful comments. Any remaining errors or omissions are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Bruce A. Blonigen, Anca D. Cristea, and Donghyun Lee. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Evidence for the Effect of Monitoring Costs on Foreign Direct Investment
Bruce A. Blonigen, Anca D. Cristea, and Donghyun Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 25933
June 2019
JEL No. D22,F21,F23,G34,L22

                                          ABSTRACT

A proposed reason for the significant inverse relationship between distance (both physical and
cultural) and foreign direct investment is the increased costs for a parent firm to monitor an
affiliate when there is greater distance between them. We provide the first direct test of this
hypothesis using O*NET data on occupational skills to construct industry-level measures of the
importance of monitoring-related skills. We then exploit this cross-industry variation to examine
whether physical and cultural distances have a greater impact on cross-border M&A in industries
where monitoring-related skills are more important. Using data on worldwide cross-border M&A
activity from 1985 through 2014, we find significant evidence for the effect of monitoring costs
on cross-border M&A activity. We also show that the relatively low importance of monitoring-
related costs in manufacturing industries compared to those in other sectors is an important factor
in explaining why cross-border M&A in manufacturing is so large despite its relatively small
share of the modern economy.

Bruce A. Blonigen                                Donghyun Lee
Department of Economics                          1301 College Avenue
1285 University of Oregon                        University of Mary Washington
Eugene, OR 97403-1285                            Fredericksburg, VA 22401
and NBER                                         dlee6@umw.edu
bruceb@uoregon.edu

Anca D. Cristea
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
cristea@uoregon.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

       The growth of world foreign direct investment (FDI) over the past few decades

has been rapid. In accordance with this, there has been a significant research effort to

explore the determinants (and frictions) that shape worldwide FDI patterns. As with

international trade and other international transactions, gravity variables are significant

explanatory variables for bilateral FDI flows and stocks. While it makes sense that

country size measures should be positively correlated with respect to any international

transaction one considers, the source of the inverse correlation with distance is less

obvious. The common explanation for the inverse correlation between distance and

international trade is transport costs. But this is an unlikely explanation for the inverse

correlation of distance with FDI unless most firms engaging in FDI intend to trade a

significant amount of inputs between the parent and its foreign affiliates. Also, most

empirical studies of trade and FDI patterns include cultural distance measures such as

language similarity, colonial relationships, etc., finding they are also signicant frictions

for these international transactions.

       A common explanation for the inverse correlation between FDI and physical and

cultural distances is that they negatively affect the ease and efficiency of communication,

coordination, and monitoring of activity across the firm's affiliates. This makes the

prospect of FDI less profitable and therefore less likely. Head and Ries (2008) provide a

theoretical model based on these principles for cross-border M&A (a major type of FDI).

They derive a gravity-like equation for explaining bilateral cross-country M&A flows that

predicts inverse relationships with physical and cultural distances due to the increased

costs for the parent firm to monitor its foreign affiliate as these distances increase.



                                             1
       While this hypothesis for the inverse relationship between FDI and physical and

cultural distance is intuitive, there is no direct evidence of which we are aware that

monitoring and communication costs are the source of these relationships. And there

are other plausible reasons for these relationships besides monitoring costs. Physical

distances are often associated with transport costs in the international trade literature,

and so the evidence for the significance of physical distance could be because transport

of intermediates between the parent and affiliate are substantial and costly with

increased distance, not because monitoring is challenged by distance. Likewise, there are

a number of reasons for why cultural distances might be deleterious to cross-border M&A

other than monitoring costs. For example, their main impact may be in making it difficult

to find appropriate targets in a potential host country, not monitoring it once they have

acquired a target.    Understanding the mechanisms behind the inverse correlation

between FDI and distance is thus vital for refining our knowledge of FDI and our ultimate

ability to inform policy.

       Besides Head and Ries (2008), other prior empirical analyses have also argued

that monitoring and communication costs are important for FDI and is the mechanism

behind a number of empirical relationships. These include several papers that find

evidence that cross-country institutional and legal differences hinder FDI (e.g., Habib and

Zurawicki (2002), Aizenmann and Spiegel (2006), BénassyQuéré, Coupet, and Mayer

(2007), and Raimondi and Scoppola (2018)) and a paper by Stein and Daude (2007)

finding that FDI is more prevalent in countries in the same (or proximate) time zones




                                            2
because it is easier to communicate during common business hours. 1 Like Head and Ries

(2008), these studies rely on cross-country differences for evidence consistent with their

hypotheses. This approach suffers from the critique that other unobserved country-level

differences may be driving these correlations which are otherwise unrelated to the

postulated mechanism.

         In contrast, this paper uses an identification method analogous to that of Rajan

and Zingales (1998) to provide the first direct test of the monitoring-cost hypothesis. We

develop a new cross-industry measure of the importance of monitoring and related skills

for firms within industrial sectors and interact this sectoral data with cross-country

measures of physical and cultural distances. If these bilateral country distances are

hampering FDI due to monitoring costs, then we should see that they are especially

harmful to industrial sectors where monitoring is more important. 2

         In order to implement this identification strategy within a theoretical framework,

we extend the Head and Ries (2008) model of cross-border M&A activity to incorporate

sectoral heterogeneity, as their original model is only specified at the country level. We

then use cross-border M&A data from Thomson SDC Platinum database ranging from


1
  These papers are part of a growing literature that investigates the determinants of cross-border M&A,
including Rossi and Volpin (2004), Di Giovanni (2005) Head and Ries (2008), Hijzen et al. (2008), Erel et al.
(2012), and Blonigen and Piger (2014). These studies generally find that gravity-type forces are important for
cross-border M&A and especially examine the role of various types of cross-border frictions, as well as
financial and institutional frictions in the home and host country.
2
  Davies et al. (2018) use a similar strategy to look at the different question of whether FDI occurs more in the
form of cross-border M&A or greenfield investments. One of their hypotheses is that cross-border M&A
should be more frequent relative to greenfield when integration of the acquired target would be more difficult.
They interact sectoral measures of input contractability and intangible assets with physical and cultural
differences and find some evidence that cross-border FDI is affected more by physical and cultural distances in
sectors where input contractibility and intangible assets are high. These measures are consistently available
only for primarily manufacturing sectors. In contrast, our measure of monitoring costs can be consistently
measured across all sectors in the economy allowing us to focus on much different questions in this paper, such
as why cross-border M&A is proportionately much higher in the manufacturing sector than non-manufacturing
sectors.


                                                        3
1985-2014 as our measure of FDI. There are two main reasons for this. First, the value

of cross-border M&A activity is typically double that of greenfield FDI, the other major

form of FDI. (For example, see Table I.10 on p. 11 of UNCTAD, 2015). Thus, by conducting

the empirical analysis with cross-border M&A data, we are capturing a substantial

portion of the worldwide FDI activity. Second, the cross-border M&A data from SDC

Platinum provide disaggregated information across all countries at the four-digit SIC

level, a level of detail that other FDI data cannot provide even for the countries with the

most comprehensive FDI data.

        We use data from the Occupational Information Network (O*NET) to measure the

extent to which occupations require various skills and construct a measure of how

important monitoring is in an industry. 3 While the previous literature has used these

data primarily to look at the routineness of tasks that workers may be asked to do, the

dataset also contains information on the degree to which various occupations require

such things as monitoring of others, interpersonal skills, and communication skills.

These directly connect to the Head and Ries (2008) rationale for why physical and

cultural distances are inversely correlated with FDI. Using data on the employment

shares of occupations for each industry (also available from O*NET), we construct

measures of the importance of these monitoring-related skills by industry and interact

them with the measures of physical and cultural distance between bilateral country pairs

so that we can examine whether there is direct causal evidence for the monitoring cost

mechanism.


3
  These data are available online at: https://www.onetonline.org. We use O*NET's ranking of the relevance and
level of various social skills which we explain further below.



                                                     4
        Our econometric results provide strong evidence in favor of monitoring costs as a

source of reduced cross-border M&A activity. We find that a standard deviation increase

in the monitoring importance in an industry is associated with a decrease in M&A activity

of about 40% and this effect is statistically significant at the 1% level. Interestingly, we

find that the majority of this effect is driven by the physical distances, not cultural

distances, across countries.         These results are robust to alternative measures of

monitoring importance, as well as to different samples of countries and years.

        With our establishment that monitoring costs are an important mechanism

driving the negative impact of physical and cultural distances on cross-border M&A, we

next investigate whether these costs are also significant in explaining another important

feature of cross-border M&A activity -- a substantial share of global FDI is in

manufacturing and undertaken primarily amongst developed countries, yet

manufacturing accounts for a very small (and rapidly declining) share of activity in these

same developed countries. 4 Could it be that the disproportionately larger share of cross-

border M&A in manufacturing is because there is less monitoring of affiliates required in

manufacturing than other sectors? The raw data are consistent with this hypothesis, as

our constructed measures of the importance of monitoring-related skills for the

wholesale, retail, and financial, insurance, and real estate sectors (FIRE) are three to four

times larger than for the manufacturing sector. We also find strong evidence for this

when applying our formal econometric analysis. On average, our estimates suggest that



4
  For example, in the US, over 45% of value added by foreign affiliates operating in the US was in
manufacturing in 2012 (Calculated from Table 2.1 in Anderson, 2014). However, total value added by
manufacturing sector in the US accounted for only about 12% of real GDP in 2012 (Elrod et al., 2013,
Table E). Likewise, almost 40% of value added in 2011 by US affiliates operating in foreign countries was
in manufacturing (Calculated from Table 2.1 in Barefoot, 2013).


                                                   5
cross-border M&A activity would be about 40-50% higher in the non-manufacturing

sectors if they required as little monitoring-related skills as in manufacuring. However,

there is significant heterogeneity across the non-manufacturing sectors. If monitoring

importance were as low as that required in manufacturing, the high-monitoring sectors

of wholesale trade, retail trade, and finance, insurance, and real estate would see their

cross-border M&A activity approximately double according to our estimates. But there

would be much smaller increases (around 5-10%) in the Services, Construction, and

Transportation, communications, and Utilities. 5

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Sections 2 and 3 describe our O*NET

measure of monitoring across industrial sectors and our data on cross-border M&A

activity, respectively. Section 4 derives an empirical specification from the Head and Ries

(2008) model and describes our identification strategy. Section 5 provides our empirical

results both for the evidence on the monitoring-cost effect on FDI and how much it

explains the heterogeneous cross-border M&A activity we see across industrial sectors.

The final section concludes.



2. OCCUPATIONAL DATA ON MONITORING-RELATED SKILLS

        A novel aspect of our analysis compared to the previous literature is the use of

information from the Occupational Information Network (O*NET) dataset in order to

measure the skills that are likely connected with parent firms' monitoring of foreign



5
 We are aware of only one other study (Ramasamy and Yeung, 2010) that has examined differences in FDI
across sectors. Unlike our study, Ramasamy and Yeung (2010) rely on annual time series data aggregated at the
one-digit sector level, which is estimated by a reduced-form equation. Their focus is on host-country
characteristics unlike our focus on frictions. They find that the same types of host-market characteristics
generally affect FDI across all sectors, and that service FDI appears to follow manufacturing FDI over time.


                                                      6
affiliates and whose use may be made more difficult by greater physical and/or cultural

distance. O*NET ranks both the level and the importance of over a hundred various skills

for over 950 different occupations in the United States. "Monitoring skills" are the ones

we gather from O*NET that include four skills that are labeled, "Coordination,"

"Management of material resources," "Management of personnel," and "Monitoring."

These are tasks that likely become more difficult as the affiliate becomes more remote

from the parent, irrespective of any cultural or language differences. Head and Ries

(2008) posit that cultural distance can affect monitoring and use proxies such as

language differences and colonial relationships for the cultural distance that will affect

monitoring costs. Following this, we also group a number of these O*NET social skills

into categories we label "cultural skills" and "language skills." The cultural skills we

consider are those labeled by O*NET as "Negotiation skills," "Persuasion," "Service

orientation," and "Social perceptiveness." Language skills include those labeled by

O*NET as "Active listening," "Instructing," "Reading comprehension," "Speaking," and

"Writing." Appendix B provides the O*NET description of each of these thirteen skills

across the three categories of monitoring skills, cultural skills and language skills,

respectively.

       O*NET ranks the relevance of each skill for each occupation along two

dimensions: importance and level. Importance (ranked from 1 to 5) measures how

essential the skill is for the occupation, whereas the level (ranked from 0 to 7) indicates

how proficient one must be in that skill for the occupation. These need not be highly

correlated. For example, writing skills may be important for an occupation (such as a




                                            7
parking citations officer) on a daily basis, but not required to be at the highest level of

proficiency.

        In order to construct measures of the relevance of these thirteen skills at the

industry level, we undertake the following steps. First, we multiply the level and

importance of each skill by occupation and rescale so that all values fall between 0 and 1.

We then use the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) survey provided by the

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) on employment by 2-digit Standard Industrial

Classification (SIC) sectors across Standard Occupational Codes (SOCs) for the year 2000

to determine the share of each occupation for each industry. 6 Using these shares, we

create a weighted average of the relevance of each skill for each industry.

        A final refinement is that we construct these measures with respect to only the

occupation codes that are likely to be important for monitoring and coordinating activity

between the parent and the affiliate: Management (SOC 11), Business and Financial

Operations (SOC 13), and Sales and Related Occupations (SOC 41). We think it is unlikely

that monitoring at non-executive levels (e.g., a floor supervisor on a production line) is

important for the coordination and communication needed between a parent company

and its foreign affiliate.

        In practice, we find that these thirteen skills are highly correlated across 2-digit

SIC industries with no pairwise correlation lower than 0.92 between any of the thirteen

skills. That is, industries where monitoring is important at management or executive

level are also industries where language and cultural skills are important. We have tried



6
 BLS provides a crosswalk between 2010 SOC codes and 2000 SOC codes, which we use in order to merge the
O*NET skills data with the occupational employment share data.


                                                   8
a variety of alternative methods for constructing our skill variables that all yield very high

pairwise correlations. Given this, we collapse all thirteen of our skill variables into one

monitoring-related O*NET variable by taking a simple average. This simplifies our

analysis in many ways and, as we show later, our results are robust to a variety of

alternative ways to define and construct the O*NET variable.

         Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for our O*NET variable where higher values

indicate a greater importance of monitoring-related skills. The mean value of the O*NET

variable is 0.062 across our entire dataset with a standard deviation of 0.05. So there is

significant variation across this measure with the value of the variable ranging from a

minimum of 0.012 to 0.239.

         There is also a clear pattern in the data that monitoring-related skills are

significantly less important in manufacturing industries than non-manufacturing

industries. 7 The mean value of the O*NET variable for manufacturing sectors is 0.035,

which is less than half the average of non-manufacturing industries at 0.073. As seen in

the final rows of Table 1, non-manufacturing industries are also quite diverse in terms of

the prominence of monitoring-related skills even at the 1-digit SIC level. Monitoring-

related skills are less prominent for mining than manufacturing, while retail, wholesale,

and finance, insurance and real estate (FIRE) have relatively high mean values for the

O*NET variable. Table 2 shows the highest ten and lowest ten 2-digit SIC sectors with

respect to the prominence of monitoring-related skills. The top ten sectors are all in retail

and FIRE, while the lowest ten sectors are in mining, transportation, and a few unique


7
 The non-manufacturing industries that we are considering in this paper are: mining (SIC 10-14), construction
(SIC 15-17), transport, communication and utilities (SIC 40-49), wholesale trade (SIC 50-51), retail trade (SIC
52-59), finance, insurance and real estate (SIC 60-67) and services (SIC 70-89).


                                                       9
personal services. As we will see in our empirical analysis, this variation is highly

significant in explaining differences in FDI patterns across countries.



3. CROSS-BORDER M&A ACTIVITY

       Like many other prior papers on M&A activity, we rely on the Thomson Reuters

SDC Platinum M&A database to examine patterns in cross-border M&A activity. The

database begins in 1985 and records all M&A transactions across the world that are

valued at $5 million or higher. If the percentage of shares acquired by the acquiring

firm is 10% or more, we consider this an acquisition. A limitation of the data is that it

does not have information on the value of transactions for about half of the

observations, as private firms do not have to report this information. As a result, we

rely on counts of M&A transactions. The empirical model we present and estimate

below naturally explains counts of transactions.

       The entire database from 1985 through 2014 has over 600,000 acquisitions

where 10% or more of the target company is acquired. About one-quarter of these

observations are M&A transactions that are cross-border; i.e, the acquiring firm's

headquarters are located in a different country than the target firm's headquarters.

Due to data availability issues, we examine cross-border acquisitions between

countries that are the top 50 target countries for M&A activity. M&A activity between

these top 50 countries accounts for over 80% of all M&A activity in the database, and




                                            10
cross-border activity between OECD countries represents around 60% of all cross-

border acquisitions. 8

        Using the data set, we create a dependent variable of the number of cross-

border acquistions at the two-digit SIC industry level for all directional country pairs

from the set of the top 50 target countries in the database and cumulate these over 5-

year intervals beginning with 1985-1989 and ending with 2010-2014. 9 We also

explore samples with only the OECD countries, which have more intense M&A activity

amongst them and account for a substantial share of overall cross-border M&A activity.

        Importantly, the database has information on the primary 4-digit SIC

classification of the acquiring and target firms, allowing us to focus on sectoral patterns

of cross-border acquisitions, including non-manufacturing ones. Because the O*NET

data are only available at the 2-digit SIC level, we aggregate our M&A data to this level

as well. For our purposes, we classify the M&A transactions according to the SIC of the

target firm.

        To get a sense of the variation in cross-border M&A activity across industries,

Table 3 looks at such activity across one-digit sectors for our full sample and the OECD

sample. As mentioned in the introduction, the manufacturing sector accounts for

nearly 40% of all cross-border M&A activity and this is nearly identical across both the

top 50 and OECD samples. Of the non-manufacturing sectors, services is the largest

and accounts for about one-quarter of all cross-border M&A activity. The next largest



8
  We rank M&A activity in terms of the number of firms targeted in that country for a M&A and define OECD
membership as of January 1, 2000 ­ roughly the midpoint of our sample. Appendix A lists the OECD countries,
as well as the additional countries that comprise the top 50 target countries in our full sample.
9
  We limit to the top 50 because M&A activity begins to get sparse beyond this set and then includes countries
where we cannot easily obtain data for some of our regressors.


                                                     11
sectors are FIRE (11-12%), transportation, communications, and utilities (8-9%), and

wholesale trade (6%). The distribution of cross-border M&A across one-digit sectors

is strikingly similar across the two samples.

       If cross-country distances matter less for manufacturing because these

distances are related to monitoring costs and such costs are less important for

manufacturing sectors, then we would expect that manufacturing will have a bigger

share of cross-border M&A than domestic M&A. Table 4 shows the number of

acquisitions in manufacturing and non-manufacturing for both domestic and cross-

border M&A activity across all our sample years and for various sample countries. A

universal pattern across all our differing samples of countries is that manufacturing

accounts for a significantly larger share of cross-border M&A activity (column 6) than

domestic M&A activity (column 3). For example, in our two samples of countries (top

50 and OECD), manufacturing accounts for only about 27-28% of targets acquired by

domestic acquirers, but 39% of targets acquired by foreign firms (i.e, cross-border

M&A). Across all top 10 target countries, the share of manufacturing targets is also

always larger in the cross-border activity than in the domestic activity. These numbers

suggest that cross-border M&A is relatively easier for manufacturing industries than

non-manufacturing ones, and we next outline the empirical model we will use to more

formally explore whether cross-border frictions are a key mechanism in these

differences we see in the raw data.




                                            12
4. MODEL AND EMPIRICAL SPECIFICATION

       The Head and Ries (2008) model views cross-border M&A as an international

market for corporate control of productive assets, where the headquarters' monitoring

cost of a (potential) subsidiary plays a key role in the cross-border M&A decision.

Frictional costs associated with cross-border M&A stem from this monitoring cost

because it is assumed that monitoring costs increase as the geographic or cultural

distance between the home and host countries increases. Our strategy is to test this

monitoring-cost mechanism using cross-sectoral variation in monitoring costs. In order

to do so we must first extend the Head and Ries (2008) model to accommodate sector-

specific frictional costs.

       The Head and Ries model is motivated by a simple inspection game, which is

played between the headquarters (HQ) and its subsidiary. Without monitoring by the

HQ, the manager of the subsidiary lacks incentives to exert effort to maximize the value

of the subsidiary. Monitoring requires costs that are increasing in distance (both cultural

and geographic) between the HQ and its subsidiary. The subsidiary (manager) chooses

whether to work or shirk. Gross profit depends on the contributions of the HQ and the

subsidiary, which are denoted by a and b, respectively. The HQ always adds a, whereas

the subsidiary adds b if it chooses to exert effort. The HQ simultaneously chooses

whether to trust subsidiary or monitor and verify for a cost of c that the subsidiary has

worked. HQ pays w to the subsidiary, unless monitoring reveals that the subsidiary is

shirking, in which case the subsidiary gets zero. Working generates gross output of a+b,

but the subsidary incurs effort costs of e. Head and Ries (2008) make parameter




                                            13
assumptions that b>w>e>c>0, and then solve for a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of the

inspection game, which yields the following expression for the value of the subsidiary:

                               v = a + b - 2 bc                             (1)

As can be seen from equation (1), higher verification costs (c) lower the value of the

subsidiary to HQs. Head and Ries (2008) postulate the costs of monitoring (c) as an

increasing function of  , which is a vector of geographic and cultural distances between

the parent country i and the host country j, and further specify the functional form of the

                                                             2
costs related to these remoteness measures as  =                 ,where  is a vector of
                                                            2


parameters that weight the distance measures. Substituting into equation (1), the value

of an acquisition between country i and j as:

                                             
                           =  +  -                                          (2)
                                                2

       As discussed more below, country-level cultural and physical distances may affect

cross-border M&A in a number of other non-trivial ways than through monitoring costs,

including transport of goods and the initial search for acquisition targets. Thus, the

strong evidence for the role of these cross-border frictions in Head and Ries (2008) does

not identify if monitoring costs are the mechanism. Our test relies on sectoral variation

across measures of monitoring intensity, so we begin our extension of their model with

                                                                                          2
the simple assumption that monitoring costs also vary by sector (k),  =                      ,
                                                                                        2


which then modifies equation (2) as follows:

                                                     
                             =  +  -                                              (3)
                                                    2

       In order to derive an estimating equation from (3), we continue to follow Head

and Ries (2008), while extending their model to account for sectoral variation. We


                                            14
assume that the HQ with the highest expected payoff (i.e., v) makes the highest bid and

wins the auction for control of a subsidiary. Let  ijk denote the probability that a HQ

from country i takes control of a randomly drawn target in country j in industry k. Also,

let  denote the asset value of the entire stock of targets in the host country j in industry

k. Then we can represent the expected bilateral FDI stocks as follows,

                                    =                                            (3)

       We follow Head and Ries (2008) in specifying  ijk , assume that country i has 

headquarters, each of which have different valuations for a given target in country j.

Heterogeneity in the valuations is introduced through the HQ value-added term a. We

assume that the cumulative density of a takes the Gumbel (type-I extreme value):

exp(- exp(-( x - µ ) /  )) , where µ is the location parameter and  is the shape

parameter. Using the results of Anderson, de Palma, and Thisse (1992, p. 39), it can then

be shown that  ijk is given by the multinomial logit formula:

                                           
                                  + ln( ) -  
                                                 
                        =                           
                                                                           (4)
                                        + ln  -       
                                                     


       Substituting (4) into (3), we can express expected bilateral FDI stocks as

                                       
                                      -  
                                      
                        E[ ] =                                              (5)
                                     -  
                                       


                                                                                 
       In order to obtain an estimating equation, we first define   (  ) , which

determines the FDI-impeding effect of the frictions that increase monitoring costs. Also,
                                                                                       
E[ Fijk ] depends only on the shares of HQs in each country, so we introduce               to
                                                                                        


represent a country's share of the world's bidders. And finally, we define


                                            15
                  
    exp   -   as the "bid competition" for targets in country j in industry

k. Re-writing equation (5) in terms of these variables yields:

                                          
                             = exp   -     -1
                                                                                    (6)

        Equation (6) now resembles the gravity equation where expected bilateral stocks

are increasing in size variables connected to the origin and destination ( and  ) and

decreasing in measures of bilateral distance. Higher bid competition in country j in

industry k (i.e., ) implies that a higher fraction of assets in j in industry k will be taken

by rivals from other countries, thereby reducing the expected bilateral stocks of HQs

from country i.

        Standard industrial classifications used to define k in our data vary for both

market structure reasons and artificial classification reasons.              For example,

manufacturing has many narrowly-defined industry classifications each composed of a

relatively small number of establishments, whereas services tends to have more broadly-

defined industry classifications with many firms. This matters because it directly affects

the number of potential targets (K) and potential bidders (B) across sectors in a

systematic way. To account for this we introduce a k-specific scaling factor that allows
               -1
us to rewrite     as   -1 . While this assumes a common industrial structure

across our economies with respect to the relative number of firms in each sector, it allows

us to extend Head and Ries (2008) in a tractable way to the sectoral level given available

data.

        Further re-arrangement of equation (6) gives us some insight into how the

parameters of the model can be estimated:



                                             16
                              
                 = exp[  + ln  + ln  - ln  + ln  -  ]                                     (7)

Equation (7) shows that bilateral FDI can be separated into an origin i-specific term
                                                                                     
relating to its share of the world's HQs ( ln  ) and their mean ability (  ), and a
                                                                         

destination j-specific term relating to the share of target assets (ln  ) and the competing

                                              
set of bidders (ln  ). We will denote             + ln  as the outward direct investment
                                              

effect for origin i,   ln  - ln  as the inward direct investment effect for destination

j, and   ln  as the sectoral effect. Substituting these terms, we obtain the following

expression for expected bilateral FDI stocks:

                         = exp[  +  +  -  ]                                             (8)

       In order to move from the expected values determined in the theory to the actual

                                                             Fijk
values of FDI recorded in the data set, we define ijk                  as the ratio of actual to
                                                           E[ Fijk ]

expected bilateral FDI stocks. Using equation (8),

                  =   = exp[  +  +  -  ]                                                (9)

As Head and Ries (2008) shows, with the right assumption on the error term, we can use

maximum likelhood estimation of a count data model (such as a (quasi-)Poisson) to

estimate the vector of parameters of interest in the model, . We can control for the

outward ( ), inward ( ), and sectoral ( ) effects using sets of parent-country, host-

country, and sectoral fixed effects, respectively.

       The focus of our analysis is the impact of the vector of frictions,  , on cross-

border M&A. In Head and Ries (2008), these frictions only vary by cross-border pair. As

discussed above, this makes it challenging to identify the effects as due to monitoring



                                             17
costs because there are a number of other reasons why cross-border distances could

limit cross-border M&A. In order to identify whether monitoring costs represent a

mechanism for the inverse relationship between bilateral-country distances and FDI, we

pursue a strategy similar to Rajan and Zingales (1998), which has been used in many

subsequent empirical studies. 10 From the O*NET data described above we have sectoral

information on the degree to which monitoring and related activities matter across

sectors. If greater cultural and physical distances increase monitoring costs, then we

expect that the FDI-reducing impact of these distances will be greater for sectors where

monitoring is more important. Formally, we model this as  =  ×  , where  is

the O*NET variable measuring the "monitoring importance" across sectors. In order to

control for other potential mechanisms for the relationship between these distances and

FDI, we continue to include the vector of bilateral distance measures ( ) separately.

         Our vector of physical and cultural distance measures include the same ones used

by Head and Ries (2008). These are  , a measure of the physical distance

between the home and the host country,  , a measure of the dissimilarity of

language between the two countries, and an indicator when the two countries do not

have a past colonial relationship,  . 11 These data come from the CEPII website

(www.cepii.fr) and have been used by many others for statistical studies of international

economic activity.



10
   In the international trade and FDI literature, such studies include Alfaro et al. (2004), Manova (2008), Chor
and Manova (2012), and Blonigen (2015).
11
    One difference from Head and Ries (2008) is that we define all these variables in terms of frictions, so
that they all have an expected inverse correlation. We also follow Melitz and Toubal (2014) and use the
percentage of people from each country that share a common native language (rather than official language)
and invert the measure so it represents a language dissimilarity measure.


                                                       18
       We also include two cultural distance variables not included in Head and Ries

(2008), but often used in other studies. The first is  , measuring the

cultural distance between the parent and the host country. We use Kogut and Singh's

(1988) approach which is a composite index formed based on the weighted difference

between the four cultural dimensions (i.e. power distance, uncertainty avoidance,

masculinity/femininity, and individualism) of each country. The second cultural

variable we include is religious distance,  . We use information from the CIA

Factbook to gather shares of population in each country that identify with the

following religions: Catholic, Protestant Christian, Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu, Orthodox

or Jewish. For each country pair we total the share (in decimal form) of their

populations with a common religion and then subtract from one.

       Finally, we include a vector of bilateral country-pair control variables (  ) that

empirical FDI studies often include and find to have statistical support. These are

common national border (  ), common currency (  ), common legal

systems ( ), the (log) GDP of the parent country and of the host country, the

(log) difference in GDP per capita between the parent and host countries ( Log pcGDPij)

and its squared value, the absolute value of the corporate tax differences between

countries (Log( 1+| CorpTaxij|)), an interaction of this tax-difference variable with an

indicator that the parent country is the higher tax country (Log( 1+|

CorpTaxij|)xAcqHighTax), whether the two countries have a double taxation treaty in

place (  ), whether the two countries have a bilateral investment treaty in place

( ) and an indicator whether the two countries have a biliateral free trade agreement

with each other ( ). For completeness, we also include domestic acquisitions


                                           19
in our sample, where the parent and host country are the same. Because there may be

something inherently different to these transactions than what is captured by our control

variables, we also include an indicator variable that the acquisition is domestic only

( ). Appendix B provides descriptions of these variables and information on

their data sources, as well as summary statistics. 12

        Our final empirical specification is:

        =   = exp[  +  +  - ( ×  ) -   -   ]                                                              (10)

where {, , } are the set of parameters to be estimated using Pseudo-Poisson Maximum

Likelihood (PPML) methods. As indicated above, we control for the outward ( ), inward

( ), and sectoral ( ) effects using sets of parent-country, host-country, and sectoral fixed

effects, respectively.



5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

        We begin the empirical results by estimating equation (10) using PPML methods

to estimate the impacts of cross-border frictions on M&A activity for our full sample of

cross-border M&A transactions across the Top 50 countries over the 1985-2014 period.

We then explore the robustness of our results to alternative samples, including the subset

of M&A activity between only OECD countries and different time periods. Finally, we turn

to examining the extent to which the monitoring cost effect of FDI explains the substantial

differences we see in cross-border M&A activity across industrial sectors.




12
  Our regressor set is informed by previous FDI studies, including Rossi and Volpin (2004), Di Giovanni
(2005) Head and Ries (2008), Hijzen et al. (2008), Erel et al. (2012), and Blonigen and Piger (2014).


                                                     20
5.1. Evidence for the Monitoring-Cost Effect on FDI

       Column 1 of Table 5 provides the results for our base specification for the full

sample of Top 50 countries when excluding any monitoring cost variables. Many of

the variables have the expected sign and are statistically significant. The overall fit of

the equation is strong with an R-squared statistic of 0.843. All the gravity variables

have the expected sign and are statistically significant at the 1% level, including our

physical and cultural friction terms ­ Dist, LangDist, CultDist, NoColony, and ReligDist ­

which we list at the top of the table.

       The economic significance of the friction variables is high as well. A standard

deviation increase in physical distance, cultural distance, and religious distance

reduces cross-border M&A activity by 38.7%, 20.6%, and 33.8%, respectively.

Countries with no common native language have a 44.1% lower probablity of cross-

border M&A than those that share a native language, and countries with

no colonial connection have a 41.3% lower probablity of cross-border M&A than those

with a colonial relationship.

       Column 2 of Table 5 introduces our O*NET measure of monitoring importance

as an independent variable into the specification and shows that it does not have a

statistically-significant direct impact on cross-border M&A activity. Industries that

involve a higher degree of monitoring skills for its employees do not inherently have

higher or lower M&A activity. We have tried a variety of alternative specifications,

including ones with interactions of the monitoring importance variable with frictions,

and the direct impact of the monitoring importance variable is always statistically

insignificant. This indicates that the impact of monitoring importance only operates



                                            21
through its interactions with cross-border frictions, not through any direct effect. This

is helpful to us in two ways. First, note that we cannot include industry fixed effects

when we include monitoring importance as an independent variable because it only

varies by industry.     The exclusion of industry fixed effects leads to a very large

reduction in the R-squared of the specification, suggesting that there are many

industry-specific effects that matter for M&A activity. Because of the evidence that

monitoring importance is not significant on its own, we can proceed with specifications

that include industry fixed effects that subsume the direct impact of monitoring

importance. This also helps in calculations of the economic significance (marginal

effects) of monitoring importance because we can assume that it only operates through

its interactions with our friction variables and thus we do not have to estimate its

direct impact separately, which can only be done by excluding industry fixed effects.

       Columns 3 through 8 of Table 5 provide evidence for the impact of monitoring

costs on cross-border M&A through interactions of the monitoring importance

variable (M) with cross-border frictions. We introduce each interaction with a

different friction separately and then include all the interactions in the specification in

the last column. Separately, each of the interaction terms has the expected negative

coefficient and is statistically significant at the 1% level. Due to multicollinearity, the

individual coefficients on the interaction terms are generally insignificant in the last

column, except for the interaction with physical distance, but they are jointly

significant at the 1% level (F-test value of 21.95 with a p-value of 0.001). In total, these

results provide statistical evidence for the monitoring-cost effect on FDI.




                                             22
       It is noteworthy that there continues to be an independent negative correlation

between the physical and cultural friction variables even after introducing the

interaction terms, suggesting that the effects of the cross-border physical and cultural

distances on FDI are not solely due to monitoring costs. There are a number of other

reasons why these cross-border frictions may be substantial and independent of the

monitoring cost effect we estimate , including the difficulty of identifying appropriate

targets for acquisition in countries that are physically and culturally different. The size

of the direct effects of the cross-border frictions is significantly reduced when

introducing the interaction terms separately in columns 3-7, suggesting that

monitoring costs are a significant explanation for how these frictions affect FDI. The

magnitude of the coefficient on the physical distance effect falls by about 25% (from -

0.325 to -0.242) when the interaction of physical distance with monitoring importance

is introduced. Analogously, the magnitude of the coefficients on language distance,

cultural distance, colonial relationship, and religious distance fall by about 22%, 57%,

40%, and 9%, respectively. However, these reductions are less pronounced (or non-

existent) when all the interactions are included together in column 8, except for

physical distance. This evidence suggests that physical distance is the friction where

monitoring costs are mainly operating.

       To examine this further and gauge the economic significance of monitoring

costs, we use our column 8 estimates to calculate the marginal effect on cross-border

M&A activity when we increase monitoring importance by a standard deviation. This

effect works through the combined effect of its interactions with the cultural and




                                             23
physical distance friction terms. 13 At the mean of the other variables in the regressor

set, we find that a standard deviation increase in the monitoring importance is

associated with a decrease in M&A activity of 41.9%. This effect is statistically

significant at the 1% level. We also find that 92.6% of this effect is driven by the

interaction of monitoring importance with the physical distance term.



5.2. Robustness

We explore the robustness of our results in a variety of ways in this section. Perhaps

the most obvious check is to reduce our sample to only the cross-border M&A

transactions between OECD countries. As indicated earlier, the majority of cross-

border transactions in the world occur between the OECD countries and, relatedly,

these are the richer and more-developed countries. Because of this there may be

structural differences in how cultural and physical distance frictions operate on

international transactions between these countries than on transactions involving a

non-OECD country.

         Table 6 provides analogous statistical results for the sample of cross-border

M&A activity between OECD countries as what we reported in Table 5 for the full

sample. The results are qualitatively very similar. All the cultural and physical

distance frictions are negative and significant as with the full sample, and the other

control variables are generally the same sign. As with the full sample, the direct effect

of monitoring importance is insignficant (see column 2).                               The interactions of


13
  Again, we assume that the direct effect of monitoring importance, which is subsumed in the industry fixed
effects, is zero because we find it is always statistically insignificant in the wide variety of specifications we
have run.


                                                         24
monitoring importance with the physical and cultural distance frictions are also all

negative and statistically significant when introduced separately with the exception of

religious distance. When the full set of interactions of monitoring importance with

cultural and physical distance frictions are introduced in the final column of Table 6,

they all have the expected negative sign, but only colonial relationship is statistically

significant. However, just as with the full sample, these interactions are jointly

statistically significant at the 1% level and a one-standard deviation increase in

monitoring importance is associated with a nearly identical decline in the dependent

variable (40.7%) as in the full sample. Also, most of this joint effect (76.4%) is

operating through the interaction with the physical distance variable. In summary, the

results for the OECD-only sample is surprisingly similar to the full sample.

       Table 7 provides evidence that the joint significance of the monitoring-

importance interactions and their joint marginal impact on cross-border M&A activity

is robust to a variety of robustness checks. Columns 1 and 2 show results from the full

sample and the OECD-only sample that we just discussed. Column 3 shows the results

when we estimate our model on the sample of observations that involve a non-OECD

country. Columns 4 and 5 show that these key results are robust to whether we

examine the first half or second half of our sample. We find no statistical difference in

any of the monitoring-importance interactions across the two sub-samples. Column 6

shows the robustness of our result when we eliminate domestic acquisitions from our

sample. Domestic observations comprise a small fraction of our sample, but are also

unusual in that the cultural and physical distance variables take values indicating

complete absence of any cross-border distances for these observations.



                                            25
       Columns 7 through 9 examine the robustness of our results to variations in how

we measure monitoring importance. Recall from section 2 above that our monitoring

importance variable is an average measure across "cultural skills", "language skills",

and "monitoring skills" identified in the O*NET database. As an alternative, we created

a new measure of monitoring importance derived only from monitoring skills. We

then analogously created a cultural importance measure from the cultural skills data,

and a languge importance measure from the langugage skills data. We interacted this

new monitoring importance measure with physical distance (Dist), the language

importance measure with language distance (LangDist), and the cultural importance

measure with our remaining cultural distance variables (CultDist, NoColony, and

ReligDist). Column 7 shows that we get qualitatively identical results when we interact

these alternative skill importance variables with our cultural, language and physical

distance measures. In column 8, we form a principal component from these three

terms (monitoring importance, cultural importance, and language importance) and

interact the principal component with our cultural, language and physical distance

terms. This too yields qualitatively identical results. Lastly, in column 9, we strip down

the monitoring importance variable to just one of the thirteen O*NET occupational

skills - the "monitoring" skill. Once again we find qualitatively identical results.

       In summary, the evidence for a statistically and economically significant effect

of monitoring importance on cross-border M&A activity is highly robust across a

number of alternative samples and measures of monitoring importance. A standard

deviation increase in monitoring importance is associated with a decreased level of




                                             26
cross-border M&A activity that ranges from 27% to over 51%. Another robust result

is that the majority of this effect is operating through the physical distance term.



5.3. Monitoring importance explains a significant portion of the difference in cross-
border M&A activity across industrial sectors

Manufacturing has a disproportionate share of FDI activity in the world economy

relative to other sectors and it also has occupations that generally require less

monitoring skills. An important question is the extent to which this monitoring

importance can explain differences in cross-border M&A activity in manufacturing

versus other sectors. We use our estimates from the final column of Tables 5 and 6 to

directly examine this question.

       Table 8 provides our analysis for both the full sample (panel A) and the OECD-

only sample (panel B). The first column of data provides the predicted number of

bilateral cross-border M&As per 5-year period for 2-digit SIC codes connected with the

sector at the means of all the regressors. For example, the model's predicted number

of cross-border M&A between any pair of countries in the full sample during a five-

year period for a 2-digit SIC in manufacturing is 0.0254 at the means of the data. The

analogous number for a non-manufacturing 2-digit SIC is 0.0165. These averages

roughly double for the OECD-only sample with a 0.0489 predicted value for

manufacturing and 0.0334 for non-manufacturing.

       In column 2, we provide the predicted value of the dependent variable when we

modify the data so that the sector has the same level of monitoring importance as

manufacturing, keeping the level of all the other variables in the regressor set at their

means. Column 3 provides the percentage difference between columns 1 and 2 to show


                                            27
how much the predicted number of cross-border M&As changes when we put the

sector's monitoring importance at the same level as seen in manufacturing, and column

4 provides the F-test and associated p-value indicating the statistical significance of

this difference.

       As Table 8 shows, M&A activity would be higher for all non-manufacturing

sectors (with the exception of mining) if monitoring importance would be at the same

level as the manufacturing sector. On average, our estimates suggest that cross-border

M&A activity would be 50.3% higher in the non-manufacturing sectors in our full

sample, and 41.3% higher in the OECD-only sample. Non-manufacturing sectors are

very heterogeneous, spaning mining to services, so rows 3 through 9 provide the

analysis for these sectors at the 1-digit level.   The results follow directly from the

summary statistics in Table 1 indicating which sectors require a greater amount of

monitoring given their occupational composition. If monitoring importance were as

low as that required in manufacturing, the high-monitoring sectors of wholesale trade,

retail trade, and finance, insurance, and real estate would see their cross-border M&A

activity approximately double according to our estimates. There would be much

smaller increases (around 5-10%) in services, construction and transportation,

communications, and utilities, and an actual decrease of around 8-9% in the mining

sector where monitoring is less important than in manufacturing. Overall, monitoring

importance is a highly significant factor in explaining lower cross-border M&A activity

in non-manufacturing, especially for the wholesale trade, retail trade, and finance,

insurance, and real estate sectors.




                                            28
6. CONCLUSION

       Prior literature nearly always finds that physical and cultural distances

significantly impede a wide range of international economic phenomena. However,

while there are a myriad of possible explanations for why these frictions are so

significant, there is typically little evidence for which mechanisms are truly

responsible for their effects.

       In this paper, we provide a way to identify the role of monitoring costs as a

mechanism behind the deleterious effects of physical and cultural distance on cross-

border M&A activity, as proposed by Head and Ries (2008).             We find significant

evidence for this channel and show that differences in monitoring importance of

affiliates across industries can explain a significant portion of the variation in cross-

border M&A we observe across sectors of the economy.

       At the same time, we find that physical and cultural distances continue to have

a negative effect on cross-border M&A activity independent of the monitoring cost

mechanism, indicating that there are additional mechanisms that are salient for

understanding how and why these frictions matter. Further study to fully understand

the mechanisms behind the strong impact of physical and cultural distance is

important because industrial development and globalization is inherently linked to the

ability of firms to engage in cross-border M&A activity. In addition, policymakers often

pursue strategies to encourage FDI activity in order to improve employment and

productivity in their economies, but it is unlikely that their strategies will be effective

without better knowledge of the mechanisms that can impede FDI.




                                             29
References

Aizenman, J. and Spiegel, M. M. (2006). Institutional efficiency, monitoring costs and the
investment share of FDI. Review of International Economics, 14(4), 683-697.

Alfaro, L., Chanda, A., Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and Sayek, S. (2004). FDI and economic growth:
the role of local financial markets. Journal of international economics, 64(1), 89-112.

Anderson, T. (November 2014) "Operations of US affiliates of foreign companies,"
Survey of Current Business
(http://www.bea.gov/scb/pdf/2014/11%20November/1114_activities_of_u.s_affilia
tes_of_foreign_multinational_enterprises.pdf).

Barefoot, K.B. (November 2013) "U.S. multinational companies: Operations of U.S.
parents and foreign affiliates in 2011," Survey of Current Business
https://www.bea.gov/scb/pdf/2013/11%20November/1113_mnc.pdf

BénassyQuéré, A., Coupet, M., and Mayer, T. (2007). Institutional determinants of
foreign direct investment. World Economy, 30(5), 764-782.

Blonigen, B.A., (2015). Industrial policy and downstream export performance. The
Economic Journal, 126(595), 1635-1659.

Blonigen, B.A. and Piger, J. (2014). Determinants of foreign direct investment. Canadian
Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d'économique, 47(3), 775-812.

Chor, D. and Manova, K. (2012). Off the cliff and back? Credit conditions and
international trade during the global financial crisis. Journal of international
economics, 87(1), 117-133.

Davies, R.B., Desbordes, R., and Ray, A. (2018). Greenfield versus merger and acquisition
FDI: Same wine, different bottles?. Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne
d'économique, 51(4), 1151-1190.

Di Giovanni, J. (2005) "What drives capital flows? The case of cross-border M&A activity
and financial deepening," Journal of International Economics 65(1): 127-149.

Elrod, A.A., Lindberg, B.M. and Morgan, E.T. (May 2013). "Annual industry accounts:
Advance statistics on GDP by industry for 2012," Survey of Current Business
(http://www.bea.gov/scb/pdf/2013/05%20May/0513_annual_industry-accts-
text.pdf).

Erel, I., Liao, R. C., and Weisbach, M. S. (2012). "Determinants of crossborder mergers
and acquisitions," The Journal of Finance 67(3): 1045-1082.




                                             30
Felbermayr, G., and Jung, B. (2011) "Trade intermediation and the organization of
exporters," Review of International Economics 19(4): 634-648.

Feliciano, Z. M. and Sun, J. (2016) "Foreign entry into U.S. service industry by
takeovers and the creation of new firms," Contemporary Economic Policy 34(3): 500­
512.

Habib, M., & Zurawicki, L. (2002). Corruption and foreign direct investment. Journal of
International Business Studies, 33(2), 291-307.

Head, K. and Ries, J. (2008) "FDI as an outcome of the market for corporate control:
Theory and evidence," Journal of International Economics 74(1): 2-20.

Hijzen, A., Görg, H. and Manchin, M. (2008). "Cross-border mergers and acquisitions and
the role of trade costs," European Economic Review 52(5), 849-866.

Kleinert, J., and Toubal, F. (2013) "Production versus distribution-oriented FDI," Review
of World Economics 149(3): 423-442.

Kogut, B. and Singh, H. (1988). "The effect of national culture on the choice of entry
mode," Journal of International Business Studies, 19(3): 411-432.

Krautheim, S. (2013) "Exportsupporting FDI," Canadian Journal of Economics 46(4):
1571-1605.

Manova, K. (2008). Credit constraints, equity market liberalizations and international
trade. Journal of International Economics, 76(1), 33-47.

Melitz, J., & Toubal, F. (2014). Native language, spoken language, translation and
trade. Journal of International Economics, 93(2), 351-363.

Morosini, P., Shane, S. and Singh, H. (1998) "National cultural distance and cross-border
acquisition performance." Journal of International Business Studies 29(1): 137-158.

Raimondi, V., and Scoppola, M. (2018). Foreign Land Acquisitions and Institutional
Distance. Land Economics, 94(4), 517-540.

Ramasamy, B. and Yeung, M. (2010). "The determinants of foreign direct investment in
services," The World Economy 33(4): 573-596.

Rossi, S. and Volpin, P. F. (2004). "Cross-country determinants of mergers and
acquisitions," Journal of Financial Economics 74(2), 277-304.

Stein, E., & Daude, C. (2007). Longitude matters: Time zones and the location of foreign
direct investment. Journal of International Economics, 71(1), 96-112.



                                            31
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (2015) World
Investment Report: Reforming International Investment Governance. Geneva and New
York: United Nations.




                                        32
                  Table 1: Summary Statistics for the O*NET Variable
                                                     St.
Sector                                  Mean        Dev.     Min           Max      Obs.

All Sectors                                   0.060     0.050       0.012    0.239      70
  Manufacturing                               0.035     0.010       0.018    0.059      20
  Non-Manufacturing                           0.071     0.055       0.012    0.239      50
    Mining                                    0.025     0.012       0.015    0.041       4
    Construction                              0.038     0.014       0.030    0.055       3
    Transportation, communications,
       and utilities                          0.039     0.035       0.012    0.121       9
    Wholesale trade                           0.108     0.007       0.103    0.113       2
    Retail trade                              0.144     0.063       0.022    0.239       8
    Finance, insurance, and real estate       0.125     0.029       0.090    0.176       7
    Services                                  0.045     0.023       0.014    0.095      15
Notes: Authors calculations. O*NET variable is a measure of the importance of monitoring,
language and cultural skills needed for the composition of occupations in an industrial
sector. See text for further description of the construction of the measure.




                                         33
  Table 2: Sectors with Highest and Lowest Importance for Monitoring-
                             Related Skills

Panel A: Highest Ten Sectors for Monitoring- Related Skills
Sector                                              SIC        O*NET Value
Apparel and Accessory Stores                          56           0.239
Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers,              62           0.176
Exchanges, and Services
Building Materials, Hardware, Garden Supply, and      52           0.173
Mobile Home Dealers
Home Furniture, Furnishings, and Equipment            57           0.163
Stores
Miscellaneous Retail                                  59           0.159
General Merchandise Stores                            53           0.158
Holding and Other Investment Offices                  67           0.137
Automotive Dealers and Gasoline Service Stations      55           0.135
Insurance Agents, Brokers, and Service                64           0.134
Non-Depository Credit Institutions                    61           0.127

Panel B: Lowest Ten Sectors for Monitoring- Related Skills
Sector                                              SIC        O*NET Value
Local and Suburban Transit                            41           0.012
Legal Services                                        81           0.014
Transportation By Air                                 45           0.014
Railroad Transportation                               40           0.015
Coal Mining                                           12           0.015
Health Services                                       80           0.016
Metal Mining                                          10           0.019
Educational Services                                  82           0.021
Motor Freight Transportation and Warehousing          42           0.021
Eating and Drinking Places                            58           0.022

Notes: Authors calculations. The O*NET variable is a measure of the importance
of monitoring, language and cultural skills needed for the composition of
occupations in an industrial sector. See text for further description of the
construction of the measure.




                                        34
    Table 3: Sectoral Composition of Cross-border M&A Across
                        Different Samples
                                               Top 50     OECD

Manufacturing                                     38%         39%

Non-Manufacturing                                 62%         61%

 Mining                                            6%          5%
 Construction                                      1%          1%
 Transportation, communications,
                                                   9%          8%
      and utilities
 Wholesale trade                                   6%          6%
 Retail trade                                      3%          3%
 Finance, insurance and real estate               12%         11%
 Services                                         24%         26%
Notes: Data from Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum M&A Database, 1985-
2014. Top 50 and OECD sample of countries are defined in Appendix A.




                                  35
    Table 4: Share of Manufacturing in Domestic and Cross-border M&A for Various
                         Samples and Top 10 Target Countries
                           Domestic Acquisitions        Cross-border Acquisitions
                                   Non-  Share of          Non-  Share of
                         Manufac Manufac Manufac Manufac Manufac Manufac
                          turing  turing  turing  turing  turing  turing
 Top 50 Sample            131,545    346,296     0.28       50,289    82,537     0.38
 OECD Sample              109,843    294,606     0.27       37,732    59,261     0.39

 Top 10 Target Countries
 Australia Targets            2,812      14,471   0.16       1,441      4,951     0.23
 Canada Targets               3,667      17,743   0.17       2,561      5,911     0.30
 China Targets                6,338       8,596   0.42       2,487      3,318     0.43
 France Targets               7,332      12,910   0.36       3,829      4,477     0.46
 Germany Targets              8,014      12,601   0.39       5,326      5,809     0.48
 Italy Targets                3,024       5,360   0.36       2,220      2,041     0.52
 Netherlands Targets          1,735       4,426   0.28       1,592      2,653     0.38
 Spain Targets                3,035       6,963   0.30       1,560      2,917     0.35
 U.K. Targets                12,168      34,591   0.26       5,108     10,873     0.32
 U.S. Targets                46,595 134,520       0.26       9,649     16,034     0.38
Notes: Authors calculations using data from Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum M&A
Database, 1985-2014. Top 50 and OECD sample of countries are defined in Appendix A.




                                        35
       Table 5: Pseudo-Poisson Maximum Likelihood Estimates of the Determinants of Cross-Border M&A - Full Sample
Independent Variables               (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)          (8)

Dist                              -0.325***   -0.325***    -0.242***      -0.325***   -0.325***   -0.325***   -0.325***   -0.253***
                                   (0.024)     (0.024)      (0.043)        (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.050)
LangDist                          -0.993***   -0.993***    -0.991***      -0.772***   -0.988***   -0.993***   -0.993***   -0.963***
                                   (0.057)     (0.057)      (0.056)        (0.090)     (0.056)     (0.057)     (0.057)     (0.132)
CultDist                          -0.144***   -0.144***    -0.144***      -0.144***    -0.062*    -0.144***   -0.144***   -0.141***
                                   (0.019)     (0.019)      (0.019)        (0.019)     (0.035)     (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.032)
NoColony                          -0.496***   -0.496***    -0.498***      -0.496***   -0.497***   -0.297***   -0.496***   -0.446***
                                   (0.028)     (0.028)      (0.028)        (0.028)     (0.028)     (0.073)     (0.028)     (0.070)
ReligDist                         -1.697***   -1.697***    -1.700***      -1.698***   -1.697***   -1.697***   -1.537***   -1.725***
                                   (0.079)     (0.079)      (0.079)        (0.079)     (0.079)     (0.079)     (0.149)     (0.145)
Monitoring Importance (M)                       0.625
                                               (2.157)
M x Dist                                                   -1.318***                                                      -1.150**
                                                            (0.431)                                                        (0.555)
M x LangDist                                                              -3.658***                                         -0.459
                                                                           (1.253)                                         (1.956)
M x CultDist                                                                          -1.401***                             -0.061
                                                                                       (0.491)                             (0.306)
M x NoColony                                                                                      -3.248***                 -0.897
                                                                                                   (1.084)                 (1.286)
M x ReligDist                                                                                                  -2.527        0.392
                                                                                                              (2.149)      (1.998)
Contig                            0.313***    0.313***         0.315***   0.313***    0.313***    0.313***    0.313***    0.315***
                                  (0.037)     (0.037)          (0.038)    (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.037)      (0.038)




                                                          36
ComCurr                               -0.111***   -0.111***    -0.109***   -0.111***   -0.110***   -0.111***   -0.111***    -0.108**
                                       (0.042)     (0.042)      (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.042)      (0.042)
ComLegal                                0.049       0.049        0.048       0.049       0.048       0.049       0.049         0.047
                                       (0.038)     (0.038)      (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.038)      (0.038)
WTOFTA                                0.584***    0.584***     0.591***    0.584***    0.584***    0.584***    0.584***     0.592***
                                       (0.053)     (0.053)      (0.054)     (0.053)     (0.053)     (0.053)     (0.053)      (0.054)
Log GDP acquirer                      0.973***    0.973***     0.973***    0.973***    0.973***    0.973***    0.973***     0.973***
                                       (0.150)     (0.150)      (0.150)     (0.150)     (0.150)     (0.150)     (0.150)      (0.150)
Log GDP target                        0.729***    0.729***     0.728***    0.729***    0.729***    0.729***    0.729***     0.728***
                                       (0.179)     (0.179)      (0.179)     (0.179)     (0.179)     (0.179)     (0.179)      (0.179)
 Log pcGDP [Tar-Acq]                    -0.030      -0.030       -0.031      -0.030      -0.030      -0.030      -0.030       -0.031
                                       (0.193)     (0.193)      (0.193)     (0.193)     (0.193)     (0.193)     (0.193)      (0.193)
( Log pcGDP)^2                          0.008       0.008        0.008       0.008       0.008       0.008       0.008         0.008
                                       (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.008)
Log (1 + | CorpTax|)                   -0.453*     -0.453*      -0.440*     -0.454*     -0.453*     -0.453*     -0.453*      -0.442*
                                       (0.253)     (0.253)      (0.256)     (0.253)     (0.253)     (0.253)     (0.253)      (0.256)
Log (1 + | CorpTax|) * Acq High Tax     0.417*      0.417*       0.413*      0.417*      0.417*      0.417*      0.417*      0.413*
                                       (0.232)     (0.232)      (0.233)     (0.232)     (0.232)     (0.232)     (0.232)      (0.233)
BIT                                   -0.592***   -0.592***    -0.591***   -0.592***   -0.592***   -0.592***   -0.592***   -0.591***
                                       (0.062)     (0.062)      (0.062)     (0.062)     (0.062)     (0.062)     (0.062)      (0.062)
DTT                                   0.222***    0.222***     0.221***    0.222***    0.221***    0.222***    0.222***     0.221***
                                       (0.059)     (0.059)      (0.060)     (0.059)     (0.059)     (0.059)     (0.059)      (0.060)
Domestic                              1.726***    1.726***     1.722***    1.724***    1.726***    1.726***    1.726***     1.717***
                                       (0.071)     (0.071)      (0.071)     (0.072)     (0.071)     (0.071)     (0.071)      (0.072)
Constant                              -9.139***   -9.383***    -9.520***   -9.162***   -9.154***   -9.164***   -9.220***   -9.462***
                                       (0.621)     (0.722)      (0.691)     (0.624)     (0.623)     (0.624)     (0.634)      (0.698)

Industry Fixed Effects                  Yes          No            Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes



                                                              37
Target Country Fixed Effects              Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Acquirer Country Fixed Effects            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Year Effects                              Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes

Observations                             812,464       812,464      812,464   812,464      812,464     812,464    812,464        812,464
R-squared                                  0.843        0.235        0.847      0.841       0.842        0.841     0.843          0.846
F-test for Monitoring Interactions                                                                                                21.95
(p-value of F-test)                                                                                                              (0.001)
Notes: Coefficient estimates are from a Pseudo-Poisson Maximum Likelihood specification where the dependent variable is the number
of merger and acquisitions in a 2-digit SIC industry between a bilateral pair from the Top 50 countries (as defined in Appendix A) every
five-year period between 1985 and 2014. A description and sources for our independent variables are reported in Appendix B.
Standard errors, clustered at the 2-digit SIC level, are in parentheses below each coefficient estimate. We denote coefficients that have a
p-value less than 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 with ***, **, and *, respectively.




                                                              38
        Table 6: Pseudo-Poisson Maximum Likelihood Estimates of the Determinants of Cross-Border M&A - OECD only
Independent Variables             (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)        (8)

Dist                           -0.694***   -0.694***   -0.627***   -0.694***   -0.694***   -0.694***   -0.693***   -0.643***
                                (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.048)     (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.050)
LangDist                       -0.936***   -0.936***   -0.934***   -0.734***   -0.933***   -0.936***   -0.936***   -0.917***
                                (0.064)     (0.064)     (0.065)     (0.114)     (0.065)     (0.064)     (0.064)     (0.150)
CultDist                       -0.077***   -0.077***   -0.077***   -0.077***     0.003     -0.077***   -0.077***   -0.074***
                                (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.036)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.020)
NoColony                       -0.406***   -0.406***   -0.408***   -0.406***   -0.407***   -0.218***   -0.406***   -0.314***
                                (0.033)     (0.033)     (0.034)     (0.033)     (0.033)     (0.082)     (0.033)     (0.047)
ReligDist                      -1.433***   -1.433***   -1.434***   -1.433***   -1.434***   -1.433***   -1.177***   -1.380***
                                (0.093)     (0.093)     (0.093)     (0.093)     (0.092)     (0.093)     (0.186)     (0.162)
Monitoring Importance (M)                    0.422
                                            (2.118)
M x Dist                                               -1.091**                                                     -0.826
                                                        (0.448)                                                    (0.566)
M x LangDist                                                       -3.369**                                         -0.282
                                                                    (1.408)                                        (2.151)
M x CultDist                                                                   -1.369**                             -0.053
                                                                                (0.622)                            (0.267)
M x NoColony                                                                               -3.085***               -1.608*
                                                                                            (1.191)                (0.832)
M x ReligDist                                                                                           -4.077      -0.918
                                                                                                       (2.854)     (2.417)
Contig                          0.070*     0.070*        0.070     0.070*      0.070*      0.070*      0.070*       0.069
                                (0.042)    (0.042)      (0.042)    (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.042)




                                                       39
ComCurr                           -0.108***   -0.108***   -0.107***   -0.109***   -0.108***   -0.108***   -0.108***   -0.106***
                                    (0.035)     (0.035)     (0.036)     (0.035)     (0.036)     (0.035)     (0.035)     (0.036)
ComLegal                              0.013       0.013      0.013       0.013       0.011       0.013       0.013       0.013
                                    (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.034)
WTOFTA                                0.030       0.030      0.034       0.029       0.029       0.030       0.030       0.035
                                    (0.079)     (0.079)     (0.080)     (0.079)     (0.079)     (0.079)     (0.079)     (0.080)
Log GDP acquirer                    0.411*      0.411*      0.412*      0.411*      0.411*      0.411*      0.411*      0.412*
                                    (0.216)     (0.216)     (0.216)     (0.216)     (0.216)     (0.216)     (0.216)     (0.216)
Log GDP target                       -0.243      -0.243      -0.245      -0.243      -0.243      -0.243      -0.244      -0.245
                                    (0.307)     (0.307)     (0.307)     (0.307)     (0.307)     (0.307)     (0.307)     (0.307)
 Log pcGDP [Tar-Acq]                 -0.048      -0.048      -0.047      -0.048      -0.048      -0.048      -0.047      -0.046
                                    (0.274)     (0.274)     (0.274)     (0.274)     (0.274)     (0.274)     (0.274)     (0.274)
( Log pcGDP)^2                    -0.278***   -0.278***   -0.278***   -0.278***   -0.278***   -0.278***   -0.278***   -0.278***
                                    (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.047)
Log (1 + | CorpTax|)               -0.687**    -0.687**    -0.678**    -0.688**    -0.688**    -0.687**    -0.687**    -0.678**
                                    (0.312)     (0.312)     (0.315)     (0.312)     (0.312)     (0.312)     (0.312)     (0.315)
Log (1 + | CorpTax|) * Acq High
Tax                                0.735***    0.735***   0.732***    0.735***    0.735***    0.735***    0.735***    0.732***
                                   (0.281)     (0.281)     (0.282)     (0.281)     (0.281)     (0.281)     (0.282)     (0.282)
BIT                               -0.537***   -0.537***   -0.537***   -0.537***   -0.537***   -0.537***   -0.537***   -0.537***
                                   (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.054)
DTT                                0.881***    0.881***   0.881***    0.881***    0.881***    0.881***    0.881***    0.881***
                                   (0.078)     (0.078)     (0.078)     (0.078)     (0.078)     (0.078)     (0.078)     (0.078)
Domestic                           1.487***    1.487***   1.484***    1.484***    1.486***    1.487***    1.486***    1.479***
                                   (0.088)     (0.088)     (0.087)     (0.087)     (0.088)     (0.088)     (0.087)     (0.087)
Constant                           7.496***    7.333***   7.198***    7.478***    7.487***    7.475***    7.368***    7.240***
                                   (1.990)     (2.083)     (2.012)     (1.991)     (1.991)     (1.992)     (2.011)     (2.022)




                                                          40
Industry Fixed Effects                 Yes          No            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Target Country Fixed Effects           Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Acquirer Country Fixed Effects         Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Year Effects                           Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

Observations                            309,060       309,060     309,060     309,060      309,060    309,060       309,060      309,060
R-squared                                0.878         0.238       0.880        0.877       0.878       0.877        0.878        0.879
F-test for Monitoring Interactions                                                                                                19.57
(p-value of F-test)                                                                                                              (0.002)
Notes: Coefficient estimates are from a Pseudo-Poisson Maximum Likelihood specification where the dependent variable is the number
of merger and acquisitions in a 2-digit SIC industry between a bilateral pair from the Top 50 countries (as defined in Appendix A) every
five-year period between 1985 and 2014. A description and sources for our independent variables are reported in Appendix B. Standard
errors, clustered at the 2-digit SIC level, are in parentheses below each coefficient estimate. We denote coefficients that have a p-value
less than 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 with ***, **, and *, respectively.




                                                             41
                  Table 7: Marginal Effect of Monitoring Costs on Cross-border M&A Activity and Robustness of the Effect

                                                                                     Eliminate      Separate                      O*NET
                                   Full               Non-      1985-     2000-      domestic        O*NET        Principal      Monitoring
                                 Sample    OECD       OECD      1999      2014         M&As        Categories    components        Skill

 F-Test for Joint Significance
 of Monitoring Interactions       21.95     19.57     49.15     15.94      23.10       25.39          21.20          22.76           22.64
 (p-value)                       (0.000)   (0.002)   (0.000)   (0.007)    (0.000)     (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.000)         (0.000)

 Reduction in Cross-Border
 M&A Activity for a Standard
 Deviation Increase in
 Monitoring Importance           41.9%     36.5%      51.4%     38.7%     43.0%        41.6%          42.4%          27.0%          39.3%
 F-test                           13.31      7.32     21.31     7.57       13.44       7.02           14.60          10.66           11.18
 (p-value)                       (0.000)   (0.007)   (0.000)   (0.006)    (0.000)     (0.008)        (0.000)        (0.011)         (0.001)

 Share of Distance Term in the
 Overall Reduction                92.6%       76.1%      92.2%   71.3%     99.1%          99.8%          91.7%         95.9%          93.7%
Notes: Calculations from estimations using a Pseudo-Poisson Maximum Likelihood specification where the dependent variable is the
number of merger and acquisitions in a 2-digit SIC industry between bilateral pairs of countries every 5-year period where the sample of
countries and time period varies according to the column heading. Except for columns titled "OECD" and "non-OECD", the sample of
countries includes all top 50 countries in the full sample.




                                                                  42
                     Table 8: The Effect of Monitoring Costs on Predicted Cross-Border M&A by Sector


PANEL A: Full Sample
                                             Predicted Value of the
                                              Dependent Variable
                                                         With the Same                        F-test
                                                           Monitoring                       statistical
                                          At Means of       Costs as          Percent      significance
                                             Data        Manufacturing       Difference     (p-value)     Observations
Manufacturing                                0.0254           0.0254             ----          ----          238,960
Non-Manufacturing                            0.0165           0.0248              50.3%    5.44 (0.020)      573,504
 Mining                                      0.0234           0.0211               -9.8%   7.63 (0.007)       47,792
 Construction                                0.0177           0.0184                4.0%   6.96 (0.008)       35,844
 Transportation, communications,
     and utilities                           0.0154           0.0161              4.5%     6.96 (0.008)      107,532
 Wholesale trade                             0.0548           0.1209            120.6%     4.09 (0.043)       23,896
 Retail trade                                0.0090           0.0293            225.6%     3.17 (0.075)       95,584
 Finance, insurance, and real estate         0.0391           0.1032            163.9%     3.62 (0.057)       83,636
 Services                                    0.0121           0.0136             12.4%     6.61 (0.010)      179,220




                                                        43
 PANEL B: OECD-only Sample
                                                 Predicted Value of the
                                                  Dependent Variable
                                                             With the Same                            F-test
                                                               Monitoring                           statistical
                                              At Means of       Costs as             Percent       significance
 Sector                                          Data        Manufacturing          Difference      (p-value)       Observations
 Manufacturing                                     0.0489               0.0489            ----            ----            90,900
 Non-Manufacturing                                 0.0334               0.0472             41.3%      3.29 (0.070)       218,160
   Mining                                          0.0406               0.0373              -8.1%     4.63 (0.031)        18,180
   Construction                                    0.0334               0.0346               3.6%     4.64 (0.031)        13,635
   Transportation, communications,
       and utilities                               0.0292               0.0304               4.1%     4.57 (0.033)        40,905
   Wholesale trade                                 0.1157               0.2256             95.0%      2.46 (0.117)         9,090
   Retail trade                                    0.0200               0.0540            170.0%      1.87 (0.171)        36,360
   Finance, insurance, and real estate             0.0777               0.1764            127.0%      2.16 (0.142)        31,815
   Services                                        0.0258               0.0284             10.1%      4.17 (0.041)        68,175
Notes: The first column of data provides the predicted number of bilateral cross-border M&As per 5-year period for 2-digit
SIC codes connected with the listed sector at the means of all the regressors. Predictions are based on the estimates from
column 8 of Table 5 for Panel A (full sample) and column 8 of Table 6 for Panel B (OECD-only sample). Column 2 provides
the predicted value of the dependent variable when we modify the data so that the sector has the same level of monitoring
importance (M) as manufacturing, keeping the level of all other variables in the regressor set at their means. Column 3
provides the percentage difference between columns 1 and 2 to show how much the predicted number of cross-border
M&As changes when we put the sector's monitoring importance the same as manufacturing, and column 4 provides the F-
test and associated p-value indicating the statistical significance of this difference.




                                                              44
                           Appendix A
  OECD Countries and Additional Countries Comprising the Top 50
             Target Countries for Cross-border M&A
                                           Additional Top 50
        OECD Countries                      Target Countries
Australia        Luxembourg            Argentina   Malaysia
Austria          Mexico                Brazil      Peru
Belgium          Netherlands           Bulgaria    Philippines
Canada           New Zealand           Chile       Romania
Czech Republic   Norway                China       Russia
Denmark          Poland                Colombia    Singapore
Finland          Portugal              Hong Kong   South Africa
France           South Korea           Iceland     Taiwan
Germany          Spain                 India       Thailand
Greece           Sweden                Indonesia   Ukraine
Hungary          Switzerland           Israel      Vietnam
Ireland          Turkey
Italy            United Kingdom
Japan            United States




                                  45
                                              Appendix B
                                    Variable Description and Sources


Dependent Variable

Merger and Acquistion (M&A) Activity

Count of M&A transactions from one country (acquirer country) into another country
(target country) in a 2-digit SIC sector during a five-year period starting with the 1985-
1989 period through the 2010-2014 period. Thomson Reuters SDC SDC Platinum M&A
Database is the source for these data.


Independent Variables

1. Monitoring Importance (M)

The Occupational Information Network (O*NET) developed by the U.S. Department of
Labor provides information on the skills and abilities required in over 950 occupations
within the U.S. economy. This can be accessed at the website:
https://www.onetonline.org.

For each occupation, experts assess and rank the relevance of 35 distinct skill
categories (e.g., coordination, negotiation, active listening, etc.). We focus on skills for
which the relevance of each skill is evaluated in two ways: 1) the "importance" of a skill
in a given occupation is measured by a score from 1 (less important) to 5 (very
important); and 2) the "level" of a skill required in a given occupation is measured by a
score from 0 (minimum level) to 7 (highest proficiency level). The two scores need not
be correlated, for example, when a particular skill such as speaking comprehension is
very important in a particular occupation, however at a level that is not very advanced
or very sophisticated.

We identify 13 skills that are potentially related to monitoring an affiilate in a foreign
country and list them here with their O*NET description 14:

Monitoring skills:

       a) Coordination - Adjusting actions in relation to others' actions.
       b) Management of material resources - Obtaining and seeing to the appropriate
          use of equipment, facilities, and materials needed to do certain work.
       c) Management of personnel - Motivating, developing, and directing people as
          they work, identifying the best people for the job.


14
     The full list of O*NET skills are at https://www.onetonline.org/find/descriptor/browse/Skills/.


                                                          46
   d) Monitoring - Monitoring/Assessing performance of yourself, other individuals,
      or organizations to make improvements or take corrective action

Cultural skills:

   a)   Negotiation - Bringing others together and trying to reconcile differences.
   b)   Persuasion - Persuading others to change their minds or behavior.
   c)   Service orientation - Actively looking for ways to help people.
   d)   Social perceptiveness - Being aware of others' reactions and understanding
        why they react as they do.

Language skills:

   a) Active listening - Giving full attention to what other people are saying, taking
      time to understand the points being made, asking questions as appropriate, and
      not interrupting at inappropriate times.
   b) Instructing - Teaching others how to do something.
   c) Reading comprehension - Understanding written sentences and paragraphs in
      work related documents.
   d) Speaking - Talking to others to convey information effectively.
   e) Writing - Communicating effectively in writing as appropriate for the needs of
      the audience.

To construct an O*NET skill score for each of the 13 skills at the 2-digit SIC industry
level, we implement the following steps:

1. For each skill level by occupation, we multiply the importance score by the level
   score to obtain a unique ranking value of that skill for that occupation. We then
   rescale the resulting score to take values between 0-1.
2. Occupations in O*NET database are recorded using SOC 8-digit classification for
   2010. We average the unique O*NET occupation scores at the SOC 6-digit level and
   then use a crosswalk to convert the 2010 SOC codes to the corresponding 2000 SOC
   codes (using a crosswalk provided by the BLS:
   https://www.bls.gov/soc/soc_2000_to_2010_crosswalk.xls).
3. We collected data from the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Survey
   provided by the BLS on employment by 2-digit SIC sectors across SOC occupation
   codes for year 2000 (https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm) and then construct for each
   2-digit SIC industry the employment share of all occupations related to Management
   (SOC 11), Business and Financial Operations (SOC 13), as well as Sales and Related
   occupations (SOC 41).
4. Using 2000 SOC codes as identifiers, we merge the O*NET occupation scores with
   the employment shares of managerial/business/sales occupations within each 2-
   digit SIC industries.
5. Using the 2000 employment shares as weights, we aggregate the O*NET skill scores
   across the selected managerial/business/sales occupations to obtain average
   O*NET skill scores at SIC 2-digit level.


                                            47
As described in the text, our primary measure of monitoring importance takes the
simple average of these 13 O*NET skill scores.


2. Geographic distance (Dist)

This is a population-weighted bilateral distance measure that comes from the GeoDist
database at CEPII (http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=6).
A benefit of using CEPII data is that it provides information on internal distances for our
observations where the acquirer and target countries are the same (i.e., domestic M&A)


3. Language distance (LangDist)

We begin with a measure of common native languages between countries that is a
continuous variable between 0 and 1 measuring the percentage of people from each
country that share a common native language. This was developed by Melitz and
Toubal, 2014, and is available as part of the Language database at CEPII:
http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=19. We construct our
language distance variable as 1 minus the common native language value.


4. Cultural distance (CultDist)

As described in the text, we use Kogut and Singh's (1988) approach to constructing
this variable which is a composite index formed based on the weighted difference
between the four cultural dimensions (i.e. power distance, uncertainty avoidance,
masculinity/femininity, and individualism) of each country. Algebraically, this
composite index is constructed as follows:
                                            4
                                  =
                                  CDij     {( I   ci   - I cj ) 2 / Vc }/ 4
                                           c =1                 ,
where     stands for the host country i's cth cultural dimension,             is the home country
j's cth cultural dimension,   is the variance of the cth dimension,              is the cultural
distance index between the host country i and home country j. The cultural dimensions
needed to construct this index are taken from Geert Hofstede's website at
http://www.geerthofstede.nl/dimension-data-matrix.


5. No Former Colonial Relationship (NoColony)

We define an indicator of colony that takes the value of 1 if either the target nation was
a colony of the acquirer nation, or vice-versa. For each pair of countries, we construct



                                            48
an indicator for not having a former (or current) colonial relationship as 1 minus the
colony variable.


6. Religious distance (ReligDist)

We use information from the CIA Factbook on the fraction of population in a country
assigned to one of the following religions: Catholic, protestant, Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu,
Orthodox or Jewish. (https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/).
We construct a common religion index between two countries by summing the
products of population shares with the same religion; this leads to a continuous index
between 0 and 1, and then define the religious distance variable as 1 minus the common
religion index.


7. Contiguity (Contig)

An indicator variable for whether the two countries share a border. We source this
variable from the CEPII Gravity database:
(http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=8)


8. Common currency (ComCurr)

An indicator variable for whether the two countries share a common currency. We
source this variable from the CEPII Gravity database:
(http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=8)


9. Common legal system (ComLegal)

An indicator variable for whether the two countries share a common legal system. We
source this variable from the CEPII Gravity database:
(http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=8)


10. FTA participation (WTOFTA)

An indicator variable for whether two countries have a bilateral free trade agreement
with each other based on information available from the WTO. We source this variable
from the CEPII Gravity database:
(http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=8)


11. GDP and per-capita GDP terms (Log GDP Acquirer, Log GDP Target,  Log
    pcGDP [Tar-Acq], and ( Log pcGDP)^2)


                                           49
GDP and population data come from World Bank's World Development Indicators
(WDI) database: https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-development-
indicators. In the few instances where either population or GDP data were missing, we
used linear interpolations to fill in the missing values. We then constructed 5-year
logged average values of GDP and GDP per capita.  Log pcGDP [Tar-Acq] is constructed
as the difference in the per-capita GDP of the target country and the per-capita GDP of
the acquirer country, and ( Log pcGDP)^2 is the square of  Log pcGDP [Tar-Acq].


12. Corporate tax rate differentials and its interaction with a "high tax" indicator
    variable (Log (1 + | CorpTax|) and Log (1 + | CorpTax|) * Acq High Tax)
We get information on the statutory corporate tax rate from two sources. The first is
the World Tax Database provided by the Office of Tax Policy Research at the University
of Michigan: https://www.bus.umich.edu/otpr/otpr/default.asp. This contains tax rate
information for a large set of countries spanning the period from 1985 to 2002. Our
second data source, KPMG provides more recent statutory tax rate information
covering the period from 2003 to 2014 and is available at:
https://home.kpmg/mm/en/home/services/tax/tax-tools-and-resources/tax-rates-
online/corporate-tax-rates-table.html.

We combine the two data sources and limit the country sample to the top 50 FDI
countries. For each country pair, we then construct the tax rate differential as the
natural log of 1 plus the absolute difference in corporate tax rates. In this way, two
countries with the same tax rates will have a tax differential of zero. We also construct
an indicator variable equal to 1 if the acquirer nation is the country with the higher tax
rate within a given pair of countries, and interact it with the tax rate differential
variable. This interaction term can capture any differences in cross-border M&A activity
driven by high tax acquirers looking to buy foreign affiliates in low tax jurisdictions.


13. Bilateral investment treaty (BIT)
We collected information on bilateral investment treaties (BITs) from the United
Nation's Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD):
https://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/IIA. We construct an indicator variable for
whether the bilateral pair of countries had a BIT "in force" during any year of the
associated five-year interval.


14. Double taxation treaty (DTT)
Data were drawn from International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation (IBFD) website
(https://www.ibfd.org) at their treaty look-up page:

https://online.ibfd.org/kbase/#topic=d&N=3+10+5302+4932&ownSubscription=false
&Ne=4912&Nu=global_rollup_key&Np=2&colid=4932&Ns=sort_country_one%7C0%7C




                                           50
%7Csort_country_two%7C0%7C%7Csort_organization_one%7C0%7C%7Cibfd-tt-
title%7C0%7C%7Cibfd-tt-signdate-s%7C0&rpp=25&WT.i_s_type=Navigation

We used the following criteria to determine a year for the presence of a double taxation
treaty between two countries:

1) Only sampled treaties involving agreements about taxation of income and/or capital.
2) Used the latest of "Effective" or "Signed" date, provided both have occurred.

We then construct the variable to take the value of "1" if a signed and effective treaty is
present between the acquirer and target country at any time during the associated five-
year interval.




                                            51
