                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE ALTRUISM BUDGET:
                MEASURING AND ENCOURAGING CHARITABLE GIVING

                                             Laura K. Gee
                                            Jonathan Meer

                                        Working Paper 25938
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25938


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2019




We thank Tricia Bromley, Valerie Dao, Christine Exley, Judd Kessler, and Woody Powell for valuable
comments. Benjamin Priday provided excellent assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Laura K. Gee and Jonathan Meer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Altruism Budget: Measuring and Encouraging Charitable Giving
Laura K. Gee and Jonathan Meer
NBER Working Paper No. 25938
June 2019, Revised August 2019
JEL No. D64,H41

                                              ABSTRACT

Much of the research on charitable giving has concentrated on how to increase monetary donations
to a single organization. But do activities that increase donations to one non-profit or through one method
come at the expense of others? This chapter examines the state of the literature on the "altruism budget."
We first discuss whether an act needs to be totally unselfish to be counted in the altruism budget. We
then examine the various components that go into the altruism budget, including but not limited to
monetary donations, volunteered time, and in-kind gifts. The remainder of the chapter discusses the
research on whether the altruism budget is fixed across gifts to different non-profits, in different forms,
or at different times. Overall, the evidence is decidedly mixed on whether the altruism budget is fixed
or flexible. Perhaps surprisingly, gifts at one point in time do not seem to be neutralized through lower
giving later. But the impact on contemporaneous gifts to other charities, or through other forms of
giving, is more difficult to summarize.


Laura K. Gee
Economics Department
Tufts University
8 Upper Campus Road
Braker Hall, Medford, MA 02155
laura.gee@tufts.edu

Jonathan Meer
Department of Economics
TAMU 4228
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
jmeer@econmail.tamu.edu
