                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT'S EFFECTS ON PATIENTS, PROVIDERS AND THE ECONOMY:
                      WHAT WE'VE LEARNED SO FAR

                                        Jonathan Gruber
                                      Benjamin D. Sommers

                                       Working Paper 25932
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25932


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2019




  The authors wish to acknowledge the helpful feedback of Bob Kaestner, Erdal Tekin, and an
  anonymous reviewer, as well as the assistance of Aurora De Mattia in our literature review. The
  views expressed here are our own, and any remaining errors are of course our responsibility. The
  views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2019 by Jonathan Gruber and Benjamin D. Sommers. All rights reserved. Short sections of
  text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
  credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Affordable Care Act's Effects on Patients, Providers and the Economy: What We've
Learned So Far
Jonathan Gruber and Benjamin D. Sommers
NBER Working Paper No. 25932
June 2019
JEL No. H3,H51,I13,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

As we approach the tenth anniversary of the passage of the Affordable Care Act, it is important to
reflect on what has been learned about the impacts of this major reform. In this paper we review
the literature on the impacts of the ACA on patients, providers and the economy. We find strong
evidence that the ACA's provisions have increased insurance coverage. There is also a clearly
positive effect on access to and consumption of health care, with suggestive but more limited
evidence on improved health outcomes. There is no evidence of significant reductions in provider
access, changes in labor supply, or increased budgetary pressures on state governments, and the
law's total federal cost through 2018 has been less than predicted. We conclude by describing
key policy implications and future areas for research.


Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E52-434
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu

Benjamin D. Sommers
Harvard T.H. Chan School of
 Public Health
Department of Health Policy
 and Management
677 Huntington Avenue
Kresge 406
Boston, MA 02115
bsommers@hsph.harvard.edu
       In March 2010, the U.S. Congress passed the Affordable Care Act (ACA), perhaps the

most significant expansion of the U.S. social safety net since the Great Society programs of the

1960s. Among other things, the law newly regulated individual insurance markets, mandated

individual purchase of insurance, heavily subsidized the purchase of insurance for low income

populations, reduced Medicare reimbursement of insurance companies and hospitals, and

imposed new taxes on wealthy households and the medical sector.

       It has now been almost ten years since the law was passed, and more than five since the

most significant provisions were implemented in January 2014. In response to the law's

implementation, the health economics and health services research communities have published

hundreds of articles evaluating the impact of the law on a wide variety of outcomes for

individuals, firms, medical providers, and governments.

       In this article, we assess what we have learned about the impact of the ACA in four

domains: health insurance coverage; health care utilization and health outcomes; health care

provider access and payment; and economic implications for employment and government

budgets. We do not do a formal meta-analysis nor do we review every paper written on these

topics over the past decade; rather, we review key findings from important studies, highlighting

the methodological approaches and challenges in this literature and pointing to unanswered

questions and future research opportunities.

       Notably, this review does not cover a large body of economic research related to the

ACA beyond the primary outcomes described above. Dozens of studies not described here

examine important questions including (but not limited to) the impact of exchange structure and

regulations on premiums, the proper design of risk adjustment within exchanges, determinants of

consumer plan choices within the marketplace, and the effects of provider networks.



                                                2
       An important point that we emphasize throughout is the increasing difficulty of

associating effects that are more indirect with a policy change of this magnitude. For example,

there are direct impacts of the ACA on insurance coverage that are large relative to other

underlying factors that drive insurance coverage in the U.S. For such impacts, time series

comparisons can convincingly demonstrate the significant impact of the ACA, and well-

identified empirical approaches leveraging state and country-level variation yield estimates that

are plausibly interpreted as causal.

       There are also more indirect or downstream impacts on health care utilization and health

outcomes ­ such as chronic disease outcomes and mortality ­ which are harder to uncover due to

other trends that might be offsetting or augmenting the offsetting the impacts of the ACA, and

the fact that insurance coverage is itself only responsible for a share of the variation in these

outcomes. For these downstream impacts, it is critical to use approaches that capture other time

series factors that might affect outcomes, but sufficient variation and data adequacy often limit

our ability to draw rigorous and sufficiently precise estimates of the ACA's effects. We discuss

the primary methods that have been used in the attempt to measure these other effects, as well as

the main limitations in these domains. Finally, we also assess the literature on the ACA's

potential non-health related impacts such as employment or government budget changes.

       Our paper begins with a brief overview of the key features of the Affordable Care Act. A

more comprehensive overview of the entire legislation is available elsewhere.1 Here, we focus

on providing a summary of the key provisions that are likely to be central for impacts on the

outcomes we consider. We then turn to a review of the evidence in the domains noted above,

before drawing conclusions about what we have learned.




                                                  3
Part I: The Affordable Care Act: Major Features and Evaluation Approaches

       The ACA was a multi-faceted law that touched almost every aspect of the health care

system in one way or another.1 Some of its provisions never became law, such as a new program

for long-term care insurance (the ill-fated CLASS Act). Others have been repeatedly delayed

and may never see the light of day, such as the "Cadillac Tax" on high-cost employer insurance

plans. Many other provisions were focused on specific populations, such as Native Americans,

which will not be the focus of this review.2 And other provisions were focused primarily on cost

control, such as a wide variety of experiments with health care delivery reform.3

       Our focus in this paper will be on the provisions of the ACA that are most central to

health insurance coverage. These include primarily:

Insurance Market Regulation: The ACA imposed community rating regulations (which were

already in place in several states) nation-wide, ending the ability of insurers to exclude pre-

existing conditions, to deny insurance issue or reenrollment based on health, or to set premiums

according to health status. The ACA also included other insurance market regulations, such as a

mandate that family insurance plans allow young adults to remain as dependents on their parents'

coverage until the age of 26, and an annual limit on enrollees' out-of-pocket costs (currently

$6,600 for individuals and $13,200 for families).

Individual Mandate: The ACA imposed an individual mandate on all legal residents to purchase

insurance (excluding those for whom the lowest-cost insurance option costs more than 8% of

income), and a tax penalty of the larger of $695 or 2.5% of taxable income for not buying

insurance. This tax penalty for the mandate was reduced to zero, however, as part of the Tax

Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.




                                                  4
Medicaid Expansions: The ACA expanded Medicaid eligibility to all qualifying legal residents

(U.S. citizens and legal permanent residents after a 5-year waiting period) with incomes below

138% of the poverty line. This change moved the program for the first time to a purely means-

tested program, rather than one based on categorical eligibility (such as parental status or

pregnancy, disability, or age group ­ i.e. children and the elderly). However, subsequent to the

passage of the ACA, the Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that this Medicaid expansion was optional

for states. As a result, only 25 states (plus Washington DC) initially adopted the Medicaid

expansion, while another 11 states have since expanded their programs, as of April 2019

(including 3 states that passed ballot referenda in 2018 but have yet to implement the

expansion).4

State Exchanges and Premium Tax Credits: The law also established state insurance exchanges,

which are regulated marketplaces through which individuals could shop for insurance (along

with parallel exchanges for small businesses that never really emerged as a viable option). These

exchanges were intended to be state-run but a lack of interest and/or capacity in many states led

to the creation of a federal backstop (healthcare.gov), to which the majority of the states turned

for their exchange enrollment.

       The basic structure of the exchanges was a set of generosity tiers (bronze, silver, gold and

platinum) distinguished by the actuarial value of all plans offered on the tier (60, 70, 80 and

90%, respectively). Some states, such as California or Massachusetts, went further in regulating

the cost sharing structure of plans on each tier or offering additional subsidies.

       The ACA also introduced generous advanced premium tax credits designed to help offset

the cost of insurance for those with incomes between 100 and 400% of the poverty line who

were not eligible for Medicaid or Medicare. In particular, the value of tax credits is the difference




                                                  5
between a statutorily-determined percentage of income and the cost of the second-lowest silver

plan available on the exchanges. For instance, individuals with incomes at 133% of poverty are

required to pay 3% of their income for health insurance, and the government will pay the rest;

this percentage rises to 9.5% of income by 400% of poverty, with no subsidies above that level.

In addition, cost sharing subsidies (CSRs) provided additional coverage for out-of-pocket costs

to those below 250% of the poverty line.

       Given these provisions, the literature on the impacts of the ACA has focused on six

different identification strategies to address the issues raised in the introduction. In reviewing

the studies in the tables below, we will denote the type of identification strategy that is used in

the study.

       Some studies are just time series (TS) analyses, relying on sharp breaks in the series to

illustrate causal impacts; others are purely cross-sectional comparisons (CS), that use

multivariate regression analysis to control for confounding factors. A number of studies rely on

the dependent coverage provisions of the law (DCP), typically by comparing outcomes for those

below and above age 26 over time. Perhaps the most common empirical strategy is to use the

fact that the Medicaid expansions (ME) took place in different states over different times,

allowing for a difference-in-difference research design. Some studies use a regression

discontinuity design that relies, for example, on specific income cutoffs for income subsidies or

mandate enforcement (RDD). Finally, some studies use triple-difference strategies (DDD) based

on variation in rules by state (or county), year, and a third category, which in various studies has

included income groups (as a measure of eligibility for subsidized coverage), area pre-ACA

uninsured rates or poverty rates (as a measure of geographic expansion intensity), or racial/ethnic

groupings (to study disparities).




                                                  6
Part II: Effects of the ACA on Insurance Coverage

        One of the main goals ­ if not the primary goal ­ of the ACA was to expand insurance

coverage in the U.S. It is important to note that this is related to, but distinct from, the goal of

increasing access to health care and thereby improving health (reviewed in the next section).          In

traditional economic terms, the central role of any kind of insurance is financial protection, not

health improvement. Market failures ­ primarily adverse selection ­ in the individual insurance

markets before the ACA resulted in the lack of fairly-priced coverage limited coverage in this

market and put a significant number of persons at financial risk. Through community rating and

guaranteed issue, the ACA ended discrimination based on health status. Combining these new

provisions with mandated participation to address adverse selection as well as generous means-

tested subsidies through Medicaid and premium tax credits, the ACA endeavored to provide

financial protection to millions of Americans.

        Figure 1 shows the uninsurance rate in the U.S. over the past three decades. Uninsurance

rose modestly throughout the 1990s and 2000s, with deviations from trend that match economic

conditions. The rate rose again during the "great recession" of the late 2000s, before declining in

the early 2010s as the economy improved.

        The striking break in the rate after 2014 is notable. From 2013 to 2016, the uninsured

rate among non-elderly U.S. residents fell from 16.6% to 10.4%, according the National Health

Interview Survey, with the latter figure representing the lowest level in U.S. history.5 There is no

plausible reason for this radical deviation from trend other than the passage of the ACA, with

projections in the absence of the ACA showing little to no major changes in coverage rates.6,7




                                                   7
       Further evidence of the role of the ACA is provided by the recent plateauing or possibly

even an increase in the uninsurance rate since 2017, despite an improving economy.8-10 This

corresponds to the weakening of key provisions of the insurance market discussed above,

including reduced marketplace enrollment outreach by the federal government, introduction of

short-term plans not subject to the ACA's consumer protections, and most recently the removal

of the individual mandate, though coverage estimates are not yet available since the mandate's

elimination.

       While the overall impact of the ACA is clear from the time series, a large literature has

attempted to measure the effects of specific provisions of the law.

       One of the most studied provisions is the extension of dependent coverage to age 26,

which was put in place right after the law passed (while most provisions were delayed until

2014). This policy, often called the "dependent coverage provision," has been studied primarily

by comparing changes in insurance coverage for those in their early 20s to those in their late 20s.

Studies have found large coverage gains, ranging from 1 to 3 million more young adults with

health insurance, depending on the data source and time frame of analysis, with the federal

government's final estimate in a 2016 report of 2.3 million more adults insured.11-14 In addition

to this shift from uninsured to parental coverage, the policy also induced some young adults to

drop coverage in their own name to become a dependent on their parents' plans.11,15

       Several studies have also compared the effects of the dependent coverage provision in

states which already had similar provisions in effect to states without such insurance provisions,

though the state laws were considerably weaker due to the exclusion of large self-insured firms

and additional restrictions on eligibility. In general, studies have found the federal policy led to




                                                  8
significant coverage gains in states both with and without pre-existing dependent-coverage

laws.11,16

        In 2014, the rest of the law's major coverage provisions took effect, and the complexity

and simultaneity of these changes makes them more difficult to decompose. These provisions

have generally been studied in isolation, though a few studies consider multiple aspects of the

law concurrently.

        Most readily studied are the Medicaid expansions. The fact that states were given the

option to expand Medicaid and that states did so at different times provides an obvious quasi-

experimental framework for investigating the impact of expansions. Estimates in administrative

data17 and survey data18-20 both indicate large coverage gains for adults of lower socioeconomic

status (either by income or education) in expansion states vs. non-expansion states. A federal

government report pegged the enrollment increase at 14.5 million people by beginning of 2016.14

One somewhat unexpected finding is that nearly half of the increase in Medicaid enrollment

occurred among those who were already eligible for the program in both expansion and non-

expansion states, the so called "woodwork effect,"21 which also included increased take-up

among nearly one million children.22-24 Several studies have also demonstrated narrowing of

racial/ethnic disparities in insurance coverage after implementation of the ACA, though

substantial disparities remain.25,26

        It is more difficult to study the impact of the introduction of exchanges per se, since

every state has either a national or state-run exchange, and premium subsidies are available in all

states. Aggregate enrollment in the exchanges was 12.2 million people by 2017,27 well below

initial CBO estimates of 23 million.7 A sizeable share of those enrollees already had individual

market insurance before the ACA, so this figure overestimates the net coverage increase. Studies




                                                  9
demonstrate heterogeneity in enrollment by type of exchange, with state-run exchanges

experiencing nearly twice as large a demand elasticity based on premium subsidies,21 which may

be explained at least in part by differing state approaches to outreach efforts and support for the

ACA's navigator program designed to improve and facilitate new enrollment.28-30 Concerns

remain, however, that insurer exits, high premium growth in some areas (particularly those with

limited competition31), and ongoing political uncertainty over the law may undermine exchange

enrollment in the near future.32

       A particularly important question, given recent policy developments, is the role of the

individual mandate. Published studies show modest or no impact of individual mandate penalty

details, but some evidence of a "taste for compliance" inducing Marketplace enrollment.21,33 A

direct beneficiary survey indicated that 19% of Californians with non-group coverage say the

mandate influenced their decision to purchase insurance.34 A recent working paper using tax

data and discontinuities in the premium penalty find stronger evidence of an effect on coverage,

though with modest population-level impacts.35 In part based on this body of research, the CBO

reduced its estimate of the mandate's effects on coverage after the ACA repeal debate in 2017.36

       With these three large policies all taking effect in 2014, it has been challenging to

disentangle their relative contributions. One paper, using a triple-difference model leveraging

income, geographic, and time variation in Medicaid eligibility, premium subsidies, and the

mandate penalty, attributed roughly 60% of the ACA's coverage gains since 2014 to Medicaid,

40% to premium subsidies, and no detectable effect of the mandate penalty details ­ though this

model was unable to assess for a broader compliance effect of the mandate.21 These results are

similar in general magnitude to simpler estimates based on time series analyses,14 which all




                                                 10
indicate that both the public and private market approaches of the ACA were critical to the law's

coverage effects.

       Despite these large expansions of non-group private insurance and Medicaid, the major

source of insurance coverage in the U.S. remains employer-sponsored coverage. As such, a

primary concern with the ACA is that it would "crowd out" private insurance provision. Prior

evidence on this front had been mixed, with a variety of studies (reviewed in Gruber and Simon,

200837) suggesting that state Medicaid expansions in the 1980s-2000s led to significant

crowdout, while studies of the Massachusetts experience found little crowd-out (and perhaps

crowd-in).38 In response to the ACA, it appears that there was also no crowd-out of employer

coverage, with roughly stable ESI offering rates and overall coverage rates.39,40 One reason for

the much weaker crowd-out effects in response to the Massachusetts plan and the ACA may be

the individual mandate, which increases the value of employer-sponsored insurance,41 as well as

the employer mandate penalty.40

       In summary, the ACA clearly and dramatically increased insurance coverage in the U.S.

Despite only partial state adoption, the Medicaid expansions appear to be the major driver of

these coverage improvements ­ both through enrollment of those newly entitled and those who

were previously eligible. Enrollment in the private market has been substantial but less

successful than anticipated, and may continue to diminish unless further actions are taken to

bolster the exchange markets and subsidies.



Part III: Effects of the ACA on Health Care Utilization and Health

       While the primary goal of the ACA was to expand financial protection through insurance,

a secondary goal was to translate this insurance expansion into improved health. This could




                                               11
occur through two channels. The traditional channel for doing so is increased health care

utilization among the uninsured. A large literature documents that past expansions of insurance

led to increased utilization, with many studies showing resulting improvements in various

aspects of health, as summarized in a recent review article.42 But there were reasons to be

concerned that these results may not fully apply to the ACA. For example, the large rise in

coverage in disadvantaged areas could run into constraints on the set of physicians available ­

and willing ­ to treat newly covered patients. Furthermore, not all studies showed consistent

health impacts, including the lack of a significant change in several chronic disease indicators

studied in the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment.43 The ACA's much larger coverage

expansion offers an important opportunity to evaluate some of these questions in a different

context, albeit without a randomized design.

       Table 2 reviews the studies on health insurance utilization and health. A particular goal

of the ACA was to increase access to and use of preventive care. This appears to have been

accomplished. Studies using multiple research designs and empirical approaches find reductions

in cost-related delays in care and an increased share of the population with a personal physician

and regular location of care. Studies have found increased use of preventive services ranging

from wellness exams to diabetes screening, although the results vary by service and study.44,45

Another study found that the young adult expansions led to modest increases in early initiation of

prenatal care.46

       The ACA was associated with clear increases in outpatient care and prescription drugs,

with the largest increases in prescription drug utilization due to the Medicaid expansion

occurring for long-term medications such as contraception, diabetes medications, and




                                                12
cardiovascular medications.47 Medication adherence improved as well, presumably due to

enhanced affordability.48,49

       Dental care is a particularly interesting area, since it is one benefit that varies

considerably across states as to whether it is included in Medicaid. Indeed, there is mixed

evidence on whether the Medicaid expansions increased use of dental care, with one study

finding no change in dental visit rates after expansion while another found a 9% increase in

dental visits among low-income childless adults.44,50 An important question for further research

is the long run implications of improved dental care for overall health, as some studies associate

improved dental health with reduced incidence of other disease.51

       A particularly controversial area of utilization analysis is emergency care. Casual

observers suggested that a major benefit of coverage expansions would be reduced use of the ED

by the uninsured, and a study of the Massachusetts health insurance reform by Miller (2012)

seemed to confirm this, with ED use falling within a few years of expansion.52 But while the

ACA was being implemented, the striking findings of Taubman et al. (2014) from the Oregon

Health Insurance Experiment showed that expanded Medicaid led to a dramatic rise in ED use.53

The authors suggest that this is not surprising since one impact of insurance coverage is to

significantly lower the price of ED care.

       This controversy is not fully resolved by studies of ED use under the ACA. Studies of

the young adult expansions suggested a significant reduction in ED utilization (particularly non-

urgent visits),54 while studies of Medicaid expansion show either no effect55 or some reduction48

(paralleling the Miller results for MA). A working paper examining the loss of public coverage

among migrants in Hawaii (only partially offset by new private insurance enrollment) showed

reductions in overall ED use,56 which is potentially consistent with the Oregon findings.




                                                  13
Meanwhile, the Medicaid expansion does not appear to have led to detectable changes in overall

inpatient hospitalization utilization,57 though large changes in payer mix have occurred and are

discussed in the next section.

       Health economists have for many years emphasized that the primary driver of high health

costs in the U.S. is expenditures on the chronically ill. Another goal of the ACA was to improve

chronic disease management. The available evidence suggests that chronic care did improve

under the ACA, in particular through increased use of prescription medicines, including

medications for the treatment of substance use disorder.47,48,58 Both the Medicaid expansion and

new Marketplace coverage have been found to increase diagnoses of chronic conditions,59,60

which can potentially lead to more efficient treatment through early detection. An open question

is whether, on net, these changes are large enough to reduce overall expenditures ­ although it

seems likely, based on medical guidelines, that they were at a minimum a cost effective means of

improving health.

       Of course, the major goal of increased utilization is not just more care, but better care and

improved health outcomes. Health outcomes can be measured in three ways. The first is self-

reported health and well-being. A large literatures shows that self-reports ­ while noisy ­ are

highly correlated with objective health outcomes such as mortality.61,62

       Most studies show significant improvements in self-reported health associated with

various aspects of the ACA. Multiple evaluations of the young adult expansions studied found

improved self-reported health, compared to controls.63-65 Studies of state Medicaid expansions

find mixed results for self-rated health, though the general pattern is that longer-term studies and

studies of states with bigger coverage gains have more consistently indicated a positive

effect.44,48,49,66,67 While point estimates vary, one study used an IV approach to estimate a local




                                                 14
average treatment effect from gaining Medicaid, finding a 23 percentage-point increase in the

likelihood of excellent self-reported health (though with very wide confidence intervals),48

slightly larger than the analogous estimate from Oregon experiment, which found a 13

percentage-point increase in good/very good/excellent health.68 Meanwhile, other studies have

identified improved quality of life69 and reduced psychological distress70 due to the Medicaid

expansion (also consistent with the Oregon experiment).

       The second approach to measuring health is to look for clinical indicators of improved

quality of care and health outcomes. Two studies have assessed the impacts of the ACA on

surgical care. One found that the dependent coverage provision led to reduced rates of

perforation among patients with acute appendicitis.71 An evaluation of Medicaid expansion's

effect on several serious but common conditions including appendicitis, peripheral artery

disease, and aortic aneurysms found evidence of earlier presentation for care and improved

outcomes as indicated by fewer perforated appendices, ruptured aneurysms, and limb

amputations.72 A study of the impact of the young adult expansions on maternity care finds

increased early prenatal care and modest reductions in rates of pre-term birth, particularly for

unmarried mothers.46 Meanwhile, a similar assessment of birth outcomes after the Medicaid

expansion (which did not directly affect pregnancy-related eligibility, but may have created

spillovers on birth outcomes via the `woodwork effect') found no change in overall rates of low

birth weight and preterm births, but did find a narrowing of black-white disparities in these

outcomes.73

       Finally, perhaps the most definitive approach to assessing health outcomes is to examine

mortality. The difficulty with assessing mortality changes is that this is (fortunately) a rare event

in the U.S. for the non-elderly, who are the primary focus of the ACA. Indeed, Black and




                                                 15
colleagues argue that the ACA itself is underpowered to detect any mortality effects at the

population level, given that coverage gains occurred in all states, and pre-ACA trends may

preclude using the Medicaid expansion as an identification strategy for this outcome.74 A recent

working paper by Miller and Wherry challenges this characterization by matching a large sample

of survey data with administrative death records. They find no differential pre-trends across

expansion and non-expansion states and are able to estimate a precise 8% decline in mortality in

the expansion states; they confirm their findings by showing no mortality changes among those

over age 65 who should have been unaffected.75

        Another angle to examining mortality is to measure changes among more targeted

populations gaining coverage. Two published studies have found significant mortality

reductions due to the ACA ­ one examining the Medicaid expansion's effects among high risk

patients starting dialysis,76 and the other finding reduced disease-related mortality among young

adults gaining coverage under the dependent coverage provision.77

        This is an impressive literature, but holes remain. Most important is additional studies of

the impact of the ACA on a wide variety of health outcomes. Increased data availability over

time should allow for richer studies of mortality effects and other long-term health impacts. But

a broad perspective on health and general well-being is essential as well. As the studies

reviewed above emphasize, health is more than just physical measurements and mortality. In a

nation where the stresses of daily life are leading to increasing numbers of "deaths of despair"

via suicide and drug overdoses,78 understanding the effects of mental health and overall well-

being is particularly critical.

        Equally important is thinking about the cost-effectiveness of these health improvements,

relative to other government interventions inside and outside of the health care space ­ and the




                                                16
potential heterogeneity across modes of insurance expansion. For example, several states have

opted to use Medicaid funds to expand coverage to low income adults via subsidized

Marketplace plans (an approach sometimes called "the private option"). A longitudinal analysis

of this policy in Arkansas found similar improvements in health care access and self-reported

health as with a traditional Medicaid expansion, although with more financial risk to

beneficiaries and at greater apparent cost to the federal government.45,79 Given that

approximately 30 millions people remain uninsured in the U.S., additional approaches to

expanding insurance coverage will be required, and these should be informed ex-ante by

evidence on the most cost-effective pathways to improved health and well-being.



Part IV: Effects of the ACA on Health Care Providers

       As the largest change to the health care system in decades, it is inevitable that the ACA

would have significant impacts on health care providers. A smaller literature has emerged to

investigate these effects.

       A major motivation for the ACA was to reduce uncompensated care costs to hospitals,

and studies suggest that this goal was achieved. Nikpay and colleagues find that the Medicaid

expansions were associated with a nearly 50% decline in uninsured hospital stays,80 and Blavin

estimated a 30% decline in hospital uncompensated care.81 At the same time, many of the

increased hospitalizations were paid for by Medicaid, which typically reimburses at a lower level

than private insurance or Medicare; the law also included a reduced rate of growth of Medicare

reimbursement. While these factors offset some of the financial gains to hospitals from reduced

uncompensated care,82 the net result of Medicaid expansion still appears to have been an

improvement in the excess margins of hospitals relative to non-expansion states.81




                                                17
       One concern with the ACA was that expanding demand for health care, without

significantly increasing supply, would lead to more binding constraints on access to care. This

concern is particularly relevant given lower provider willingness to accept Medicaid patients due

to lower reimbursement rates, compared to private insurance and Medicare.83 The early

evidence on this point is mixed. One study showed an increase in wait times for appointments

after Medicaid expansion,49 while others have shown unchanged or increased availability of

appointments after expansion84,85 ­ in part attributable to the ACA's 2013 policy that temporarily

increased primary care reimbursement rates in Medicaid to match Medicare rates.86 Despite

these concerns about provider availability, one analysis found that the improvements in access to

care associated with Medicaid expansion occurred even in federal-designated primary care

provider shortage areas.45 Thus, while provider participation in Medicaid remains an important

area for evaluation, any shortages have not been so dire as to prevent substantial benefits in

access to care for low-income individuals enrolled in the program.

       Federally qualified health centers (FQHC) are an essentially source of care for millions of

low income Americans, both the uninsured and those with Medicaid. Some researchers have

examined this population in particular, finding that Medicaid expansion led to substantially

larger effects on coverage among community health center patients than in the population as a

whole, with a 12 percentage-point increase in Medicaid and 11 point decrease in the uninsured

rate. However, the total volume of patients seen in community health centers increased similarly

in both expansion and non-expansion states, suggesting that the ACA primarily produced a payer

shift without overwhelming FQHC capacity.87




                                                18
Part V: Non-Health Care Effects of the ACA ­ Budgets and Employment

        Policy discussions around the ACA have not been restricted to the health care space. In

particular, critics of the policy emphasized two non-health areas where the ACA could have

negative impacts.

        The first is budgetary effects on both the federal government and the states. At the

federal level, the initial CBO budgetary estimates suggested that the ACA would, on net, lower

the deficit by more than $100 billion over the first decade, and more than $1 trillion in the

decade thereafter.7 But this projection was highly uncertain and dependent on a number of

factors that played out differently than CBO anticipated.

        Several studies have assessed the impacts on the federal budget and have found them to

be substantially different than the CBO anticipated. In particular, the costs of the exchange

subsidies came in at well below CBO estimates initially,88 and total federal spending in 2018 on

premium tax credits, cost-sharing reductions and risk adjustment was less than half of what CBO

had projected ­ in large part because overall Marketplace enrollment was substantially lower

than originally predicted.89,90

        More recently, however, actions by the Trump administration to weaken the law,

including repeal of the individual mandate, may significantly worsen the risk pool in the

exchanges.32 Under the tax credit structure of the ACA, individuals pay a fixed percentage of

their income for insurance, and the government pays the residual costs. As a result, these recent

actions could significantly increase the federal budgetary costs of Marketplace subsidies, though

if they reduce enrollment even more, the net effect compared to original estimates is unclear.




                                                 19
       The Medicaid expansion has been sizeable, with federal Medicaid spending in expansion

states growing 12% faster than in non-expansion states.91 At the same time, overall Medicaid

cost growth over the past decade has been much slower than predicted by actuaries at the Centers

for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), reflecting both lower costs of the Medicaid

expansion as well as lower per-capita growth in spending for pre-ACA eligibles.92

       Some state policymakers were also concerned with the increased state financial burden

from their share of Medicaid expenditures. For newly-eligible expansion enrollees, costs were

initially covered 100% by the Federal government; but, as Frean et al. (2016) emphasize, much

of the rise in Medicaid rolls were individuals who were already eligible "coming out of the

woodwork" ­ and doing so at a higher state fiscal share.21 Despite this, Sommers and Gruber

(2017) find that state spending projections for the Medicaid expansions were quite close in the

aggregate, and there was no meaningful impact of the expansion on spending from state funds or

on other categories of state spending such as education or transportation.91

       The second area of focus has been on labor supply. There are a number of reasons why

the ACA could lower labor supply. First, many individuals may have been working simply to

obtain health insurance, and they might now leave the labor force now that community-rated and

subsidized options were broadly available. This might operate particularly strongly for those

now eligible for free expanded Medicaid coverage, although past studies of the impact of

Medicaid on labor supply are decidedly mixed.93,94 Second, the phase-out of the tax credits as a

function of income placed an "implicit tax" on labor supply at potentially quite high rates that

could lead individuals to reduce their labor supply.95 Third, the employer mandate penalties in

the law were tied to full time employment, providing an incentive for employers to shift

employees to part time.




                                                20
       To date, however, there is no evidence of major impacts on labor supply. In studies of

the dependent coverage provision, one analysis of survey data found a small reduction in work

hours for young adults compared to slightly older adults but no effect on overall employment,11

while another using tax data found no change in earnings.96 Other studies find no impact of the

Medicaid expansions on employment, hours worked, or wages among adults with low incomes

or no college degree,19,97,98 and one analysis considering both Medicaid and private coverage

expansions also found no aggregate changes in labor supply.99 There also has not been any

evidence of a shift to part-time employment in response to the law,100 and no increase in early

retirement or part-time labor among adults in their 50s or early 60s.101 The decision in some

states not to expand Medicaid created an incentive for workers to earn more than 100% of FPL

to become eligible for Marketplace tax credits (below 100% they are not eligible for tax credits

or Medicaid); one study found this led to bunching in reported income among self-employed

individuals just above the notch, though the study concludes that this is a reporting distortion

only and not a true change in earnings.102



Part VI: Conclusion

       The health economics community has responded robustly to the exciting opportunities for

new analysis made available by the ACA. In the decade since the law was passed and the five

years since it became fully effective, dozens of studies have emerged to explore and evaluate a

wide variety of the law's impacts. These studies have covered a wide range of areas, and we

have learned much.

       One notable feature from our perspective is that this literature has been generally

empirically sophisticated, recognizing the challenges in causally estimating the impact of




                                                 21
policies on outcomes. Most of the studies reviewed here have not relied on simple time series or

cross-sectional comparisons but have used more sophisticated quasi-experimental approaches,

with a variety of plausible control groups whenever possible. The studies of the Medicaid

expansions have been particularly convincing in this context, attributable to both the natural

control group created by the state-level variation in expansion decisions, and the generally robust

analysis of pre-ACA trends and multiple other specification checks in most of the papers cited

here.

        More good news is that we have learned an enormous amount in just a short period. The

evidence reviewed here clearly demonstrates that the ACA led to major increases in insurance

coverage, with strong evidence of coverage increases from the young adult coverage provision,

the Medicaid expansion, and premium tax credits. The impacts of the exchanges themselves,

individual insurance market regulations, and the individual mandate are still unclear, in part due

to the lack of an obvious control group for these policies ­ though with the recent repeal of the

individual mandate and several states stepping in with their own mandate, we may soon have a

much clearer sense of the impact of this particular policy. There is also clear evidence of an

increase in access to and use of a variety of types of health care.

        Equally importantly, we have learned that some of the major concerns with the law have

not come to pass. There has been no evidence of widespread deterioration in access to health

care providers, a significant deterrent to labor supply, or major budgetary pressures on state

governments from the Medicaid expansion thus far.

        That said, not all is rosy in this area of research. We still have not reached consensus on

a number of critical questions facing this literature. While our assessment is that several strong

studies have indicated positive impacts on outcomes including self-reported health, surgical




                                                 22
emergencies, prenatal care, and mortality among high-risk patients with chronic conditions, we

recognize that this is not a universally-held view. Further studies on a wide variety of health

outcomes are needed ­ in particular over the longer run, when health effects might be easier to

observe; already, some of the early studies showing non-significant changes in health have

become significant with additional years of follow-up.103,104 While one major goal of the ACA

was to provide financial protection, the public perception of the value of health insurance

expansion is not simply limited to the traditional economic view of insurance as a tool for risk

management. Rather, policymakers and the general public have great interest in understanding

the law's impacts on health outcomes, so continued study in this area is critical.

       Moreover, these issues have substantial policy implications. Disentangling which aspects

of the ACA have the largest impacts will be critical as policymakers consider both selective

restrictions and expansions of the law's provisions. The effect of the individual mandate repeal

and potential barriers to coverage such as Medicaid work requirements have been the focus of

recent political discussions, while early forays into health policy among Democratic presidential

contenders often focus on making exchange plans more affordable. Understanding the effects

not just of having any health insurance but the particular type of coverage also has important

implications for health care quality, costs, and patient outcomes. A better understanding of

coverage heterogeneity is particularly critical as state and federal policymakers propose a wide

range of solutions, such as a public option on the insurance marketplace, moving more Medicaid

beneficiaries to private coverage, and ­ most dramatically ­ "Medicare-for-All" in various

configurations. Ongoing studies of these issues are warranted to continue to inform changes to

the ACA and the U.S.'s health insurance system more broadly in the coming years.




                                                23
24
REFERENCES
1.      Kaiser Family Foundation. Summary of the Affordable Care Act. Washington, DC; 2013.
2.      Frean M, Shelder S, Rosenthal MB, Sequist TD, Sommers BD. Health reform and
coverage changes among native americans. JAMA Intern Med 2016.
3.      Cutler DM. What Is The US Health Spending Problem? Health Aff (Millwood)
2018;37:493-7.
4.      Status of State Action on the Medicaid Expansion Decision. Kaiser Family Foundation,
2019. at http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-activity-around-expanding-medicaid-under-
the-affordable-care-act/.)
5.      Martinez ME, Zammitti EP, Cohen RA. Health Insurance Coverage: Early Release of
Estimates From the National Health Interview Survey, January­June 2018: National Center for
Health Statistics; 2018.
6.      Blumberg LJ, Garrett B, Holahan J. Estimating the Counterfactual: How Many Uninsured
Adults Would There Be Today Without the ACA? Inquiry 2016;ePub ahead of print.
7.      H.R. 4872, Reconciliation Act of 2010 (final health care legislation). Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Budget Office; 2010.
8.      Collins SR, Gunja MZ, Doty MM, Bhupal HK. First Look at Health Insurance Coverage
in 2018 Finds ACA Gains Beginning to Reverse. New York, NY: Commonwealth Fund; 2018.
9.      Sommers BD, Clark KL, Epstein AM. Early Changes in Health Insurance Coverage
under the Trump Administration. New England Journal of Medicine 2018;378:1061-3.
10.     Health Insurance Coverage for People Under Age 65: Definitions and Estimates for 2015
to 2018. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Budget Office; 2019.
11.     Antwi YA, Moriya AS, Simon K. Effects of federal policy to insure young adults:
evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act's dependent coverage mandate. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2013;5:1-28.
12.     Sommers BD, Schwartz K. 2.5 million young adults gain health insurance due to the
Affordable Care Act. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services; 2011.
13.     Sommers BD, Buchmueller T, Decker SL, Carey C, Kronick R. The Affordable Care Act
has led to significant gains in health insurance and access to care for young adults. Health Aff
(Millwood) 2013;32:165-74.
14.     Uberoi N, Finegold K, Gee E. Health Insurance Coverage and the Affordable Care Act,
2010-2016. Washington DC: U.S. Department of Health & Human Services; 2016.
15.     Sommers BD, Kronick R. The Affordable Care Act and insurance coverage for young
adults. Jama 2012;307:913-4.
16.     Cantor JC, Monheit AC, Delia D, Lloyd K. Early impact of the affordable care act on
health insurance coverage of young adults. Health Serv Res 2012;47:1773-90.
17.     Medicaid & CHIP: Preliminary August 2017 Applications, Eligibility, and Enrollment
Data. Baltimore, MD: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; 2017.
18.     Courtemanche C, Marton J, Ukert B, Yelowitz A, Zapata D. Early Impacts of the
Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid Expansion and Non-Expansion
States. J Policy Anal Manage 2016;36:178-210.
19.     Kaestner R, Garrett B, Chen J, Gangopadhyaya A, Fleming C. Effects of ACA Medicaid
Expansions on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Supply. Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 2017;36:608-42.


                                                 25
20.     Sommers BD, Gunja MZ, Finegold K, Musco T. Changes in Self-reported Insurance
Coverage, Access to Care, and Health Under the Affordable Care Act. Jama 2015;314:366-74.
21.     Frean M, Gruber J, Sommers BD. Premium subsidies, the mandate, and Medicaid
expansion: Coverage effects of the Affordable Care Act. J Health Econ 2017;53:72-86.
22.     Hamersma S, Kim M, Timpe B. The effect of Parental Medicaid Expansion on Children's
Health Insurance Coverage. Contemporary Economic Policy 2019;37:297-311.
23.     Kenney GM, Haley J, Pan C, Lynch V, Buettgens M. Children's Coverage Climb
Continues: Uninsurance and Medicaid/CHIP Eligibility and Participation Under the ACA: Urban
Institute / Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; 2016.
24.     Ugwi P, Lyu W, Wehby GL. The Effects of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act on Children's Health Coverage. Med Care 2019;57:115-22.
25.     Courtemanche C, Marton J, Ukert B, Yelowitz A, Zapata D, Fazlul I. The three-year
impact of the Affordable Care Act on disparities in insurance coverage. Health Serv Res 2019;54
Suppl 1:307-16.
26.     Buchmueller TC, Levinson ZM, Levy HG, Wolfe BL. Effect of the Affordable Care Act
on Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Insurance Coverage. Am J Public Health 2016:e1-e6.
27.     Health Insurance Marketplaces 2017 Open Enrollment Period: January Enrollment
Report. Baltimore, MD: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; 2017.
28.     Karaca-Mandic P, Wilcock A, Baum L, et al. The Volume Of TV Advertisements During
The ACA's First Enrollment Period Was Associated With Increased Insurance Coverage. Health
Aff (Millwood) 2017;36:747-54.
29.     Sommers BD, Maylone B, Nguyen KH, Blendon RJ, Epstein AM. The Impact Of State
Policies On ACA Applications And Enrollment Among Low-Income Adults In Arkansas,
Kentucky, And Texas. Health Aff (Millwood) 2015;34:1010-8.
30.     Vargas R. How health navigators legitimize the Affordable Care Act to the uninsured
poor. Soc Sci Med 2016;165:263-70.
31.     Parys JV. ACA Marketplace Premiums Grew More Rapidly In Areas With Monopoly
Insurers Than In Areas With More Competition. Health Aff (Millwood) 2018;37:1243-51.
32.     Aaron HJ, Fiedler M, Ginsburg PB, Adler L, Rivlin AM. Turmoil in the Individual
Insurance Market - Where It Came From and How to Fix It. N Engl J Med 2017;377:314-5.
33.     Saltzman E. Demand for health insurance: Evidence from the California and Washington
ACA exchanges. J Health Econ 2019;63:197-222.
34.     Fung V, Liang CY, Shi J, et al. Potential Effects Of Eliminating The Individual Mandate
Penalty In California. Health Aff (Millwood) 2019;38:147-54.
35.     Heim B, Lurie IZ, Sacks DW. Does the individual mandate affect insurance coverage?
Evidence from the population of tax returns2018.
36.     Antos JR, Capretta JC. CBO's Revised View Of Individual Mandate Reflected In Latest
Forecast. Health Affairs Blog 2018.
37.     Gruber J, Simon K. Crowd-out 10 years later: have recent public insurance expansions
crowded out private health insurance? J Health Econ 2008;27:201-17.
38.     Kolstad JT, Kowalski AE. The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital and Preventive
Care: Evidence from Massachusetts. Journal of Public Economics 2012;96:909-29.
39.     Abraham J, Royalty AB, Drake C. Employer-Sponsored Insurance Offers: Largely Stable
In 2014 Following ACA Implementation. Health Aff (Millwood) 2016;35:2133-7.




                                              26
40.    Sommers BD, Shepard M, Hempstead K. Why Did Employer Coverage Fall In
Massachusetts After The ACA? Potential Consequences Of A Changing Employer Mandate.
Health Aff (Millwood) 2018;37:1144-52.
41.    Kolstad JT, Kowalski AE. Mandate-based health reform and the labor market: Evidence
from the Massachusetts reform. J Health Econ 2016;47:81-106.
42.    Sommers BD, Gawande AA, Baicker K. Health Insurance Coverage and Health - What
the Recent Evidence Tells Us. N Engl J Med 2017.
43.    Baicker K, Taubman S, Allen H, et al. The Oregon Experiment - Effects of Medicaid on
Clinical Outcomes. N Engl J Med 2013;368:1713-22.
44.    Simon K, Soni A, Cawley J. The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventive Care and
Health Behaviors: Evidence from the First Two Years of the ACA Medicaid Expansions. J
Policy Anal Manage 2017;36:390-417.
45.    Sommers BD, Blendon RJ, Orav EJ, Epstein AM. Changes in Utilization and Health
Among Low-Income Adults After Medicaid Expansion or Expanded Private Insurance. JAMA
Intern Med 2016;176:1501-9.
46.    Daw JR, Sommers BD. Association of the Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage
Provision With Prenatal Care Use and Birth Outcomes. Jama 2018;319:579-87.
47.    Ghosh A, Simon K, Sommers BD. The Effect of Health Insurance on Prescription Drug
Use Among Low-Income Adults:Evidence from Recent Medicaid Expansions. J Health Econ
2018;63:64-80.
48.    Sommers BD, Maylone B, Blendon RJ, Orav EJ, Epstein AM. Three-Year Impacts Of
The Affordable Care Act: Improved Medical Care And Health Among Low-Income Adults.
Health Aff (Millwood) 2017;36:1119-28.
49.    Miller S, Wherry LR. Health and Access to Care during the First 2 Years of the ACA
Medicaid Expansions. N Eng J Med 2017;376:947-56.
50.    Nasseh K, Vujicic M. Early Impact of the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid Expansion on
Dental Care Use. Health Serv Res 2017;52:2256-68.
51.    Jeffcoat MK, Jeffcoat RL, Gladowski PA, Bramson JB, Blum JJ. Impact of periodontal
therapy on general health: evidence from insurance data for five systemic conditions. Am J Prev
Med 2014;47:166-74.
52.    Miller S. The effect of insurance on emergency room visits: An analysis of the 2006
Massachusetts health reform. J Pub Econ 2012;96:893-908.
53.    Taubman SL, Allen HL, Wright BJ, Baicker K, Finkelstein AN. Medicaid increases
emergency-department use: evidence from Oregon's Health Insurance Experiment. Science
2014;343:263-8.
54.    Akosa Antwi Y, Moriya AS, Simon K, Sommers BD. Changes in Emergency Department
Use Among Young Adults After the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act's Dependent
Coverage Provision. Ann Emerg Med 2015;65:664-72 e2.
55.    Klein EY, Levin S, Toerper MF, et al. The Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Utilization
in Maryland Emergency Departments. Ann Emerg Med 2017;70:607-14 e1.
56.    Halliday, T.J., Sentell, T., Akee, R.Q., Inada, M. Miyamura, J. (2019) "The Impact of
Public Health Insurance on Medical Utilization in a Vulnerable Population: Evidence from
COFA Migrants." University of Hawaii Working Paper 2019-1.
57.    Admon AJ, Valley TS, Ayanian JZ, Iwashyna TJ, Cooke CR, Tipirneni R. Trends in
Hospital Utilization After Medicaid Expansion. Med Care 2019;57:312-7.




                                              27
58.    Maclean JC, Saloner B. The Effect of Public Insurance Expansions on Substance Use
Disorder Treatment: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act. J Policy Anal Manage
2019;38:366-93.
59.    Goldman AL, McCormick D, Haas JS, Sommers BD. Effects Of The ACA's Health
Insurance Marketplaces On The Previously Uninsured: A Quasi-Experimental Analysis. Health
Aff (Millwood) 2018;37:591-9.
60.    Wherry LR, Miller S. Early Coverage, Access, Utilization, and Health Effects Associated
With the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions: A Quasi-experimental Study. Ann Intern
Med 2016.
61.    DeSalvo KB, Bloser N, Reynolds K, He J, Muntner P. Mortality prediction with a single
general self-rated health question. A meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med 2006;21:267-75.
62.    Miilunpalo S, Vuori I, Oja P, Pasanen M, Urponen H. Self-rated health status as a health
measure: the predictive value of self-reported health status on the use of physician services and
on mortality in the working-age population. J Clin Epidemiol 1997;50:517-28.
63.    Wallace J, Sommers BD. Effect of Dependent Coverage Expansion of the Affordable
Care Act on Health and Access to Care for Young Adults. JAMA pediatrics 2015.
64.    Chua KP, Sommers BD. Changes in health and medical spending among young adults
under health reform. Jama 2014;311:2437-9.
65.    Barbaresco S, Courtemanche CJ, Qi Y. Impacts of the Affordable Care Act Dependent
Coverage Provision on Health-Related Outcomes of Young Adults. J Health Econ 2015;40:54-
68.
66.    Winkelman TNA, Chang VW. Medicaid Expansion, Mental Health, and Access to Care
among Childless Adults with and without Chronic Conditions. J Gen Intern Med 2018;33:376-
83.
67.    Courtemanche C, Marton J, Ukert B, Yelowitz A, Zapata D. Effects of the Affordable
Care Act on Health Behaviors After 3 Years. Eastern Economic Journal 2019;45:7-33.
68.    Finkelstein A, Taubman S, Wright BJ, et al. The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
Evidence from the First Year. Quarterly Journal of Economics 2012;127:1057-106.
69.    Flavin P. State Medicaid Expansion and Citizens' Quality of Life. Social Science
Quarterly 2018;99:616-25.
70.    McMorrow S, Gates JA, Long SK, Kenney GM. Medicaid Expansion Increased
Coverage, Improved Affordability, And Reduced Psychological Distress For Low-Income
Parents. Health Aff (Millwood) 2017;36:808-18.
71.    Scott JW, Rose JA, Tsai TC, et al. Impact of ACA Insurance Coverage Expansion on
Perforated Appendix Rates Among Young Adults. Med Care 2016;54:818-26.
72.    Loehrer A, Chang DC, Scott JW, et al. The Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansion and
changes in the care of surgical conditions. JAMA Surgery 2018;153:online e175568.
73.    Brown CC, Moore JE, Felix HC, et al. Association of State Medicaid Expansion Status
With Low Birth Weight and Preterm Birth. Jama 2019;321:1598-609.
74.    Black B, Hollingsworth A, Nunes L, Simon K. The Effect of Health Insurance on
Mortality: Power Analysis and What We Can Learn from the Affordable Care Act Coverage
Expansions. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research; 2019.
75.    Miller S, Wherry LR. Medicaid and Mortality: New Evidence from Linked Survey and
Administrative Data2019.




                                               28
76.     Swaminathan S, Sommers BD, Thorsness R, Mehrotra R, Lee Y, Trivedi AN.
Association of Medicaid Expansion With 1-Year Mortality Among Patients With End-Stage
Renal Disease. Jama 2018;320:2242-50.
77.     McClellan C. The Affordable Care Act's Dependent Care Coverage and Mortality. Med
Care 2017;55:514-9.
78.     Case A, Deaton A. Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non-Hispanic
Americans in the 21st century. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015;112:15078-83.
79.     G.A.O. Medicaid Demonstrations: HHS's Approval Process for Arkansas's Medicaid
Expansion Waiver Raises Cost Concerns: U.S. Government Accountability Office; 2014 8
August 2014.
80.     Nikpay S, Buchmueller T, Levy HG. Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansion Reduced
Uninsured Hospital Stays In 2014. Health Aff (Millwood) 2016;35:106-10.
81.     Blavin F. Association Between the 2014 Medicaid Expansion and US Hospital Finances.
Jama 2016;316:1475-83.
82.     Young GJ, Flaherty S, Zepeda ED, Singh S, Rosenbaum S. Impact of ACA Medicaid
Expansion on Hospitals' Financial Status. Journal of healthcare management / American College
of Healthcare Executives 2019;64:91-102.
83.     Decker SL. In 2011 nearly one-third of physicians said they would not accept new
Medicaid patients, but rising fees may help. Health Aff (Millwood) 2012;31:1673-9.
84.     Tipirneni R, Rhodes KV, Hayward RA, Lichtenstein RL, Reamer EN, Davis MM.
Primary Care Appointment Availability For New Medicaid Patients Increased After Medicaid
Expansion In Michigan. Health Aff (Millwood) 2015;34:1399-406.
85.     Neprash HT, Zink A, Gray J, Hempstead K. Physicians' Participation In Medicaid
Increased Only Slightly Following Expansion. Health Aff (Millwood) 2018;37:1087-91.
86.     Polsky D, Richards M, Basseyn S, et al. Appointment Availability after Increases in
Medicaid Payments for Primary Care. N Engl J Med 2015.
87.     Cole MB, Galarraga O, Wilson IB, Wright B, Trivedi AN. At Federally Funded Health
Centers, Medicaid Expansion Was Associated With Improved Quality Of Care. Health Aff
(Millwood) 2017;36:40-8.
88.     Spiro T, Gruber J. The Affordable Care Act's Lower-Than-Projected Premiums Will
Save $190 Billion. Washington, DC: Center for American Progress; 2013.
89.     Elmendorf DW. Estimates for the Insurance Coverage Provisions of the Affordable Care
Act Updated for the Recent Supreme Court Decision. Washington DC: Congressional Budget
Office; 2012.
90.     Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People Under Age 65: 2018 to 2028.
Washington, D.C.: Congressional Budget Office; 2018.
91.     Sommers BD, Gruber J. Federal Funding Insulated State Budgets From Increased
Spending Related To Medicaid Expansion. Health Aff (Millwood) 2017;36:938-44.
92.     Glied S, Tavenner M. Medicaid Through the Crystal Ball of Historical CMS Projections.
Health Affairs Blog 2019.
93.     Garthwaite C, Gross T, Notowidigdo MJ. Public health insurance, labor supply, and
employment lock. Q J Econ 2014;129:653-96.
94.     Baicker K, Finkelstein A, Song J, Taubman S. The impact of Medicaid on labor market
activity and program participation: evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. Am
Econ Rev 2014;104:322-8.




                                             29
95.     Mulligan CB. Average Marginal Labor Income Tax Rates under the Affordable Care Act.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research; 2013.
96.     Heim B, Lurie IZ, Simon K. The Impact of the Affordable Care Act Young Adult
Provision on Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Tax Data. In: Brown J, ed. Tax Policy and
the Economy: National Bureau of Economic Research; 2015:133-57.
97.     Gooptu A, Moriya AS, Simon KI, Sommers BD. Medicaid Expansion Did Not Result In
Significant Employment Changes Or Job Reductions In 2014. Health Aff (Millwood)
2016;35:111-8.
98.     Leung P, Mas A. Employment Effects of the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions.
Industrial Relations 2018;57:206-34.
99.     Duggan M, Goda GS, Jackson E. The Effects of the Affordable Care Act on Health
Insurance Coverage and Labor Market Outcomes. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research; 2017.
100. Moriya AS, Selden TM, Simon KI. Little Change Seen In Part-Time Employment As A
Result Of The Affordable Care Act. Health Aff (Millwood) 2016;35:119-23.
101. Levy H, Buchmueller TC, Nikpay S. Health Reform and Retirement. The journals of
gerontology Series B, Psychological sciences and social sciences 2018;73:713-22.
102. Kucko K, Rinz K, Solow B. Labor Market Effects of the Affordable Care Act: Evidence
from a Tax Notch: SSRN; 2018.
103. Courtemanche C, Marton J, Ukert B, Yelowitz A, Zapata D. Effects of the Affordable
Care Act on Health Care Access and Self-Assessed Health After 3 Years. Inquiry
2018;55:46958018796361.
104. Courtemanche C, Marton J, Ukert B, Yelowitz A, Zapata D. Early Effects of the
Affordable Care Act on Health Care Access, Risky Health Behaviors, and Self-Assessed Health.
Southern Economic Journal 2018;84:660-91.
105. O'Hara B, Brault MW. The disparate impact of the ACA-dependent expansion across
population subgroups. Health Serv Res 2013;48:1581-92.
106. Health Insurance Marketplaces 2017 Open Enrollment Period Final Enrollment Report"
November 1, 2016 - January 31, 2017. Baltimore, MD: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services; 2017.
107. Blavin F, Shartzer A, Long SK, Holahan J. Employer-Sponsored Insurance Continues to
Remain Stable under the ACA: Findings from June 2013 through March 2015. Washington DC:
Urban Institute; 2015.
108. Allen H, Swanson A, Wang J, Gross T. Early Medicaid Expansion Associated With
Reduced Payday Borrowing In California. Health Aff (Millwood) 2017;36:1769-76.
109. Gallagher EA, Gopalan R, Grinstein-Weiss M. The effect of health insurance on home
payment delinquency: Evidence from ACA Marketplace subsidies. Journal of Public Economics
2018;172:67-83.
110. Wadhera RK, Joynt Maddox KE, Fonarow GC, et al. Association of the Affordable Care
Act's Medicaid Expansion With Care Quality and Outcomes for Low-Income Patients
Hospitalized With Heart Failure. Circulation Cardiovascular quality and outcomes
2018;11:e004729.
111. Budgetary and Economic Effects of Repealing the Affordable Care Act. Washington,
D.C.: Congressional Budget Office; 2015.
112. Gruber J. The Impacts of the Affordable Care Act: How Reasonable are the Projections.
National Tax Journal 2011;64:893-908.



                                            30
113. Bachrach D, Boozang P, Herring A, Reyneri DG. States Expanding Medicaid See
Significant Budget Savings and Revenue Gains. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation; 2016.




                                          31
         Figure 1: Percentage of Non-Elderly Residents without Health Insurance, 1987-2015




Notes: Datapoints are nationally-weighted estimates for the percentage of U.S. residents ages 0-64 without health
insurance; Gallup datapoints are limited to adults 18-64, since that dataset does not include children.




                                                        32
               Table 1: Key Findings on the Coverage Effects of the Affordable Care Act
Outcomes               Findings                                                           Studies
Coverage for Young     · 2 to 3 million more young adults covered via their               Antwi et al. (2013),11
Adults (19-25)              parents' plans, compared to slightly older control group      O'Hara & Brault (2013),105
                            (DCP)                                                         Schwartz & Sommers
                       · Gains largest among men, unmarried adults, and whites            (2012),12 Sommers et al.
                            (DCP)                                                         (2013)13
Marketplace            · 12.2 million enrolled in Marketplace coverage during             CMS (2017),106 Frean et al.
Coverage                    the 2017 open enrollment period (TS)                          (2017),21 Heim et al.
                       · State Marketplaces nearly double the coverage effect             (2018),35 Karaca-Mandic et
                            (holding subsidies constant) as federal Marketplace           al. (2017),28 Parys (2018),31
                            (DDD)                                                         Saltzman (2019),33 Sommers
                       · Suggestive evidence for positive impact of advertising           et al. (2015),29 Vargas
                            efforts and navigators (CS)                                   (2016)30
                       · Published studies show modest or no impact of
                            individual mandate penalty details, but some evidence
                            of a "taste for compliance" inducing Marketplace
                            enrollment (RDD, DDD)
                       · Premium growth clustered in areas with monopoly
                            insurers on the Marketplace (CS)
Medicaid Coverage      · Net enrollment increase of 14.0 million in Medicaid              CMS (2017),17
                            expansion states and 2.4 million in non-expansion states      Courtemanche et al.
                            by 2017 (TS)                                                  (2016),18 Frean et al.
                       · Difference-in-difference analyses of Medicaid                    (2017),21 Kaestner et al.
                            expansion indicate uninsured rate decreased by 3 to 21        (2017),19 Kenney et al.
                            percentage points, depending on state and data source         (2016),23 Miller & Wherry
                            (ME, DDD)                                                     (2017),49 Sommers et al.
                       · Enrollment increases largest among childless adults              (2017),48 Ugwi et al.
                            (ME)                                                          (2019)24
                       · `Woodwork effect' induced greater enrollment among
                            children - estimates ranging from 700,000-1.4 million
                            (ME, DDD)
Employer Sponsored · Stable offer rates and overall ESI coverage, with no                 Abraham et al. (2016),39
Coverage (ESI)              substantial crowd-out by Marketplace or Medicaid (TS,         Blavin et al. (2015),107 Frean
                            ME, DDD)                                                      et al. (2017),21 Sommers et
                       · Slight increases in ESI noted in many states since 2014          al. (2018)40
                            (TS)
Overall Uninsured      · Federal government reports a reduction in the uninsured          Buchmueller et al. (2016),26
Rate                        population from 50 million pre-ACA to 30 million by           Collins et al. (2018),8
                            2016 (TS)                                                     Courtemanche et al.
                       · Survey-based analyses indicate largest gains in coverage         (2016),18 Courtemanche et
                            for those living in Medicaid expansion states (TS, ME,        al. (2019),25 Martinez et al.
                            DDD)                                                          (2018),5 Sommers et al.
                       · Disparities in coverage rates by race and income                 (2018),9 Uberoi et al.
                                                                                          (2016)14
                            narrowed substantially after Medicaid expansion (TS,
                            ME, DDD)
                       · Mixed evidence on whether uninsured rate has begun to
                            increase again in 2017-2018 (TS)
Notes: Study findings relate to the following policies and the following study designs:
CS = Cross-sectional analysis, using multivariate adjustment




                                                         33
DCP = Dependent Coverage Provision, using D-in-D comparison to slightly older adults, unless otherwise noted
DDD = Triple Difference of ACA policies, by state, year, and income group or pre-ACA county-level uninsured rate
ME = Medicaid expansion, using D-in-D comparison between expansion and non-expansion states, unless otherwise
noted
RDD = Regression Discontinuity Design
TS = Time Series, no comparison group




                                                      34
          Table 2: Key Findings on Utilization and Health Effects of the Affordable Care Act
Outcomes           Findings                                                            Studies
Access to and      · Reductions in cost-related delays in care and out-of-pocket       Allen et al. (2017),108 Chua &
affordability of       health care costs (DCP, ME)                                     Sommers (2014),64 Gallagher
care               · Increased share of population with a personal physician or        et al. (2018),109 McMorrow et
                       regular location of other than the Emergency Department         al. (2017),70 Miller & Wherry
                       (DCP, ME)                                                       (2017),49 Simon et al.
                   · Reduced risk of financial distress, including short-term loans    (2017),44 Sommers et al.
                       and home payment delinquency (DCP, ME, RDD of                   (2017)48
                       Premium Subsidies)
Preventive Care    · More utilization of some preventive care services including       Courtemanche et al. (2019),67
and Outpatient         wellness exams, HIV tests, mammograms, cholesterol              Goldman et al. (2018),59
Utilization            testing, and screening for diabetes, though results vary by     Ghosh et al. (2018),47 Miller &
                       service and study (ME, DDD)                                     Wherry (2017),49
                   · Increases in outpatient utilization and prescription drug use     Nasseh & Vujicic (2017),50
                       among Marketplace and Medicaid enrollees (ME, D-in-D for        Simon et al. (2017),44
                       Marketplace vs. ESI)                                            Sommers et al. (2017)48
                   · Mixed evidence on whether Medicaid expansion increased
                       dental care (ME)
Emergency &        · Young adult private coverage expansion led to a reduction in      Admon et al. (2019),57 Antwi
Hospital Care          ED utilization, particularly weekday non-urgent visits (DCP)    et al. (2015),54
                   · Studies on Medicaid expansion have been mixed, with some          Klein et al. (2017),55 Sommers
                       showing less ED use and others no change, in contrast to        et al. (2017),48 Taubman et al.
                       sharp increases in Oregon Experiment (ME)                       (2014)53
                   · No significant change in overall hospital utilization (ME)
Chronic Disease    · Increased use of medications, with one study showing the          Ghosh et al. (2018),47
Care                   largest increases for chronic conditions such as diabetes and   Goldman et al. (2018),59
                       cardiovascular disease, as well as contraception (ME)           Maclean & Saloner (2019)58
                   · Increased rates of diagnoses of some chronic conditions           Sommers et al. (2017),48
                       (ME, D-in-D for Marketplace vs. ESI) and in regular care for    Swaminathan et al. (2018),76
                       chronic conditions (ME)                                         Wadhera et al. (2018),110
                   · No change in quality for hospitalized patients with cardiac       Wherry & Miller (2016)60
                       disease (ME)
                   · Increase in Medicaid as source of payment for treatment for
                       substance use disorder, with possible increase in specialty
                       treatment admissions chronic (ME)
                   · Improved care for patients with end-stage renal disease (ME)
Surgical Care      · Better care for acute appendicitis [fewer perforations] for       Scott et al. (2016)71, Loehrer
                       young adults (DCP)                                              et al. (2018)72
                   · Better surgical care and surgery outcomes after Medicaid
                       expansion (ME)
Maternal Health    · Earlier prenatal care and better maternal outcomes for young      Brown et al. (2019),73 Daw &
Outcomes               women after private insurance expansion, especially among       Sommers (2018)46
                       unmarried women (DCP)
                   · No change in overall rates of low birthweight or pre-term
                       birth after Medicaid expansion, but a narrowing of black-
                       white disparities (ME)
Self-Reported      · Improved quality of life and overall well-being with reduced      Barbaresco et al. (2015),65
Health and Well-       psychological distress after state Medicaid expansions (ME)     Chua & Sommers (2014),64
Being              · Studies of young adult coverage expansion show improved           Courtemanche et al. (2018),103
                       self-reported health (DCP)                                      Flavin et al. (2018),69
                   · Medicaid analyses show mixed results regarding self-rated         McMorrow et al. (2017),70



                                                      35
                         health, with some showing improvement and others no effect   Miller & Wherry (2017),49
                         (ME), and another study showing improved self-reported       Simon et al. (2017),44
                         health related to the ACA's private coverage expansion       Sommers et al. (2017),48
                         (DDD)                                                        Wallace & Sommers (2014),63
                                                                                      Winkelman et al. (2018)66
Mortality           ·    Young adult provision led to reduced disease-related         Black et al. (2019),74
                         mortality among young adults (DCP)                           McClellan (2017),77
                    ·    No change in hospital mortality for patients with cardiac    Swaminathan et al. (2018),76
                         disease (ME)                                                 Wadhera et al. (2018)110
                    ·    Medicaid expansion led to significant mortality reduction
                         among high-risk patients starting dialysis (ME)
                    ·    Simulation modeling suggests population-based studies of
                         mortality may be underpowered detect ACA effects
                         (Simulation-based analysis of Medicaid expansion)

Notes: Study findings relate to the following policies and the following study designs:
CS = Cross-sectional analysis, using multivariate adjustment
DCP = Dependent Coverage Provision, using D-in-D comparison to slightly older adults, unless otherwise noted
DDD = Triple Difference of ACA policies, by state, year, and income group or pre-ACA county-level uninsured rate
ME = Medicaid expansion, using D-in-D comparison between expansion and non-expansion states, unless otherwise
noted
RDD = Regression Discontinuity Design
TS = Time Series, no comparison group




                                                       36
       Table 3: Key Findings on Effects of the Affordable Care Act on Health Care Providers
Providers          Findings                                                                 Studies
Hospitals          · Medicaid expansion led to a 50% decline in uninsured hospital          Blavin (2016),81
                       stays and a 30% decline in hospital uncompensated care (ME)          Nikpay et al.
                   · Reductions in uncompensated care were partially offset by              (2016),80 Young et al.
                       increased hospital payment shortfalls due to Medicaid (ME)           (2019)82
                   · Evidence suggests excess margins and operating margins in
                       expansion state hospitals improved as well (ME)
Outpatient         · Appointment availability for physicians accepting Medicaid             Miller & Wherry
Physicians             patients increased in 2013-2014 after implementation of the ACA's    (2017),49 Neprash et
                       enhanced Medicaid payment rate for primary care (TS based on         al. (2018),85 Polsky et
                       size of state reimbursement increase in Medicaid)                    al. (2015),86 Tipirneni
                   · Mixed evidence on the impact of expanded coverage on overall           et al. (2015)84
                       provider availability ­ one study showed an increase in wait times
                       for appointments, while others have shown unchanged or increased
                       availability of appointments after expansion (ME, TS)
Federally-         · Medicaid expansion led to substantially larger effects on coverage     Cole et al. (2017)87
Qualified Health       among community health center patients than in the population as a
Centers                whole, with a 12 percentage-point increase in Medicaid and 11
                       point decreased in the uninsured rate (ME)
                   · Total volume of community health center patients seen increased
                       similarly in both expansion and non-expansion states (ME)


Notes: Study findings relate to the following policies and the following study designs:
ME = Medicaid expansion, using D-in-D comparison between expansion and non-expansion states, unless otherwise
noted
TS = Time Series, no comparison group




                                                       37
           Table 4: Key Findings on Non-Health Care Effects of the Affordable Care Act ­
                               Employment and Budgetary Impacts
Outcomes           Findings                                                                    Studies
Federal Budget     · Total federal spending in 2018 on premium tax credits, cost-sharing       Congressional
Effects                reductions, and risk adjustment was $55 billion, less than half what    Budget Office
                       CBO had projected ($129 billion) in 2012 for 2018 spending (TS          (2012)89 (2015)111
                       vs. projections)                                                        and (2018),90 Glied &
                   · Federal spending in Medicaid expansion states outgrew federal             Tavenner (2019),92
                       spending in non-expansion states by 12.2% through mid-2015 (ME)         Gruber (2011),112
                   · Medicaid spending growth has been substantially lower                     Sommers & Gruber
                       (approximately 30% by 2019) than predicted by actuaries at the          (2017)91
                       Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (TS vs. projections)
                   · Taking into account the law's revenue provisions, CBO projected
                       in 2015 that a full repeal of the ACA would increase the federal
                       deficit by $137 billion over a decade, largely consistent with pre-
                       ACA projections (TS vs. projections)

State Budget       ·   Difference-in-difference assessment of state budgetary impact of        Bachrach et al.
Effects                Medicaid expansion showed no significant change in state spending       (2016),113 Sommers
                       fiscal year 2015 and no crowd-out of other state spending priorities    & Gruber (2017)91
                       (ME)
                   ·   State spending projections for Medicaid expansion were reasonably
                       accurate in the aggregate (ranging from 0.8 to 2.9% for total, state,
                       and Medicaid spending), though individual state's error rates varied
                       widely (-26% to 46%) (TS)
                   ·   Descriptive analyses of individual state budgets show various
                       offsets of Medicaid expansion to state budgets, in some cases
                       covering the full cost of expansion to date113 (TS)

Labor Supply       ·    One study found a modest reduction (3%) in work hours for young    Antwi et al. (2013),11
                        adults after implementation of the 2010 dependent coverage         Duggan et al.
                        provision, but that study and others have not found any change in  (2017),99 Gooptu et
                        overall employment rates or earned income (DCP)                    al. (2016),97 Heim et
                   · ACA implementation was not associated with any significant            al.  (2015),96 Kaestner
                        changes after 2014 in part-versus full-time employment or rates of et  al. (2017),19 Levy
                        job switching (TS, ME)                                             et al. (2018),101
                   · Studies of Medicaid expansion among adults with low incomes or        Leung & Mas
                        no college education showed no significant changes in              (2018),98 Moriya et
                        employment, hours worked, or wages (ME)                            al. (2016)100
                   · Overall ACA coverage expansion ­ both Medicaid plus exchanges
                        ­ was not associated with aggregate employment changes, though
                        potentially with some offsetting heterogeneous effects by region
                        (DDD)
                   · No changes in rates of early retirement or part-time work among
                        near-elderly adults after 2014, or between Medicaid expansion vs.
                        non-expansion states (TS, ME)
Notes: Study findings relate to the following policies and the following study designs:
DCP = Dependent Coverage Provision, using D-in-D comparison to slightly older adults, unless otherwise noted
DDD = Triple Difference of ACA policies, by state, year, and income group or pre-ACA county-level uninsured rate
ME = Medicaid expansion, using D-in-D comparison between expansion and non-expansion states, unless otherwise
noted
TS = Time Series, no comparison group




                                                        38
