                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE THROUGH PRICE AND NON-PRICE INTERVENTIONS

                                       Joseph E. Stiglitz

                                      Working Paper 25939
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25939


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




I am deeply indebted to Linus Mattauch, Cameron Hepburn, and Naman Garg, and two very
helpful anonymous referees for their detailed and helpful comments. I am also indebted to Nick
Stern for long conversations about the subjects covered here, and the members of the High-Level
Commission on Carbon Prices for their insights and debates over the issues discussed here. I am
also indebted to Andrea Gurwitt for her editorial assistance. Financial support was provided by
INET. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Addressing Climate Change through Price and Non-Price Interventions
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 25939
June 2019
JEL No. A1,H23,K32,Q52,Q54,Q55

                                          ABSTRACT

Recognizing the importance of the second-best nature of economies, the Stern-Stiglitz report on
carbon pricing departed from the recommendation of a single carbon price for all uses at all
places and times. This paper provides some of the analytics behind these recommendations. First,
I analyze the circumstances in which distributional concerns make desirable a tax or regulation
inducing significant reductions in carbon usage in a carbon-intensive sector for which consumers
are disproportionately rich. Such policies allow lower carbon prices elsewhere without exceeding
carbon emission targets. The cost of the resulting production inefficiency may, under the
identified circumstances, be less than the distributional benefits. The paper considers the
circumstances in which such differential policies may be best implemented through regulation vs.
differential pricing, as well as differential effects on political economy and norm setting.
Second, I consider the effect of carbon price trajectories on induced innovation, providing general
conditions under which the optimal carbon path should, at least eventually, be falling over time.
Finally, I revisit the price-versus-quantity debate and highlight important aspects of the dynamic
nature of the problem.


Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu
               Addressing Climate Change through Price and Non-Price Interventions

                                              Joseph E. Stiglitz 1

    1. Introduction

Economists have had a long predilection for price interventions to correct market failures such
as those arising from the presence of externalities. The reason is simple: market efficiency
requires equating private and social returns, the presence of an externality means that there is
a gap between the two, and a price intervention can close the gap, restoring efficiency. In the
context of climate change, the prescription is to price carbon, and since what matters is the
atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases, and since the rate of decay of, say, carbon
dioxide is so slow, the price of carbon should be (approximately) the same for all uses, at all
places, and at all dates. (IPCC 2013; Stiglitz, 2013; Millar et al., 2016;; Dietz and Venmans, 2017;
van der Ploeg, 2018). 2

If only things were so simple. There are several fundamental departures from this simplistic
world, all speaking to the point that we are always in a second- or third-best world, and in such
a world, naively moving the economy seemingly closer to first best may entail a lowering of
social welfare.3

The Stern-Stiglitz High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices (2017), while recognizing that "A
well-designed carbon price is an indispensable part of a strategy for reducing emissions in an
efficient way," departed from the "single price of carbon in all place, dates, and uses," calling


1
  University Professor, Columbia University. I am deeply indebted to Linus Mattauch, Cameron Hepburn, and
Naman Garg, and two very helpful anonymous referees for their detailed and helpful comments. I am also
indebted to Nick Stern for long conversations about the subjects covered here, and the members of the High-Level
Commission on Carbon Prices for their insights and debates over the issues discussed here. I am also indebted to
Andrea Gurwitt for her editorial assistance. Financial support was provided by INET.
2
  The economic argument for a single price is straightforward: Climate change is a result of the increase in the
atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. Assume, for instance, that there were
a precise carbon budget--no climate change so long as carbon concentration was below a critical threshold, and
unacceptable change over that level. Because of the long duration that any CO2 molecule entering the atmosphere
remains there, we don't care when the molecules enter the atmosphere. There is thus a shadow price associated
with molecules entering the atmosphere--and this is the carbon price, the same at all places and times.
   Other greenhouse gases obviously also play a role in climate change, and because they are (relatively) short-
lived, it is not quite accurate to focus only on the long run.
3
  See Lipsey and Lancaster (1956) for a general theory of second best.

1
for "explicit price trajectories." The Commission, in formulating optimal strategies for meeting
the Paris and Copenhagen goals, also did not rely exclusively on carbon pricing, suggesting that
such pricing "may need to be complemented by other well-designed policies tackling various
market and government failures, as well as other imperfections." It observed that, "Adopting
other cost-effective policies can mean that a given emission reduction may be induced with
lower carbon prices than if those policies were absent." All of these considerations represent
marked departures from the standard first-best model alluded to in the first paragraph of this
paper. While these ideas received the support of all the members of the Commission, the
Commission in its report did not provide analytic justifications for these departures from the
conventional wisdom. Implicitly, the report seems to suggest different shadow prices of carbon
across time, over space, and with different uses, and that these shadow prices would
themselves be contingent on information as it was revealed. 4

The intent of this paper is not to provide a general alternative analytic framework, but through
a series of simple, partial equilibrium models, to enhance our intuition for the Stern-Stiglitz
recommendations, and to provide a better sense of the circumstances under which a deviation
from the "single price" might be desirable, and the form that such deviations might best take.
We focus in particular on distribution and induced innovation, and the appropriate responses
to uncertainties about developments in technology and our knowledge of climate change,
including its economic and social impacts.

We draw on the extensive public finance literature that has addressed analogous questions.
Unfortunately, many of the complicated and subtle insights from that literature have not been
fully brought into discussions related to climate change. While earlier literature on corrective
taxation in a second-best world with optimal commodity taxation (Sandmo, 1975) 5--where
there were no pure profits and no restrictions on commodity taxes--suggested that a standard
Pigouvian analysis in which simple taxes can address externalities would apply, more recent



4
  Even a single carbon price "at all places, at all dates, and in all uses" will be state contingent, i.e. will change with
changes in information about technology and damage, so that in practice, the carbon price will change over time.
5
  Baumol and Oates (1971) argued for the desirability of using Pigouvian taxation even when there was uncertainty
about the appropriate level of emission reductions.

2
work has questioned these results. One essential question relates to the circumstances in
which the Diamond-Mirrlees efficiency conditions apply (Diamond and Mirrlees, 1971). When it
does, then a Pigouvian corrective tax ensures production efficiency, and optimal consumption
(including optimal wage) taxes can be used to raise the requisite revenue in a way that
maximizes social welfare (or alternatively, do so in a way that is Pareto efficient.6)
Unfortunately, it turns out that the conditions under which the Diamond-Mirrlees efficiency
hold are very restrictive, requiring, for instance, a wide range of rent, profits, and differential
product and wage taxes (Dasgupta and Stiglitz, 1971, 1972). And even more so when individuals
differ in their abilities and relative wages are endogenous and offsetting differential wage taxes
cannot be levied or when they differ in their ownership of other assets the returns to which
could not be fully differentially taxed (Stiglitz, 1998a, 2018b). Thus, with restrictive taxation, a
tax on carbon could lead to a change in the distribution of income or well-being, either because
of direct price effects or because of indirect general equilibrium effects on relative wages and
prices; and the government may not have at its disposal instruments to undo these distributive
effects. In these cases, Pigouvian corrective taxation does not suffice to "undo" the externality
in ways which maximize societal welfare. In short, in the second-best world in which we live,
there is no presumption that a carbon tax alone can suffice to address optimally the problem of
climate change. To the contrary, there is a presumption that additional interventions can
increase societal welfare. 7


6
  For a general analysis extending the standard theory of optimal taxation to the theory of Pareto efficient
taxation, see Stiglitz (1987).
7
  The mathematics establishing these results is straightforward. The usual Lagrangean associated with maximizing
social welfare (and Pareto optimality, where the well-being of one group is maximized subject to the levels
attained by other groups) incorporates the limitations on government redistribution, e.g. by embedding self-
selection constraints and limiting the set of taxes/interventions. It turns out that with specific utility functions,
where, for instance, leisure is separable from goods and where the effects of climate change are separable from
goods and leisure, and if the government is allowed to impose unrestricted non-linear income and commodity
taxes, then the standard efficiency results can be restored (Kaplow, 1996, 2006, building on Atkinson and Stiglitz,
1976). But even with strong separability conditions, if the government were restricted in its income tax, say to a
linear income tax, then public policy once again has to take into account distributive effects (Stiglitz, 2009).
  The work of Goulder, Hafstead, and William (2016) can perhaps best be looked at in this way. They provide a
special model in which they show the desirability of using a clean energy standard over simply using a price: "On
the other hand, lower electricity prices have a virtue associated with tax interactions. Because it gives rise to a less
pronounced increase in electricity prices, the [clean energy standard (CES)] leads to smaller distortions caused by
the tax system. Our models indicate that this offsetting benefit makes the CES nearly as cost-effective as--and in
some cases more cost-effective than--the equivalent emissions price policy" (p.188). Our analysis is very much in

3
Earlier results showing that when information is imperfect and/or asymmetric and risk markets
incomplete--that is always--markets are not (constrained) Pareto efficient imply, of course,
that climate change is never the only "market failure." 8 These microeconomic externalities
imply there are likely to be significant macroeconomic externalities (Jeane and Korinek, 2010)
that government policy will need to take into account. While these, too, may sometimes be
effectively addressed through price interventions, the relevant price interventions will differ
from sector to sector, depending on the nature of these macroeconomic externalities and
spillovers. Moreover, private decisions are also affected by publicly provided infrastructure.
While prices may help guide these decisions, inevitably market imperfections, such as those
associated with geography, loom large, and limit the guidance that can be provided by carbon
prices alone. And government itself seldom relies on pricing alone (or even shadow prices) in
making its resource allocations.9
It is this and similar insights, all of which can be framed as second or third best deviations from
the "standard model," that informed our thinking. If the standard economists' arguments were
correct, and if (as is conventionally assumed) citizens are rational, it would appear that there
should be strong support for a carbon tax, accompanied perhaps by some measures to ensure
that those who might lose from a carbon tax are made whole. But so far, few countries have



their spirit, though they do not point out clearly what departure from the Diamond-Mirrlees model justifies a
departure from using a single price intervention. In the analysis below, as we'll see, the departure relates to costly
redistributions, which seem not to play the central role in their model.
  While this paper focuses on costly redistributions, other restrictions in the set of admissible taxes also give rise to
the desirability of going beyond just a carbon tax, for instance, restrictions on the imposition of different tax rates
on different products and restrictions on the imposition of taxes on rents. When, for instance, there are rents, a
higher carbon tax may be viewed as an indirect way of taxing rents in some sectors.
   The difference between Ramsey's analysis of commodity taxation--where taxes were related to the elasticity of
supply as well as demand--and that of Diamond and Mirrlees--where only demand is relevant--arises from the
absence of rents in the latter model or the complete taxation away of those rents. See Dasgupta and Stiglitz
(1971).
   Cross-country redistributive issues are more complex, and more difficult to resolve, than those addressed here,
and this provides an even more compelling case for a deviation from a global single carbon price. See Stiglitz
(2017).
8
  See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986) and Geanakoplos and Polemarcharkis (1986). The term "constrained Pareto
optimality" simply refers to the fact that, even taking into account the costs of obtaining information and creating
markets, the equilibrium is not Pareto efficient.
9
  Stiglitz (2018b) explains why, even if it were guided by shadow prices, government would not necessarily want to
use the same shadow prices for all projects, in all periods, and in all locations, and would not want to use the same
prices used by markets.

4
enacted significant carbon taxes, let alone relied on them to curb the use of fossil fuels, and
there remains significant opposition from various quarters. In one sense, this paper is an
enquiry into whether there might exist a rationale for such opposition, and if so, are there
reforms in the design of the carbon tax (perhaps along the lines suggested by the Stern-Stiglitz
Report) that might result in a broader consensus behind it.

Beyond the introduction and the conclusion, this paper is divided into four sections. In the
first, I lay out some of the important, but not always transparent, assumptions that shape
public policy. In the second, I focus more narrowly on designing carbon policy when
distributional considerations are important, and there are not first best, or often even second
best, mechanisms for undoing the distributive consequences of carbon pricing. In the third, I
focus on the interactions between pricing trajectories and innovation, addressing the question
of whether it might be desirable to begin with a high carbon price which would subsequently be
reduced. In the fourth section, I have a few remarks about an old puzzle--the merits of using
prices vs. quantities--in the context of climate change.

     2. The core assumptions
This paper is, in many ways, an exploration of optimal policy in contexts in which there are
multiple market failures and public policy constraints, not just a single market failure- excessive
emissions of carbon that could be corrected by a single intervention, imposing a carbon price.
10   It may be useful, in this introductory section, to lay out the range of deviations from the
standard first best model and the constraints on government that we will explore in subsequent
sections.


The standard simple model of optimal environmental intervention has a well-defined damage
function, a well-defined damage abatement (emissions reduction) function, a representative
consumer, and costless adjustment, and the only market failure is the absence of a carbon
price. In this context, it is obvious that direct regulation (specifying the quantity of allowable


10
   As we have noted in the next section, we focus on limitations on the ability to redistribute income, limitations
which, in turn, may be explicable in terms of imperfections of information. See Mirrlees (1971) and Stiglitz
(1987b). In section 4, we focus on inherent market failures in the innovation process.

5
emissions) and price regulation (specifying a fine for emissions) are equivalent. Much of the
"folk" policy literature assumes that the government may not know precisely the abatement
function or even the damage function at the time the policy is imposed. If, of course, the
government knows precisely the marginal damage cost, then imposing a fine equal to the
marginal damage cost achieves the first best outcome. But if, as in Weitzman (1974), the
damage function is itself unknown 11, then ex ante, we don't know what the optimal fine (price)
should be. Weitzman's early analysis made it clear, at least as a matter of principle, that the
economists' presumption in favor of the use of price interventions was more limited than had
previously been thought. 12


This paper explores a set of complementary reasons for policy to go beyond a carbon tax in
support of the conclusions of the Stern-Stiglitz Commission, some of which go beyond the
considerations that have preoccupied optimal tax-and-expenditure theory.


2.1.     Welfare criteria. Much of this paper focuses on the observation that carbon taxes have
     distributive implications. In particular, it may be (if carbon consumption increases less than
     in proportion to income), and be perceived to be, regressive. 13 Levinson (2018) argues that
     for the US, the rich consume more energy but not proportionately so, so that a carbon tax is
     regressive.      More broadly, it can have large adverse distributive consequences which
     cannot easily be undone. 14 This was illustrated by the refrain of France's yellow vest
     protestors in response to the proposal for an increase in gasoline taxes, viewed as part of


11
   Or if there is uncertainty about the abatement function and the damage function is upward-sloping.
12
   In a sense, Weitzman's work could be set in the context of the extensive work on optimal policy, and especially
optimal taxation, with asymmetries of information between the government and agents, where it had been shown
that it was optimal to have non-linear interventions, i.e. neither relying on price or quantity interventions, if such
non-linear interventions are implementable. The formal similarities between the various
screening/signaling/optimal tax models are, by now, well-recognized. See, e.g. Mirrlees (1971, 1975) and Atkinson
and Stiglitz (1976, 1980).
13
   Even if a carbon tax is progressive, it may be less progressive than other tax instruments, so that shifting towards
a carbon tax can reduce the progressivity of the tax system. Of course, as we discuss below, there are other
changes to policy that can offset these effects, but whether these offsetting measures will be undertaken and
sustained is a different matter, which we also discuss below.
14
   By adverse distribution effects, we simply mean redistributions that lower the level of social welfare under an
inequality averse social welfare function, e.g. distributive effects against the poor.

6
     the broader agenda of creating a carbon price in France. "The government talks about the
     end of the world. We are worried about the end of the month." 15 (Of course, it didn't help
     that the government had earlier lowered taxes on the wealthiest French citizens.)



At least for some important aspects of energy consumption--in the home and for public
transportation--prices charged the poor do not have to increase in tandem with the price of
carbon. There can be non-linear electricity tariffs that undo the distributive effects of the
carbon tax for the poor, and public transportation, especially for the poor, can be subsidized.
More generally, there are combinations of interventions that may reduce carbon consumption
and still be progressive

In addition to the standard vertical inequities (between the rich and the poor), we also consider
horizontal inequities (impacts of a tax on individuals, say, with the same income, who differ in
their consumption preferences). Such differences provide a critique of proposals to rebate the
carbon tax16. While on average, a uniform lump sum payment may more than compensate
low income individuals for increased energy costs--the evidence, as we have already noted, is
that carbon consumption on average increases with income--there are sub-groups for whom
that may not be true. A more distributively sensitive but less efficient policy--a carbon tax
exempting fuel (which already has a high implicit carbon tax)--might increase social welfare
and might not have run into such opposition.17




15
   Interestingly, transportation may be the one sector in which energy/carbon usage increases more than in
proportion to income, partly because many poor do not own cars. See Grainger and Kolstad (2010) for the US.
More generally, see Flues and Thomas (2015) and Sterner (2012). The yellow-vests protests seems to have
reflected concerns of a particular subgroup that face high fuel costs. Because of where low income housing is
located in relation to work opportunities, the working poor often have to travel long distances.
16
   Such a proposal received the support of a broad coalition of American economists in a letter published in the
Wall Street Journal on January 19, 2019. Other critiques are based on the arguments provided in later sections of
this paper, as well as the inefficiencies of providing lump sum redistributions and subsequently having to impose
distortionary taxes to raise revenues, including those required for green infrastructure. The major argument put
forward for such proposals is based on political economy, the ability to garner sufficient political support for a
carbon tax. We comment on these political economy arguments below.
17
   In the discussion below, we will explain why the government may not able to offset these distributional impacts.

7
Governments are often adverse to policies that introduce large differences among individuals
who previously seemed similarly situated, even if the differences are related to the extent to
which they generate negative societal externalities 18. This is especially true if the government is
sensitive to loss aversion 19--the fact that those who lose from the high carbon tax lose more,
or perceive those losses more intensely, than those who gain from the restructured tax
structure (e.g. from lower taxes on labor and capital).

The significance of these distribution effects will depend, of course, on the nature of the
economy and the set of instruments available to government. The costs of undoing any adverse
distributive consequences is affected also by the diversity of the population. Distributive
consequences will be larger in a society in which there are greater disparities in income and
greater societal heterogeneity. The former is a standard argument in the theory of optimal
taxation, but the latter has not been given sufficient attention, partly because much of the
literature, beginning with Mirrlees (1971), focused on vertical inequalities in models where all
individuals of a given income were identical. An implication is that it might be desirable to have
more reliance on regulations and restraints in an economy with a high level of inequality and
diversity, like the US, than in a society with greater equality and less diversity.

Still a third concern is risk. Individuals are risk averse, and cannot obtain insurance against
many of the risks that they face--including the uncertainties posed by policy itself. In a world
in which individuals may not be sure about the full distributive consequences of a carbon tax,
risk aversion will mean that a carbon tax lowers their ex ante expected utility. Risk averse
individuals may believe that a carbon tax (even when accompanied by a lump-sum


18
   And even if similar changes in well-being could have resulted from changes in market prices. The implication for
the cost of energy of the Stern-Stiglitz recommended price of carbon is far smaller than variations in the prices of
energy that have often occurred over the past 40 years. (See, for instance, Stiglitz 2018c).
19
   See, e.g. Tversky and Kahneman 1991. As we note below, individuals may not be fully aware of their levels of
carbon consumption, and therefore of the impact of say a carbon tax. Loss aversion is defined relative to their
current level of utility.
 Similar results may hold in a standard utilitarian analysis with concave utility functions, where individuals differ in
their preferences, even when the carbon tax is uniformly fully rebated. For non-negligible taxes, the increase in
utility of the gainers (low carbon consumers) may be less than the loss in utility of the losers (high carbon
consumers). This is even more so, as we note below, in a standard ex ante utilitarian analysis where individuals are
uncertain about the consequences of the carbon tax, even if they have rational expectations concerning average
impacts.

8
redistribution) might make them worse off, simply because they are uncertain about the
general equilibrium effects. 20

A fourth concern (taken up briefly in section 5) combines risk and the absence of a full set of
insurance markets and fully state contingent policies and a particular aspect of distribution--
intergenerational equity. Alternative policies have implications for intergenerational
distribution, including that of risk bearing, the consequences of which are not fully offset by
intergenerational transfers. 21

There is a final set of modifications to the simplistic welfare framework that we take into
account: adjustment is costly, both financially and psychically, and it is the latter that raises the
most problematic issues.
Moreover, advances in behavioral economics have detailed the many ways in which individuals
differ from the homo oeconemus of standard theory, both in limited cognitive capacities and in
the endogeneity of preferences, which to a large extent are culturally determined. 22 Policies


20
   These individuals will, of course, oppose the tax, unless there is some credible way to compensate them. There
is clearly a close relationship between these risk effects and the horizontal inequities discussed in the previous
paragraphs, where particular individuals may believe that a carbon tax accompanied by a uniform lump sum
distribution may make them worse off also because they believe that their (general equilibrium) carbon
consumption might be greater than the average per capita and/or they believe that their costs of adjustment are
significant. Imperfections in competition may also result in adverse distribution effects, with goods prices going up
more than proportionately to costs of production. The imposition of a carbon tax may provide an opportunity for
those with market power to take advantage of them. There is ample evidence that firms often increase prices
following an increase in taxes in ways that are markedly different from what one would have expected in a fully
competitive equilibrium. Uncertainty about the degree of market power (and there is again ample evidence of
such uncertainty, especially in the midst of on-going increases in market power) will lead to uncertainty about the
effects of a carbon tax.
21
   Limitations in such intergenerational transfers is one of the reasons that the rate of discount to be used in social
cost benefit analysis may differ from the pure rate of discounting of future generations (plus an adjustment for the
decline in marginal utility as a result of technological change). See, e.g. Stiglitz 1982. (Other reasons have to do
with other market imperfections, e.g. limitations in the ability to costlessly transfer money from the private sector
to the public. See Stiglitz 2018b.)
22
   This has been called by Hoff and Stiglitz (2016) the second strand of behavioral economics. The original work in
behavioral economics, based on insights from psychology, focused on cognitive limitations, analyzing how these
often led to decisions that seemed inconsistent with individuals' deep preferences. This second strand, by
contrast, draws on insights from social psychology and sociology, and is centered on the determination of these
deep preferences and societal norms. There is a growing literature on endogenous preferences and how
preferences and norms are shaped. See, e.g., Bowles (1998, 2016).
    An often cited example is Israeli day care centers: charging parents for picking up their children late from a
daycare center actually exacerbated the problem of late pickups. Previously, it had been a "norm" to pick up a
child on time, and parents struggled to conform to the norm. But a charge made a late pickup into an ordinary

9
predicated on analyses of rational agents with fixed preferences often go astray, simply
because the underlying predicate that agents are rational with fixed preferences is so off the
mark. Public policies aimed at increasing savings making use of insights from behavioral
economics seem far more efficacious than those based on the conventional model of
individuals maximizing the standard intertemporal utility function. And this may be particularly
important when it comes to the establishment of norms when individually rational behavior is
so out of tune with societal well-being.
One important insight of behavioral economics already noted is that individuals are "loss
averse." This means that the societal consequences of a policy that symmetrically imposed
losses on some individuals and gains to others would lower social welfare: the losses of the
losers would be more salient than the gains of the winners. Greater salience can easily translate
into greater political activism. 23

The introduction of behavioral economics into our analysis, though, presents a challenge which
this paper cannot resolve: We know less about the determinants either of preferences and
norms or of deviations from full rationality than we would like. While even if we can't provide
adequate answer to the relative merits of prices and regulations in changing preferences and
norms, it is important to raise the issue: in the end, this question may be of first order
importance.


2.2.    Innovation. A standard result in modern welfare economics is that market economies
     are essentially never efficient when it comes to the pace and direction of innovation.
     (Stiglitz and Greenwald, 2014). Knowledge is a quasi-public good, and there are significant
     spillovers from innovation. Government policies can affect the direction of innovation, and


commodity, with parents evaluating the costs and benefits (Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000). For a more recent
survey, see Gneezy et al 2011
    Endogeneity of preferences poses difficult problems in welfare economics (see, e.g. Gintis, 1974), but, as we
shall see, can play an important role in addressing climate change. In the context of climate change, see also
Mattauch and Hepburn, 2016.
23
   There is some controversy about whether it is appropriate to use loss aversion to analyze welfare implications of
alternative policies. Kahneman, Wakker and Sarin (1997) emphasize the difference between "Decision Utility" and
"Experienced Utility." While loss aversion may correctly capture the weights humans put on decisions, it may not
capture "Experienced Utility" well.


10
     not just through its role in providing direct support, especially for basic research. It can, for
     instance, do so through prices and regulations. A long-established theory of induced
     innovation provides an intellectual framework guiding us in understanding how that
     happens and the merits of alternative policies.
These issues interact, of course, with those discussed earlier: innovation can have significant
distributive effects, and changes in norms, preferences, and capabilities can both help shape
the direction of innovation and affect the social consequences.


2.3.     Political economy. Economists often refer vaguely to "political constraints": a
     particular policy (such as a carbon tax) would be first best, but because of ill-defined
     political constraints, there is a need for a second best policy. My experience in politics has
     left me with an uncertain feeling about such constraints: sometimes, they seem real and
     binding until they suddenly disappear; the art of politics entails persuading others that
     something that might seem economically and politically infeasible in fact is feasible. 24
There are two real aspects of political decision-making that cannot not be ignored. The first is
time consistency. Time consistency problems arise whenever there are long term decisions,
and as such are particularly pertinent to innovation: The government has an incentive to
persuade the private sector to develop low carbon technologies, but once developed, the
marginal social cost of carbon might decrease, thus allowing it to charge a low carbon price.
But at a low carbon price, the development of the new technology would not have made sense.
Of course, if private agents view governments as having a time consistency problem, the




24
  Sometimes, the political constraints are another way of saying, "if we could only ignore issues of distribution."
But of course we can't. Distributive consequences are of first order importance.
  Earlier, we referred to the distributive issues raised by horizontal inequities. Government policies creating
horizontal inequities are sometimes viewed as unacceptable--even though when such disparities are created by
the market they seem acceptable. Thus, it may be viewed as "unfair" and therefore unacceptable for government
to impose a carbon tax that hurts those who have to drive to work, even though an increase in the oil price that
would have the identical effect is accepted. The reason may be the seeming anonymity of market forces while it is
often difficult to evaluate the true motives and rationale behind government policies. In contrast, it is possible,
and perhaps even plausible, that non-drivers might get together in a political process to advantage themselves at
the expense of drivers.


11
initially announced price or regulatory path will not be viewed as credible, and therefore will
not have the desired effect. (Helm et al 2003).
         Here's where the second, and often neglected, aspect of political economy enters:
policies today can affect the coalitions that form and agents' behavior (investments) in such a
way that their future interests are changed; and this may alter the political support for policies
in the future. Indeed, this was part of the rationale for the Paris strategy: if enough firms
believed that there was enough global commitment to climate change that there would be a
high carbon price (implicit or explicit) going forward, they would have an incentive to make
green investments; and to ensure that they were advantaged over firms that didn't make such
investments and to ensure that they obtained the desired returns on those investments, they
would then politically support, in coalition with other like-minded agents, a high carbon price. 25


Time consistency, and questions about whether there is a political resolution, enter repeatedly
in policy analysis. In multiple contexts, a policy is described which grows the economic pie, so
everyone could be made better off. But that's far different from a policy that will make
everyone better off. Even if government engages in compensatory actions today so that
everyone is better off now, it may be difficult for the government to commit itself to sustaining
those compensatory policies. 26 Moving beyond the "single price in all uses, at all dates, and at




25
   There is a fixed cost associated with forming coalitions; and the formation of such coalitions is like a public good.
Once established, the coalitions can be self-sustaining, and result in the continuation of the policies. For an earlier
discussion, see Stiglitz (1998b).
   More generally, there can be a multiplicity of such political/economic equilibria. See Hoff and Stiglitz (2004,
2007), who study a transition from a "lawless" state to one governed by a rule of law in the context of the
transition from Communism to a market economy. There are obvious analytic parallels between that transition
and the transition from a high-carbon (where there is a dearth of rules governing carbon emissions) to a low-
carbon economy.
    At least partial time consistency can be obtained even in a contestable democracy, where future governments
may not fully share preferences (values) and the current government cannot fully commit future governments to
any course of action. Investments both in the private and public sectors are, for instance, reversible but only
partially so, especially in the short run. Even reversible policies (e.g. a change in tax rates) can lead to only partially
reversible actions (i.e. long-term investments), and these can affect both future patterns of voting and behavior.
See Korinek and Stiglitz (2008, 2009) for a discussion of the general theory in the context of a game theoretic
model with two parties and an application.
26
   For a discussion in the context of globalization and technical change, see Korinek and Stiglitz, 2019.

12
all places" increases the set of feasible policies, and thus the prospect of finding a policy that
avoids politically unacceptable redistributive effects in a time-consistent way.
3.     Distribution

A central reason, we have argued, for going beyond a single carbon price relates to distribution.
Changes in prices, regulations, and government investments each can have large redistributive
effects. There may be large costs associated with undoing the distributional effects, and, given
limitations in information available to government, the adverse effects on distribution may not
be able to be undone and, in any case, can never be undone perfectly and costlessly. The
question on which we focus in this section is whether there may be regulations and/or more
complex pricing policies that achieve similar environmental goals as a simple carbon tax with
fewer adverse distributive consequences. Though regulations might not be first best, i.e. would
not be chosen if redistributions were costless, once the costs of redistributions are taken into
account, they are socially desirable. 27 Throughout the analysis of this section, we assume there
is a carbon tax. We show, however, that under certain circumstances, regulations 28 may
reduce the general level of the carbon tax required to achieve a given reduction in carbon
emissions, reduce the magnitude of the resulting adverse distribution, and as a consequence,
increase societal welfare.

3.1.     A Simple Model

We begin by ignoring uncertainty and dynamics, focusing simply on the question of the best
way to achieve, for example, a given reduction in carbon.29 Figure 1A illustrates the carbon tax
that achieves the given level of carbon emissions, with the level of carbon emissions falling as
the carbon price increases. Assume there is some important sector j, which is very carbon
intensive and such that for that sector, a switch to a low carbon-intensive production




27
   We emphasize that this is a theoretical exercise. We are not evaluating the relative merits of any particular
regulatory measure designed to supplement a carbon tax.
28
   or differential carbon taxes in different usages
29
   As we have emphasized, the amount of reduction that is desirable is itself an endogenous variable in a fuller
analysis.

13
technology only occurs at a very high carbon price. 30 We identify a switching price, p*, at which
it switches to a low carbon technology. The switching price p* determines the carbon price
required to achieve emission levels of E*; at a price below p*, the level of carbon emissions
exceeds the desired level.




                                                     Figure 1A




                                                     Figure 2B



30
  This formulation biases the analysis towards a regulatory intervention, since it assumes there is a well-defined,
easily identifiable low emissions technology. In practice, as we note below, there are a myriad of decisions that
affect emissions. The Stern-Stiglitz Commission recommended combining regulations with prices. Regulations
can, for instance, proscribe coal burning electric generation; the prices will help induce low emission choices within
non-coal technologies. See also the discussion below.

14
Societal welfare (apart from the benefits of carbon reduction) is denoted by the indirect social
welfare function W = aR VR (q, qj , YR) + (1 - aR) VNR (q, qj , YNR) where qj is the price of the jth
good and q is the price of all other goods, VR and VNR being the indirect utility of the rich and
non-rich respectively, YR and YNR the income of the rich and non-rich respectively, aR the social
weight put on the rich, with 31 Vqj = -Cj VY and Vq = -C VY where Cj and C are consumption in the
carbon-intensive sectors and of all other goods, respectively (where for convenience we have
dropped the subscript denoting the group), and VY is the marginal utility of income.32 33

Now assume instead of relying just on prices, we introduce a regulation for sector j that
requires producers to use the very low carbon technology. This shifts the supply curve of
carbon, as depicted in figure 1A, so that the target emissions level can now be achieved at a low
carbon price p' < p*. The constraint imposes an implicit higher shadow price on carbon in
sector j: The effective shadow price of carbon in j (at least with respect to its choice of
technology) is p*, higher than p'. This is the sense in which the regulation violates the principle
of one price. Of course, sector j uses a "too low" carbon technology relative to the carbon price
p'; and it is the lower carbon intensity in that sector that allows for the carbon budget to be
satisfied at a lower price. With the regulation in place, p' is the price of carbon that achieves the
desired reduction in carbon. At carbon price p', the cost of production of sector j would be
lower at any choice of technique than at p* simply because of the lower carbon price, but in
total, higher than it would be without the regulation because of the constraint of being forced
to use the low carbon technology. In effect, while sector j confronts a higher carbon price, it
gets a lump-sum rebate on the difference between p' and p*.




31
   These are standard results concerning indirect utility functions.
32
   We can explicitly incorporate loss aversion by writing the welfare function as depending on current prices po:
V(p ­ po,.... ), with |Vp+ | > |Vp- |, i.e. the loss from an increase in price above the current level is greater than the
gain from a fall in the price.
33
   Throughout this simplified analysis, incomes are kept constant, except that the proceeds of the tax are
redistributed as a uniform lump sum.

15
All products (with carbon emissions), with the exception of j, now have a lower price q than
without regulations, and on that account societal welfare is higher 34 . Of course, the regulation
has increased the cost of production in sector j, increased output prices in that sector, and
introduced a distortion in the economy. On these accounts, societal welfare is lower. It is
possible, however, that the former effect on social welfare outweighs the latter.

Carbon tax revenues are lower, by the amount (p* - p') x E, where E is the level of emissions.
The move from carbon prices p* to the regulation combined with carbon price p' leads to a
change in consumer prices from {q*, q*j} to {q', q'j}. 35 If we ignore distribution, the increase in
utility from lower carbon prices is (from the indirect utility function) approximately  Y {(q* - q')

x C + (q*j - qj ) Cj } (where  y  aR VR Y(q, qj , YR) + (1 - aR) VNR Y(q, qj , YNR) ), which, if the shadow

price of a dollar in the public sector is not too different from that in the private (so that  Y  1),

is approximately equal to the difference in tax revenues, in a competitive economy with zero
profits where the change in the value of output equals the change in the cost of production, the
payments of carbon taxes plus the additional costs of production resulting from the regulation.
But going beyond an infinitesimal tax, the gain in consumer surplus from the lowering of q is
strictly less than the loss in welfare from the distortionary regulation plus the loss in tax
revenue: there is a deadweight loss. 36 That is the essence of the Diamond-Mirrlees results on
the desirability of production efficiency (the use of a single price in production.) If only
efficiency were the issue (and there were no other second-best considerations), carbon pricing
would thus be preferable.

3.1.1. Direct distributional effects

There are, however, both direct and indirect distributional impacts of a carbon tax. For
simplicity, assume that the proceeds of the tax are used to reduce proportionately income
taxes. If those who consume commodity j are disproportionately rich and those who consume
the other goods are disproportionately poor, then the "tax-cum-regulatory" system imposes
more of the adjustment burden on the rich and less on the poor, so that social welfare, as

34
   Even apart from any benefit from lower carbon emissions.
35
   For simplicity, we assume constant returns to scale technologies, so there are no pure profits/rents.
36
   Illustrated in figure 1B by the shaded area.

16
measured by the change in aR VR + (1 - aR) VNR, increases so long as the proceeds of the carbon
tax at the margin are not distributed too progressively (that is, so long as the reduction in
revenues from the lowering of the carbon tax doesn't have too regressive effects). The tax-
cum-regulatory policy drives down the overall carbon price, even if it creates an inefficiency,
centered on good j. Hence the incidence of the tax-cum-regulatory regime is more on the rich:
the rich disproportionately pay the cost of the regulatory inefficiency, because they consume a
lot of j, and the poor bear disproportionately benefit from the lower carbon price.37

In short, one has to weigh the distributional benefit against the production distortion to assess
the desirability of the tax-cum-regulatory scheme vs. the pure tax. It is clearly conceivable that
the former is preferred, especially if the carbon saving from the regulation is great and the
distributional impacts are large.

3.1.2. Indirect Distributional Effects

There can also be indirect distributional impacts, as a result of the general equilibrium effects.
The higher carbon tax may have an adverse impact on the relative demand for, say, unskilled
labor (for example, if more carbon-intensive goods, like coal, are more unskilled-labor
intensive), lowering wages of low-income workers. In first-, or even second-best tax theory, the
government can provide a wage subsidy to low-wage workers (in general, and those directly
impacted in particular 38) that would offset this adverse distributional effect. Again, however, in
practice implementing these additional subsidies is costly.

Indeed, implementing the offsetting subsidies may not even be feasible, given the limited
information available to the government, which cannot monitor either effort or hours worked,
the standard assumption in the theory of optimal taxation. 39 Though any equalitarian social


37
   Tax revenues decrease (a lower carbon tax times the same target level of carbon), necessitating a reduction in
public expenditures (redistributions) or an increase in taxes elsewhere. If, for instance, there is a uniform increase
in income tax rates, for the poor, the gains in the reduction in the carbon tax are greater than the losses from the
increase in income taxes.
38
   Because of imperfections in labor mobility, adverse effects on those directly impacted are likely to be greater
than on labor more generally.
39
   Thus, an individual may be a low-income worker because he is low ability, or because he is high ability but is
exerting little effort or working fewer hours. If the government could monitor effort and hours worked, it could
infer ability and impose a first-best lump-sum tax. See Mirrlees (1971).

17
welfare function would like to distinguish among workers of different abilities, making such
distinctions is costly and imperfect, and this is so whether one relies on self-selection
mechanisms or direct screening mechanisms. As a result, policies that increase inequality in
wages (the disparity between wages of skilled and unskilled workers) lower social welfare
(Stiglitz (2018b)).

Whether the general equilibrium impact of a carbon tax is to lower wages of unskilled workers
is an empirical question that may be hard to answer. It may reduce the demand for coal
(emphasized by the Trump administration) and thus of coal miners, but it may also increase the
demand for unskilled solar panel installers and thus increase (relative) wages of unskilled
workers. Data suggest that for the US, the increase in demand for solar panel installers is
greater than the loss in demand for coal miners, and if this pattern holds more generally, a
carbon tax would be even more desirable than it would have been in the absence of these
distribution effects.40

This example illustrates an important aspect of responding to the distributive impacts of a
carbon tax: When there are an easily identifiable set of losers, it may be easier to design
offsetting measures than when the population of losers is more diffuse. Identifying coal miners
and designing policies to limit their losses may be relatively easy compared to identifying those
consumers who disproportionately are adversely affected by a high carbon price.

3.1.3. Horizontal inequities

A very high carbon tax leads to horizontal differences among consumers who previously were
similarly situated. Those who consume disproportionately more carbon goods are worse off.
Thus, poor owners of carbon-inefficient vehicles who must use them extensively see the
possibility that their real incomes will fall, and the value of one of their few assets, their
vehicles, will decline as well.




40
  See Wei, Patadia, and Kammen (2010). Patrizio et al. (2018) describe how a well-designed "bio-energy with
carbon capture and storage" (BECCS) strategy can actually preserve large numbers of jobs in the coal industry.

18
The essential problem is that there is no way of compensating the high-carbon consumers that
does not undo the objective of the carbon tax, which is to discourage consumption of carbon-
intensive goods. Assume, arguendo, that the government could observe the consumption
patterns of each individual. It can then identify the individuals who are consuming high levels of
carbon-intensive goods. But attempts to offset the loss of welfare with a grant based on their
carbon consumption is, effectively, undoing the carbon tax. Only if it could see deep into the
soul of the individual and ascertain who was a high-carbon consumer without looking at
behavior could it accomplish the necessary redistribution within the framework of a carbon tax.
This is clearly impossible. 41

The issue just described increases in importance the larger the carbon tax, the larger the
disparities in consumption patterns (which may be related both to income disparities and
population heterogeneity) and the greater the societal loss aversion.

3.1.4. Uncertainty about incidence, Horizontal Inequities and a Preference for a Smaller Carbon
Tax

There is a further, related set of arguments in favor of a mix of policies that include regulations
with an implicit higher carbon tax in some uses, but results in a smaller carbon tax overall. 42
Assume, as in the previous paragraphs, that there is unobservable individual heterogeneity
making it impossible for government to compensate each individual for the carbon tax he has
paid. All that can be done is to compensate the average individual. The individual himself may
not know enough about the set of available technologies ex ante to know the magnitude of the
price increases to be expected at each level of carbon price. But ex ante, the imposition of a


41
   That is, the only signal that high-carbon preference individuals are deserving of additional compensation is their
consumption of carbon-intensive goods. Using that as a basis of compensation would, of course, undo the effects
of the carbon tax.
42
   The distinction between the discussion of this section and our earlier discussion of individual heterogeneity is
this: the earlier discussion focused on the consequences for social welfare of the inability to offset the differential
effects on different individuals; here we focus on the fact that individuals themselves may now know enough
about the structure of the economy to be able to predict the consequences of a particular policy on their own well-
being. (In the former model, individuals understood the consequences, but the government couldn't ascertain who
was affected in which way). This uncertainty about the consequences of a policy change means that individuals' ex
ante expected utility is lower--it has a social cost. It can also have political consequences: it can (rationally) lead
to opposition to the policy change.

19
carbon tax can be thought of as mean income preserving spread, in the sense that, on average,
all of the income collected will be paid back, but that will not be true for any particular
individual, who may get back more or less than she paid. It should be clear that if individuals are
sufficiently risk (or loss) averse, then all individuals might oppose the carbon tax because their
expected utility, taking into account the uncertain incidence 43, is lower. And the greater the
carbon tax, the greater the loss in welfare. 44 In some cases, where there is an explicit green
technology--renewable energy--one may be able to induce the switch to the "greener"
technology more efficiently, with less redistributive consequences and with less uncertainty,
through a subsidy for a particular class of technologies or a regulation than through a general
carbon tax. 45
So too, there may be more uncertainty associated with the consequences of a carbon tax than
with that of particular regulations. This is the case, for instance, for a regulation that specified a
particular alternative technology, with a predictable impact on costs through the economic
system. This may be the case even for the government. There is what has been called in other
contexts instrument uncertainty 46.

A regulation that simply specifies the use of the low emissions technology (when such a
technology can be identified) may, accordingly, be preferable to the use of a sector-specific
carbon emissions tax.47 Thus, a portfolio of actions entailing "low uncertainty regulations" and



43
    That there is such uncertainty is obvious: economists disagree markedly over tax incidence.
44
    There may be still greater uncertainty because of the possibility of new technologies being introduced as a result
of a carbon tax. The next section will deal explicitly with induced innovation.
45
    Instrument uncertainty may lead to the preference for sectoral regulatory measures rather than sectoral specific
taxes, as the next paragraph illustrates. See, however, the discussion elsewhere in this paper, including at the end
of section 3.1.6., on the benefits of combining price and regulatory mechanisms.
46
  For instance, the government may not be sure of the level of carbon tax required to achieve, say, the Paris goals,
or precisely what price of carbon will induce the use of the low emissions technology, in the example earlier in this
section. Instrument uncertainty matters: there is a societal cost (in additional distortions in the price of the jth
good) in imposing a tax beyond the necessary level. A government commitment to obtaining that objective
through a carbon tax may impose a high level of risk on consumers and producers.
   In the context of macroeconomics, the role of instrument uncertainty in affecting the desirability of price vs.
quantity measures has been discussed in Greenwald and Stiglitz (1989). See Hepburn (2006) for a review on
instrument choice under uncertainty. Risk can be mitigated by the kinds of "safety valve" measures discussed in
section 5.1.
47
    It is straightforward to formalize the losses associated with these uncertainties and to compare the
consequences of the use of a price vs. a regulatory intervention.

20
"a relative low carbon tax" can, in terms of ex ante expected utility, be preferred to just a
carbon tax (yielding the same expected reduction in carbon emissions) by all individuals

3.1.5. Alternative ways of achieving carbon reductions consistent with distributional objectives

A natural question is, are there other ways of achieving carbon reductions consistent with
distributional objectives? The government might, for instance, subsidize the consumption of
the non-j goods and tax the consumption of j, achieving the same consumption prices and
therefore the same distributional effects. Even this intervention violates the "one price of
carbon for all uses," but at least it entails a price rather than a regulatory intervention.48

Of course, in the absence of uncertainty and transaction costs, and with perfect information,
one can achieve identical outcomes through either tax or regulatory interventions. 49 But the
solution entailing taxes with offsetting subsidies is more complicated: every sector except j
faces both a carbon tax and a consumption subsidy, and the jth sector faces a carbon tax and a
consumption tax.

While this section has emphasized the use of regulatory measures to complement a carbon tax
to enable lowering the level of the carbon tax, there are other actions the government can take
with similar effects. Any public investment, zoning regulation, or other public action that results
in a shift to the left in the overall supply of carbon at any carbon price lowers the requisite
carbon price. The "single carbon price" rule might suggest that in all of its public investment
and regulatory decisions, the government evaluates alternatives using that carbon price. This
analysis suggests that for certain investment or regulatory decisions, it may want to use a
higher shadow price if there are "favorable" distributive benefits, either directly or indirectly, as



48
   Some of the public discourse concerning fuel standards revolves around similar issues: for instance, some have
suggested that lowering fuel standards would have a positive distributional effect (Holland, Hughes, Knittel, 2009),
though we noted earlier that transport may be one sector in which increasing energy prices would have a positive
distributional effect.
   For an earlier discussion of how to make a carbon tax reform progressive, see Klenert and Mattauch, 2016.
49
   This is a general result: under these conditions, there is no compelling case against regulation and for price
interventions. It is only when one introduces imperfect and asymmetric information, uncertainty, and transactions
cost that one can argue for one instrument over another. But when this is done formally, the case for price
interventions is typically less compelling than economists have assumed. See, e.g., Weitzman (1974, 1977) and the
more extensive discussion in section 5.

21
a result of the lower carbon price. A greater investment in public transportation might thus be
doubly desirable, being particularly beneficial for the poor, and at the same time enabling the
equilibrium price of carbon to be lower than it otherwise would have been. 50

3.1.6. Putting the result in perspective

As we noted in the introduction, the result just derived can be viewed as a specific application
of a more general result in the theory of optimal taxation and expenditures: when there are
distributive effects that cannot be undone by commodity taxes (including type specific factor
subsidies), production efficiency is in general not desirable. 51 Here, it would be desirable to tax
carbon emissions in the jth sector at a higher rate. This would be the case even if there were a
continuous technology choice in the jth sector. There are instances in which this can be (and
has been) done: we can charge a higher price for aviation fuel (consumed more by the rich)
than for gasoline. More generally, if we can identify a set of goods which are more carbon
intensive and more consumed by the rich, it would be desirable to impose higher taxes
(including higher carbon taxes) on these goods. And the same holds for intermediate goods
which are used in the production of final goods which are consumed disproportionately by the
rich.

The discrete change in technology in sector j (and thus of emissions) might, of course, naturally
lead to a "corner" solution, where the tax is set at just the level to induce the lower level of
emissions. Further increases in the jth sector carbon tax would yield lower marginal benefits.52

If that were all that there were to the matter, we could achieve the result either by a regulation
or a sector specific carbon tax set at the level to just induce the use of the low emission
technology. But in practice, matters are more complicated. Because the critical tax may differ




50
   This argument follows that of Stiglitz (2018b), which also analyzes the distributive implications of public
investment, showing the desirability of the use of differential shadow prices.
51
   As we noted earlier, this holds too if there are other restrictions on taxation, e.g. on profits and rent taxes,
especially if these restrictions have distributive consequences.
52
   The optimal tax problem is beset by non-convexities and discontinuities, as Mirrlees (1971) and much of the
subsequent literature has recognized. See, e.g. Arnott and Stiglitz (1988).

22
from firm to firm, a different tax would have to be set for each firm. And because the critical
tax might differ over time, it would have to be continuously reset.

In many cases, however, there are multiple subtle choices concerning techniques of production,
and implementing separate regulations for each of these may be virtually impossible. To induce
firms to make the right choices, one has to rely on the use of a carbon price. This argues for
combining regulations with carbon prices, as the Stern-Stiglitz Report advocates. 53

3.2.    Some Political economy concerns

Not surprisingly, there are political consequences arising from the possibility of adverse
(uncompensated) distributional effects. 54 Individuals are particularly sensitive to high new
taxes (consistent with the theory of loss aversion), and political discourse often centers on the
individuals who are likely to be hurt. Large losers from a carbon tax will campaign against the
carbon tax. As we noted earlier, there is typically uncertainty about the ultimate effect of a tax,
and thus large numbers of individuals, even possibly a majority, may face a lowering of their ex
ante expected utility, and thus oppose even a tax with lump sum rebates. The regulation, by
keeping the carbon tax to a lower level, reduces the distributive effects, except for those
associated with sector j, and may accordingly mitigate these adverse political effects. 55 Thus
the tax-cum-regulatory policy may be (more) politically robust.

Moreover, both among recipients and non-recipients of subsidies, there may be beliefs
(rational or irrational) concerning what are acceptable and non-acceptable subsidies, taxes, and
regulations, all of which are particularly relevant to the political economy of carbon taxation. It
may be acceptable to have a hidden subsidy to coal, which leads to higher wages of coal


53
   Recall our earlier discussion focusing on problems associated with implementation and instrument uncertainty.
There is a related point of regulatory circumvention: innovations which comply with the regulation but are less
effective in reducing carbon. It may be difficult for the government to continuously adapt the regulations in
response to changing technology. This is not the case, however, for regulations that focus directly on emission
levels.
54
   Even when there are compensations, as we noted in section I, voters may not believe that there can be a
credible commitment to the continuation of such subsidies. Preventing time inconsistencies in this arena may be
more difficult than in the context of investments, described elsewhere in this paper.
55
   Because sector j is (by assumption) a sector that is disproportionately consumed by the rich, the distributive
impacts may be politically "welcome," and even more so if that sector has a high level of carbon emissions. It will
have political legitimacy.

23
miners, but unacceptable to give coal miners an explicit pay check. (Behind views of what is and
is not acceptable are "narratives": coal protection may be justified because it is protecting the
industry against unfair competition from abroad, while outright subsidies are seen simply as
handouts. And the objection to handouts may not just be "moral," but political--where do we
draw the line in who gets handouts?) While from an analytical perspective, there may be
limited or no difference amongst these alternatives, behavioral economics has shown that
framing and perceptions matter. Thus, it may be acceptable to stop firms that impose large
costs on others (big polluters) through regulation, but not acceptable to "allow" them to
pollute, simply by paying a price to do so.56 Among environmentalists, a standard criticism of
an environmental tax is that it allows those with money to destroy the environment: it puts a
price on something that should be priceless.

3.2.1. Endogenous Preferences and Behavioral Economics

In doing so, it changes attitudes towards the environment and its protection; it can change
preferences in a fundamental way. As we noted earlier, a recent strand of behavioral
economics has emphasized the determination of "deep preferences," what individuals actually
care about. While there has not been much research into the relative impact of prices vs.
regulations in changing "deep preferences," 57 from what has been observed in other contexts,
putting a price on the environment may make it more acceptable to "abuse" it, i.e. to engage in
emissions, while strong regulatory constraints may help create a norm of protecting the
environment.

Similarly, in many countries, for instance, there has been a change in attitudes about the use of
plastics, and especially plastic bags, a change in which grocery store policies may have played
an important role, as they increasingly switched to paper and reusable bags. The switch had


56
   See Sandel (2012) and Bowles and Polania-Reyes (2012). For a somewhat contrasting view, see Caney and
Hepburn (2011). Klenert et al. (2018) emphasize the importance of framing policy proposals in ways that generate
political acceptability
57
   There is some recent research on the behavioral impact of carbon taxes. Similar to the day-care experiment,
Lanz et al. (2018) show experimental evidence on how carbon taxes can crowd out pro-social motivation to
consume less carbon-intensive products. Mattauch, Hepburn and Stern (2018) provide a framework to adjust
carbon taxes taking into account such change in social preferences. While these analyze the behavioral impact of
carbon taxes, there is no evidence on relative impact on behavior of a carbon tax vis-à-vis regulation. .

24
salience. It was an everyday reminder of the importance of the environment, and it thereby
helped reinforce pro-environment attitudes and values. Even when grocery stores started
charging for plastic bags to induce the switch, it was welcome--a sign that the store was
environmentally sensitive--rather than greeted with the hostility that it would have received a
quarter century ago. In turn, the use of paper bags helped spread a culture of environmental
sensitivity. In these cases it was a small price (though from some perspectives, going from a
free bag to charging a few pennies is a large change) that induced changes in behavior, leading
in turn to changes in norms, while in other countries, it was regulations that brought about the
social change. Regulations moving the economy towards green light bulbs, for instance, might
shift consumption patterns far faster than a change in price.58 Social coordination--creating
new norms--may not be optimized by changes in prices, partly because such changes in prices
do not in general signify changes in norms. By contrast, a regulatory induced change to paper
bags and green light bulbs more clearly reflects a new societal norm.



For all these reasons, the combination of regulations and prices might be preferable on both
utilitarian and political economy grounds.

3.2.2. Diffuse vs. concentrated costs

But countering these political economy arguments are those that go in the opposite direction:
while the impacts of general carbon taxes are diffuse, those of a regulation (e.g. on sector j) are
more concentrated, and a standard political economy argument holds that the problem of the
"public good" of lobbying is more easily overcome when impacts are concentrated, i.e. there
will be lobbying by the jth sector to water down the regulations and to make sure that they do
not keep pace with changes in technology. On the other hand, with some industries so much
more polluting than others, and therefore more affected even by a uniform carbon tax, these
high polluting industries have an incentive to lobby against any carbon tax at a significant rate
or for an exemption for their industry, greatly weakening the effectiveness of carbon pricing. In



 This may be particularly true in those instances where it is hard to explain consumption patterns on the basis of
58

models of economic rationality, e.g. individuals could save money by switching to greener products.

25
their campaign against the tax, they will, of course, emphasize adverse effects on ordinary
individuals. In many countries such an unholy alliance has been able to stymie green policies.
Especially as the importance of climate change has come to be generally recognized, seemingly
distributionally sensitive green policies, with regulations targeted at the worst offender, may
garner more political support.

Some have argued that by linking the carbon tax with a uniform direct dividend of the revenues
received one can change the political economy of the carbon tax. Such a policy would, on
average, be strongly redistributive, and many have argued that somehow, this form of
redistribution would be acceptable (because it is associated with the public good of reducing
carbon emissions) when comparable redistributions would not be. These alleged political
economy advantages, proponents claim, more than outweigh the inefficiency associated with
provided lump sum payments to the household sector combined with distortionary taxation to
recover the revenues lost, that might otherwise have been spent, say, on green infrastructure.

There is another political argument in support of a carbon tax with proceeds redistributed as
lump sum payments: It could simultaneously garner support of both progressives with
equalitarian social preferences and conservatives with a procedural preference for markets,
who see the tax as avoiding heavy-handed government interventions. 59

4. Innovation

The nature of the optimal price path is a subject of some controversy, with some arguing for a
slow path of price increase, giving time for individuals to adjust; some suggesting that optimal
(discounted) prices being the same over time, and others arguing for a fast path--or even a
higher price in the short run than the long 60. The Stern-Stiglitz Commission itself seemed
somewhat agnostic on the issue, though it called attention to both the importance of
adjustment costs and innovation:




59
     This argument is, of course, far more salient in some countries, like the United States, than in others.
60
     See Sinclair (1992, 1994) and Ulph and Ulph (1994) for an early discussion.

26
         "Efficient carbon-price trajectories begin with a strong price signal in the present and a
         credible commitment to maintain prices high enough in the future to deliver the
         required changes. Relatively high prices today may be more effective in driving the
         needed changes and may not require large future increases, but they may also impose
         higher, short-term adjustment costs. In the medium to long term, explicit price
         trajectories may need to be adjusted based on the experience with technology
         development and the responsiveness to policy. The policy dynamics should be designed
         to both induce learning and elicit a response to new knowledge and lessons learned.
         Price adjustment processes should be transparent to reduce the degree of policy
         uncertainty..."

The objective of the discussion here is to develop a better understanding of the argument for a
trajectory with a particularly high price in the short run to spur innovation. (Note that the
previous section focused on the overall level of carbon prices--arguing that the use of
regulations may allow the carbon price to be set at a lower level than otherwise. Here, we are
concerned with the trajectory of prices, given a particular set of regulations, that is, whether
optimal prices increase or decrease over time. Analogous issues arises with the time trajectory
of regulations.) 61

The argument for the middle position--a constant price in today's dollars, which entails prices
increasing exponentially at the rate of interest--is, as we noted earlier, derived from the nature
of climate change itself. More generally, there is some smooth increase in expected marginal
damage per ton as cumulative emissions increase. While the shadow price is not an explicit
function of time, it is an explicit function of cumulative emissions, which is itself a function of




61
  Space limitations do not allow us to consider the relative merits of prices vs. regulations in inducing innovation.
There is, however, a direct analogue to the question posed here: the trajectory of regulation, i.e. at what pace
regulatory standards are optimally tightened over time. Regulations can be translated into shadow prices, and
once that is done, the analysis here is directly applicable.
   While the overall lower level of carbon prices will induce less innovation in reducing emissions in those sectors,
the regulation in the high carbon sectors, especially if well-designed (e.g. targeted at limiting emissions), can be
very effective in reducing emissions in these sectors. Given the non-convexities associated with research, it may
be efficient to focus research centered on reducing emissions in the high emissions sectors.

27
time. As we approach the limiting situation, where we are able to contain increases in
atmospheric carbon concentrations, then the (discounted) price converges to a constant.

Popular discussions focus on politics and adjustment costs. Politically, societies are averse to
quick changes, partially for reasons already given. Moreover, quick changes have large costs of
adjustment. Conventional economic costs of adjustments by themselves cannot justify a time-
varying price: individuals will respond slowly if there is a cost of adjustment. But they need to
be guided in their adjustment by the right shadow prices. But because of the macroeconomic
externalities associated with the adjustment process, the macro dynamic process is not in
general efficient. 62 Moreover, as the previous section explained, individuals themselves may
not be sure about the costs that they will bear in the process of adjustment 63, and risk and loss
aversion might then result in large majorities opposing any pricing scheme, even if there were,
say, lump-sum rebates that sufficed to compensate the average individual. Achieving an
efficient, equitable, and politically acceptable adjustment process may accordingly entail time-
varying prices--with a presumption that prices adjust slowly to the long-run equilibrium in
order to spread the adjustment costs out over time. 64

Here I want to present an argument to the contrary: that it may be desirable to have a higher
carbon price in the short run than in the long run.

4.1. Learning by doing and inducing a shift in technology

The argument derives from the benefits from innovation that might be induced by a high-
carbon price in the short run, benefits which extend over time. There are large fixed costs of


62
   That is, a firm in laying off a worker (say in response to a high carbon tax making a particular technology
uncompetitive) doesn't take fully into account the costs imposed on the workers, e.g. in finding a new job, nor
does he take into account the induced unemployment that might result as that worker cutbacks his consumption.
For a broader discussion of macroeconomic externalities, see Jeanne and Korinek (2010).
63
   This argument is analogous to the one presented earlier concerning uncertainties associated with the impacts of
a change in the carbon price across individuals.
64
   There may, in additional, by intergenerational aspects. The generation in which the aggressive transition to a
green economy begins may bear disproportionately the costs, because of changes in asset values. Slower
transitions modulate the impacts on these asset prices. The generation that is at the onset of a green transition
may bear additional fixed costs in designing new alternative technologies. It is problematic whether market
mechanisms will ensure that these costs will be shared across generations, and it is also problematic whether
government will engage in offsetting intertemporal redistributions.

28
switching technologies, and only large changes in relative prices can induce a change in
technology. Once that change is effected, there would be large switching costs to return to a
high carbon technology, and especially if there is learning by doing, so that the low carbon
technology continues to improve relative to the high-carbon technology. Learning by doing
argues that as a result of using a technology, there are improvements in its productivity (Arrow,
1962; Stiglitz and Greenwald, 2014). The theory of localized learning argues that improvements
in one technology--for example, a low-carbon technology--spill over at best imperfectly to
other technologies, say, the high carbon technology (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1969, Acemoglou,
2015). 65 This implies that the prices required to maintain a low carbon economy can be lower
than those required to induce a switch. 66

When there are spillovers to others from learning, the benefits of learning will not be fully
appropriated by the parties making the decisions. In making their production decisions, firms
won't take into account the learning benefits that will not be appropriated by the firm itself.
The optimal carbon price trajectory has to "correct" this externality.


4.2. A Simple Model: The Theory of Induced Innovation

A simple model that captures and expands on some of the insights of the previous paragraphs is
based on the theory of induced innovation 67, where firms have a choice between efforts



65
  In the case of explicit research programs, in principle we could introduce a research subsidy to encourage
"green" research, and some of the earlier literature argued for the use of such a subsidy (as opposed to a
production subsidy) precisely on the grounds we are arguing for here (Acemoglou et al., 2012; Fischer and Newell,
2008; Gerlagh, Kverndokk and Rosendahl, 2014, and Tvinnereima and Mehling (2018). With learning by doing,
however, there is no explicit research program. It is a by-product of decisions about production, which are affected
by carbon prices. The social value of the learning associated with increased production implies that there is an
additional argument for (early) subsidies of production using the green technology. The analysis of the following
section implies that the magnitude of the green production subsidy may decline over time. Stiglitz and Greenwald
(2014) have emphasized the role of government subsidies in the presence of such learning spillovers.
66
   For a similar result, also exploring the policy implications, including for price trajectories, see Kalkuhl et al.
(2012).
67
   There is an old and distinguished literature, dating back to the work of Fellner (1961), Drandakis and Phelps
(1966), Samuelson (1965), Kennedy (1964), Habakkuk (1962), and more recently revived by Acemoglu (2002, 2010)
and Stiglitz (2006, 2014, 2018a). The model developed here is more general and less parametric than many of the
other recent models of induced (or directed) innovation. There are other differences to which we call attention as
we develop the model.

29
directed at reducing carbon emissions and labor costs. We model it by assuming output is a
function of labor L and energy E, and innovation makes each unit of labor more productive
(labor augmenting innovation, denoted by an increase in ) or energy more productive (energy
augmenting innovation, denoted by an increase in ) 68 in the production function

     (3.1)        Q = F (t+1 E, t+1 L),

We assume for simplicity that energy use translates directly into carbon emissions. (A more
complicated version of this model would focus both on innovations reducing energy per unit of
output and emissions per unit of energy.) We make use of the well-established concept of the
innovation possibilities curve, postulating that there is a tradeoff between  and , as depicted
in Figure 2: One can only have more energy-augmenting technological progress by giving up on
labor-augmenting technological progress. 69




                                                     Figure 3




(3.2)  = Z () , Z'  0, Z"  0




68
   While (3.1) does not embed the principle of localized technological progress, it is easy to extend the model to
incorporate this, with each technology having its own value of  and .
69
   For simplicity, we have dropped the time superscript.

30
We assume each period, the innovation curve is defined relative to the state of knowledge of
the previous period.

We assume a large number of symmetric firms, so each firm takes future period's wage and
energy costs as given. With a symmetric equilibrium, all firms pursue the same innovation
strategy. We assume that knowledge produced at t for t + 1 becomes publicly available at t + 2.
A firm only focuses on the "private" benefits of innovation, and these occur at time t+1,
because after that the knowledge is public. 70

A standard result in the theory of induced innovation is that the firm chooses the technological
innovation mix which minimizes cost, and the cost-minimizing point is that where the elasticity
of the innovation curve = dln Z/dln  = relative shares (sL/sE). 71 Innovation is directed at the
factor whose share is relatively large. If the relative labor supply were to diminish, and the
elasticity of substitution between labor and energy were less than one, then the share of labor
would increase, and innovation would be directed more at augmenting labor. 72

The sequence of carbon prices (assumed to increase the cost of energy) thus affects the energy
efficiency at every date--an increase in carbon prices at t increases energy efficiency at every
subsequent date. The value of reducing energy (carbon emissions) today is compounded by the
savings in subsequent dates. The market "bias" and level of investment in innovation are
inefficient because the individual firm doesn't take into account future benefits, since, by
assumption, these innovations move into the public domain the following year. 73



70
   This is a crucial difference between this model and much of the more recent literature, where each entrepreneur
has to solve a complicated intertemporal maximization problem. (In a more fully articulated version of this model,
each entrepreneur would take as given the technological opportunities to be available in subsequent periods as a
result of the innovation by others, and might decide to augment that set by his own technology. Given the
symmetry assumptions, what he does is identical to what others do.)
71
   Note, as in the case of learning by doing, that it is the price of carbon as confronted by the firm, that matters. As
we noted earlier, the market distortions that arise here cannot be effectively addressed by having a general R & D
subsidy, though obviously a subsidy limited to energy augmenting innovation would change the allocation of R & D
between energy augmentation and labor augmentation.

72
   In some of the older literature (Habakkuk, 1962), it was suggested that innovation was directed at increasing the
productivity of labor because it was "scarce." This analysis suggests what is relevant is the relative share.
73
   More generally, there is no presumption that markets are efficient either in the level of investments in
innovation or in the direction. This is true in virtually any model of innovation. (See Stiglitz and Greenwald, 2014).

31
The social value of, say, a percentage reduction in carbon emissions  when the shadow price
of carbon emissions is ps (assumed to be fixed at all dates) is ps   Ct where Ct is the carbon
emissions at time t. Since the carbon emissions will be converging to zero, the social value of
reduced carbon emissions falls over time. Hence, as we set the market price of carbon to reflect
both the shadow cost of emissions today and the social value of induced innovation, it is clear
that the optimal carbon price falls over time. 74

Obviously, this result depends on the time profile of ps. If the shadow price of carbon is
increasing over time because of increasing concentrations of carbon, then it is possible that
pst  Ct might increase for a while. However, at least as we approach the steady state, where
we've been able to contain increases in atmospheric carbon concentrations, so pst converges to
a constant, the value of innovation diminishes.

While this argument implies a price trajectory with a high initial price, doing something is better
than doing nothing. The political economy--resistance to an initially high carbon tax--may, in
the end, be dispositive. 75

4.3. Behavioral Economics Effects

While the analyses presented so far in this section is based on standard models of innovation
with rational individuals and profit-maximizing firms, there are further arguments for a high
initial price of carbon based on the kinds of behavioral economics considerations discussed at
the end of the last section. One has to engineer a major change in mindset from a fossil fuel
economy to a green economy. Incremental changes in prices may not do that. Large changes
do, especially when they are centered around things that are salient in an individual's life.




This is a market failure in addition to the market failure associated with global warming. But it is a market failure
that public policy cannot ignore.
74
   Distributive effects are being ignored, either because there is a lack of concern about distribution or because
there are adequate instruments for undoing the effects. The significance of redistributive effects could also
change over time, reinforcing or offsetting the above conclusion.
75
  Countering this political argument is the one made earlier: early investments in green innovation may help solve
the time inconsistency problem, garnering sustained support for green policies.


32
That's why regulations forcing firms to, say, increase automobile energy efficiency or use green
light bulbs have sometimes proven more effective than price incentives. 76


A high early price of carbon may also change the behavior of the fossil fuel industry, inducing
them to explore less for oil, and the resulting higher prices of fossil fuels may help reinforce the
move to a green economy. 77

5. Uncertainty and a Revised Weitzman Price Quantity Perspective

In the context of climate change, there is considerable uncertainty, e.g. about the magnitude of
the links between greenhouse gases and climate change and that of the links between any
instrument and greenhouse gas emissions. The latter uncertainty has led some
environmentalists to argue for quantitative restrictions on emissions. Earlier, Weitzman (1974)
delineated conditions under which such restrictions would be preferable to a simple price
intervention.78

One way of understanding this is to note that while the standard result argues for a single price
of carbon in all places, for all uses, at all dates, the (appropriate shadow) price differ depending
on the state of the world. There is much we don't know: the effects of any policy on emissions
or the effects of emissions and carbon concentrations on climate change, and the full effects of
climate change on well-being. Thus, as we learn more about the state of the world the carbon
price adjusts. In fact, the best we can do is to announce a carbon price today and a limited
state-dependent sequence of prices going forward. Weitzman's analysis focused on a one-
period world, where either price or quantity has to be set before we know critical information
about the state of the world. The price we set may be either too high or too low, given the true

76
   Of course, as always, one has to offset these benefits with the short term distortionary costs that may arise
particularly from a high (implicit) carbon price in a particular sector or against a particular technology. Karplus et al
2013, for instance, argue that there is a high cost to US vehicle fuel economy standard within a standard
computable general equilibrium model, without innovation and without behavioral economics effects.
77
   In principle, of course, exploration is based on the whole time path of carbon prices, so that seeing (credible)
high future prices leads to less exploration. But there is a large literature suggesting that firms are myopic, paying
more attention to the economics of the moment (today) than possible future scenarios. Moreover, oil companies
may believe that if they succeed in finding large oil deposits, the fear of stranded assets will curtail the imposition
of excessively high carbon prices.
78
   See Stiglitz (1986) for a standard textbook treatment.

33
state of the world; and so, too, for the quantity. 79 Weitzman derives conditions under which if
we have to pick either a single price or a single quantity, picking a quantity would be preferable.

In earlier policy discussion, this debate has loomed large, with many environmentalists arguing
for cap-and-trade because it centers policy on the objective of concern, the level of
concentration of carbon dioxide, and avoids the problems posed by price-instrument
uncertainty. The Stern-Stiglitz report does not weigh into this debate, simply stating

         There are different ways to introduce a carbon price. Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
         can be priced explicitly through a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system.

As we have noted, the level of climate change and its consequences is of ultimate concern, and
this is related (in an uncertain way) to the concentration of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere. This in turn is a result of emissions that occur over a long period of time.
Weitzman's analysis applied to a one-period problem (where welfare was, in effect, related to
the flow of pollutants rather than here, to a stock.) There is not only instrument uncertainty but
also uncertainty about the relationship between atmospheric concentration and social
consequences. The discussion in this section highlights some additional considerations that
need to be brought to bear beyond those highlighted by Weitzman and some of the subsequent
research extending his work into a dynamic context.

As we learn more about the relationship between price (pollutant charge) and emissions
(related, in turn, to the technology of emissions abatement), and about the consequences of
climate change and the relationship between climate change and atmospheric carbon
concentration, the target level of atmospheric concentration to be achieved needs to be
revised. 80 If we use a price mechanism, it means that the price charged is revised. The same,
of course, could be said for the quantities approach. Accordingly, even when the quantities can



79
   Having a single price for all states of nature is analogous to a restricted tax regime where the same tax rate has
to be imposed on a range of products (in an unrestricted tax regime, every product--distinguished by every
feature--would have its own tax; this is obviously impractical, so, for instance, all automobiles, or all automobiles
of a certain size, face the same tax rate). Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1971) show that when that is the case, in general,
production efficiency may not be desirable, i.e. having just a carbon tax may not be optimal.
80
   See Hoel and Karp (2001, 2002) and Pizer (2002).

34
be made state dependent, a pure quantities-based framework does not result in perfect
consumption (emissions) smoothing.

The key trade-offs in this dynamic formulation have to do with asymmetries of information, the
speed of government response, the magnitudes of the underlying uncertainties including
instrument uncertainty, and the relative ease (cost) of adjusting prices vs. quantities. 81 Some
limiting cases may be illuminating. 82

If, for instance, there were no asymmetries of information, no uncertainties about the
consequences of setting a particular price, and government could respond instantaneously as
new information about technology or the consequences of atmospheric concentrations
increase by adjusting either prices or quantities, then (as in the standard one period model) a
price and a quantity approach are equivalent: both are state contingent, and each would be set
to generate exactly the same time profile of emissions and consumption.

If there is no uncertainty about the (expected) marginal social damage of emissions at each
date, then obviously a carbon price reflecting the (expected) marginal social damage of
emissions achieves the optimal results. Assume, however, the government does not have full
information on all the technologies relevant to emissions and emissions abatement. 83 Then in
the quantities approach, the government would, on the basis of its impartial information, have
to set forth an uncertain time path of quantities (to be revised as it learns more about actual
emissions). With bankable caps (at the right interest rate), the price and quantities approaches



81
   The latter has featured prominently in macroeconomics, where the menu cost literature (Sheshinki and Weiss
(1977), Akerlof and Yellen (1985a, 1985b, and Mankiw (1985)) has emphasized the cost of adjustment of prices,
while other literature has suggested that such costs are not significant, not large enough to explain
macroeconomic fluctuations (Golosov and Lucas, 2007) and stressed adjustment costs and uncertainties related to
quantities (see, e.g. Greenwald and Stiglitz 1989).
82
   As Karp and Traeger (2018) observe, in many cases, the choice between price and quantity regimes can, even in
a dynamic setting, be put into a generalized version of Weitzman, where what matters is the relative slopes of the
marginal damage and marginal cost curves. The discussion below will highlight some of the special assumptions
underlying their analysis.
    There is one more dimension of optimal intergenerational policies that has perhaps received insufficient
attention but which we will not be able to pursue here: intertemporal risk trade-offs. Increasing expected utility
this period by reducing risk may well increase the risk that will have to be borne by future generations.
83
   If the government is not certain of current and future abatement cost functions, it can only be certain of the
appropriate marginal social cost of carbon if the social damage function is horizontal.

35
would, of course, be equivalent--the private sector in effect using its information to "correct"
inappropriate caps set by the government.

Assume now that there were some clear threshold above which climate change was intolerable
(but below which it was manageable), so that we had a clear target for atmospheric carbon
concentrations, but again the government has less information about abatement technology
than the private sector. 84 Then, with the quantities approach, we can use the market for "price
discovery," to ascertain the efficient way of achieving this goal, provided we have bankable
caps. (Similar results hold if the government is less informed about the social damage function.
This can be particularly important when there are lags in government policy.) Especially with
bankable caps (in a system of quantity controls), an event today that is rationally anticipated to
lead to more stringent controls and a higher market price for carbon in the future will affect
markets and behavior before the government actually adjusts the level of caps (See Koch et al.,
2017). By contrast, with a carbon tax, in the presence of information and adjustment
asymmetries, the anticipation of a higher price of carbon in the future may result in more
pollution today, exacerbating emissions volatility, in what may be viewed as intertemporal
leakages. 85 The efficiency losses of adjustment may thus be lower in a carbon market than with
carbon taxes. 86 Under these assumptions, there is some presumption for using an auctioned-
quantity approach with bankable caps. (An auction avoids the difficult problem of allocating
emission rights, which in turn results in large political economy problems.)

5.1. Towards a More General Framework and Finding the Basis of a Political Consensus in the
Presence of Differences in Beliefs


84
   Framing the question this way biases the result: when what we care about is the quantity, it is perhaps no
surprise that a quantity-regime is preferable. The Weitzman prices vs. quantities analysis centers around
situations where we have to ascertain the optimal quantity. Still, the following discussion on the use of market
mechanisms is relevant because it highlights the importance of information asymmetries: in the absence of such
asymmetries, the government could have achieved the desirable quantity trajectory by setting a trajectory for
carbon prices.
85
   Thus, it is possible that the private sector has better information not only about the abatement function but also
about the damage function. Even if the private sector has no intrinsic interest in the environment, if it anticipates
that information about the social damage function will eventually be learned by the government, leading to more
stringent controls, it will undertake abatement actions, engaging in emissions smoothing better than if the
government set prices based on its (poorer) information.
86
   See also Park, Hepburn, and Keohane (2013).

36
There is, of course, no reason to restrict ourselves to the limiting cases of prices vs. quantities.
One can introduce a non-linear price schedule, two limiting forms of which are the pure price
system and the pure quantity system.

While the literature on optimal tax interventions has clearly explained the advantages of such
more general systems (Roberts and Spence, 1976; Pizer, 2002), there are also general results
suggesting that under a variety of special, but frequently assumed, conditions linear pricing
would be optimal 87.

The argument that there is a preference for simple systems is also unconvincing: there are
simple piece wise systems. For instance, a quantity system where there is a maximum price and
a price system in which there is a maximum quantity of emissions. Such a system obviously
limits the amount of emissions, charging a very high price if it turns out that the costs of
emission reductions is very high, so that with, say, a moderate price, the level of emissions
reductions is not sufficient to meet what is thought to be the requisite level of emissions
reductions88.

There is one aspect of these systems with safety values that has not received sufficient
attention: In a world in which individuals have different expectations (beliefs), if appropriately
structured, they can provide the basis of greater consensus.89 Consider a quantities-based
restriction with a safety valve guaranteeing that the price will not exceed a critical level. Then
environmentalists, who are confident that the quantities target can be met at reasonable cost,
can support the safety valve, precisely because they think it is unlikely to have to be invoked.
On the other hand, businesspeople, whose main concern with the quantities approach is that



87
   Indeed, under these restrictions, no differential commodity taxation is required at all, and a single carbon price
would suffice to correct the climate externality. (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1976; Kaplow 1996, 2006; Deaton 1979;
Deaton and Stern 1986. These results are, of course, overturned with distributive concerns and restricted taxation
(Stiglitz, 2018b.)
88
   See Narassimhan et al. (2018) for a description of similar emissions trading systems in California and in the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI).
89
   Recent work has highlighted how the behavior of the economic system may differ markedly when individuals
have different beliefs. Explicit and implicit bets among individuals may give rise to what Guzman and Stiglitz called
pseudo-wealth--as they engage in bets, they both feel wealthier because they both believe on average they will
win. See Guzman and Stiglitz (2016a, 2016b).

37
there is a risk of a very high implicit tax, can support the measure because that "tail risk" has
been eliminated.

6. Concluding Comments

The Stern-Stiglitz report seemingly differed from orthodox economic policy entailing a single
carbon price, for all uses, at all dates, in all places, in all uses by arguing for a more nuanced
policy where carbon prices were supplemented by regulations and other government
interventions and might vary across time, location, and uses. In fact, our report falls squarely
with the mainstream of modern public finance. It is the advocates of a simplistic reliance on
carbon taxes who have failed to take on board the insights of modern economics, which
recognize the limitations posed by uncertainty, imperfect information, imperfect
appropriability of investments in innovation, and restrictions on the sets of instruments
available to government. We have attempted to show how, in particular, concerns about
distribution, innovation, and uncertainty could justify the policies advocated in Stern-Stiglitz
report. To be sure, the application of this more nuanced policy is more complicated. It will
require a greater understanding of the structure of the economy and of the distributive effects
of policies than an approach that relies simply on carbon taxes. In particular, we have discussed
countering arguments, for instance, some arguing for a gradual adjustment of carbon prices,
others for a short transition to a high carbon price; some suggesting the political economy
advantages of a carbon tax with proceeds redistributed as a lump sum payment, others
suggesting the advantages of a tax-cum-regulatory regime. Like the Stern-Stiglitz Commission,
we have not attempted to undertake an overall balancing of these contrasting forces: the
overall assessment will almost surely differ across countries and over time.




38
 
 

                                             References 

Acemoglu, D., "Directed Technical Change," The Review of Economic Studies, 69(4), October 
       2002, pp. 781809. 

_____2010, "When Does Labor Scarcity Encourage Innovation?" Journal of Political Economy, 
       118(6), December, pp. 10371078. 

_____2015, "Localised and Biased Technologies: Atkinson and Stiglitz's New View, Induced 
       Innovations, and Directed Technological Change, " The Economic Journal, 125(583), 
       March, pp. 443­463.  

Acemoglu, P. Aghion, L. Bursztyn and D. Hemous, "The Environment and Directed Technical 
       Change," The American Economic Review, 102(1), February 2012, pp. 131166. 

Akerlof, G. A. and J. L. Yellen, (1985a), "A Nearrational Model of the Business Cycle, with Wage 
       and Price Intertia," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(5), pp. 823­838. 

_____(1985b), "Can Small Deviations from Rationality Make Significant Differences to Economic 
       Equilibria?" American Economic Review, 75(4), pp. 708­720.  

Arnott, R. and J. E. Stiglitz, "Randomization with Asymmetric Information," Rand Journal of
       Economics, 19(3), Autumn 1988, pp. 344-362 

 Arrow, K. J., "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing," The Review of Economic 
       Studies, 29(3), June 1962, pp. 155173. 

Atkinson, A. B. and J. E. Stiglitz, "A New View of Technological Change," Economic Journal, 
       79(315), September 1969, pp. 573578. 

_______1972, "The Structure of Indirect Taxation and Economic Efficiency," Journal of Public 
       Economics, 1(1), April, pp. 97119. 

______ 1976, "The Design of Tax Structure: Direct Versus Indirect Taxation," Journal of Public 
       Economics, 6(1­2) , July­August, pp. 5575. 




39 
 
 
 

_______1980, Lectures on Public Economics, New York and London :  McGrawHill Book 
       Company.  Reprinted in 2015, with a new introduction, Princeton:  Princeton University 
       Press 

Baumol, W. J. and W. Oates, "The Use of Standards and Prices for the Protection of the 
       Environment," Swedish Economic Journal, 73(1), March 1971, pp. 4254. 

Bowles, S., "Endogenous Preferences: The Cultural Consequences of Markets and other 
       Economic Institutions," Journal of Economic Literature 36(1), March 1998, pp. 75­111. 

_____ 2016, The Moral Economy: Why Good Incentives are No Substitute for Good Citizens, 
Yale University Press. 
Bowles and S. PolaniaReyes, "Economic Incentives and Social Preferences: Substitutes or 
       Complements?" Journal of Economic Literature, 50(2), June 2012, pp. 368425. 

Caney, S. and C. Hepburn, "Carbon Trading: Unethical, Unjust and Ineffective?" Royal Institute 
       of Philosophy Supplements, 69, October 2011, pp. 201234. 

Dasgupta, P. and J. E. Stiglitz, "Differential Taxation, Public Goods, and Economic Efficiency," 
       Review of Economic Studies, 38(2), April 1971, pp. 151174. 

______1972, "On Optimal Taxation and Public Production," Review of Economic Studies, 39(1), 
       January, pp. 87103. 

Deaton, A., "Optimally uniform commodity taxes," Economics Letters, 2(4), 1979, pp. 35736. 

Deaton and N. Stern, "Optimally Uniform Commodity Taxes, Taste Differences, and Lumpsum  
       Grants," Economic Letters, 20(3), December 1986, pp. 263266. 
Diamond, P. and J. A. Mirrlees, "Optimal Taxation and Public Production," American Economic 
       Review, 61(1), March 1971, pp. 827, 261278. 

Dietz, S. and F. Venmans, "Cumulative Carbon Emissions and Economic Policy: In Search of 
       General Principles," Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the 
       Environment, Working Paper No. 283, March 2018. 

Drandakis, E. M. and E. R. S. Phelps, "A Model of Induced Invention, Growth, and Distribution," 
       Economic Journal, 76, December 1966, pp. 832840. 

40 
 
 
 

Fellner, W., "Two Propositions in the Theory of Induced Innovations," The Economic Journal, 
       71(282), June 1961, pp. 305308. 

Fischer, C. and R.G. Newell, "Environmental and technology policies for climate mitigation," 
       Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55 (2), 2008, pp. 142162 

Flues, F. and A. Thomas, "The distributional effects of energy taxes," OECD Taxation Working 
       Papers, No. 23, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2015. 

Geanakoplos, J. and H. Polemarcharkis, "Existence, Regularity, and Constrained Suboptimality 
       of Competitive Allocations when the Asset Market Is Incomplete," in W. Heller, R. Starr, 
       and D. Starrett (Eds.), Essays in Honor of Kenneth Arrow, Cambridge University Press, 
       Cambridge, Volume 3, 1986, pp.6595. 

Gerlagh, R., S. Kverndokk and K. Rosendahl,  "The optimal time path of clean energy R&D   

       policy when patents have finite lifetime," Journal of Environmental Economics and 
       Management, 67(1), January 2014, pp. 219.  

Gintis, H., "Welfare Criteria With Endogenous Preferences:  the Economics of Education," 
       International Economic Review, 15(2), June, 1974. 

Gneezy, U. and A. Rustichini, "Pay Enough or Don't Pay at All," The Quarterly Journal of 
       Economics, 115(3),  August 2000, pp. 791810. 

Gneezy, S. Meier and P. ReyBiel, "When and Why Incentives (Don't) Work to Modify Behavior," 
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4), Fall 2011, pp. 191­210. 

Golosov, M. and R.E. Lucas Jr., "Menu Costs and Phillips Curves," Journal of Political Economy, 
       115(2), April 2007, pp. 171­199. 

Goulder, L. H., M. A. C. Hafstead and R. C. Williams, III, "General Equilibrium Impacts of a 
       Federal Clean Energy Standard," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(2), May 
       2016, pp. 186­218. 

Grainger, C.A. and C. D. Kolstad, "Who Pays a Price on Carbon?" Environmental and Resource 
       Economics 46(3), July 2010, pp. 359376. 


41 
 
 
 

Greenwald, B. and J. E. Stiglitz, "Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information and
        Incomplete Markets," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), May 1986, pp. 229-264. 

_______ "Toward a Theory of Rigidities," American Economic Review, 79(2), May 1989, pp. 364
        69. 

Guzman, M. and J. E. Stiglitz, "A Theory of PseudoWealth," Contemporary Issues in 
        Macroeconomics: Lessons from The Crisis and Beyond, J. E. Stiglitz and M. Guzman 
        (Eds.), IEA Conference Volume, No.155II, Palgrave Macmillan, Houndmills, UK and New 
        York, 2016. 

______2016, "PsuedoWealth and Consumption Fluctuations," NBER Working Paper No. 22838, 
        November, and presented at the American Economic Association Meetings, January, 
        2015. 

Habakkuk, H.J., American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century, Cambridge 
        University Press, Cambridge, 1962. 

Helm, D., C. Hepburn and R. Mash, "Credible Carbon Policy," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 
        19(3), Autumn 2003, pp. 438450. 

Hepburn, C., "Regulation by Prices, Quantities, or Both: A Review of Instrument Choice," Oxford 
        Review of Economic Policy, 22(2), July 2006, pp. 226247. 

Hoel, M. and L. Karp, "Taxes and Quotas for a Stock Pollutant with Multiplicative Uncertainty," 
        Journal of Public Economics, 82(1), October 2001, pp. 91114.  

______2002, "Taxes Versus Quotas for a Stock Pollutant," Resource and Energy Economics 

              24(4), November, pp. 367384. 

Hoff, K. and J. E. Stiglitz, "After the Big Bang? Obstacles to the Emergence of the Rule of Law in 
        PostCommunist Societies," American Economic Review, 94(3), June 2004, pp. 753  763. 
_____2008, "Exiting a Lawless State," Economic Journal, 118(531), August, pp. 14741497. 

_____2016, "Striving for Balance in Economics: Towards a Theory of the Social Determination of 
        Behavior," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 126, June, pp. 25­57. 



42 
 
 
 

Holland, S. P., J.E. Hughes and C.R. Knittel, "Greenhouse Gas Reductions Under Low Carbon Fuel 
       Standards?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(1), February 2009, pp. 106
       46. 

IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I 
       to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
       (Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, 
       V. Bex and P.M. Midgley  [eds.]), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge U.K. and New 
       York. 

Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek, "Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigouvian Taxation 
       Approach," American Economic Review, 100(2), May 2010, pp. 40307. 

Kahneman, D., P. P. Wakker and R. Sarin, "Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced 
       Utility," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), May 1997, pp. 375406. 

Kalkuhl, M., O. Edenhofer and K. Lessmann, "Learning or Lockin: Optimal Technology Policies 
       to Support Mitigation," Resource and Energy Economics, 34(1), January 2012, pp. 1­23. 

Karp, L., and  C. Traeger, "Prices versus Quantities Reassessed," CESifo Working Paper 
       Series 7331, November, 2018. 

Karplus, V. J., S. Paltsev, M. Babiker and J. M. Reilly, "Should a vehicle fuel economy standard be 
       combined with an economywide greenhouse gas emissions constraint? Implications for 
       energy and climate policy in the United States," Energy Economics, 36, March 2013, pp. 
       322­333. 

Kaplow, L., "The Optimal Supply of Public Goods and the Distortionary Cost of Taxation," 
       National Tax Journal, 49(4), December 1996, pp. 513­33. 

______2006, "Optimal Control of Externalities in the Presence of Income Taxation," NBER 
       Working Paper 12339, June. 

Kennedy, C., "Induced Bias in Innovation and the Theory of Distribution," The Economic Journal, 
       74(295), September 1964, pp. 541547. 



43 
 
 
 

Klenert, D., L. Mattauch, E. Combet, O. Edenhofer, C. Hepburn, R. Rafaty and N. Stern, "Making 
       Carbon Pricing Work for Citizens," Nature Climate Change, 8(8), August 2018, pp. 669­
       677. 

Klenert and L. Mattauch, "How to Make a Carbon Tax Reform Progressive: The Role of 
       Subsistence Consumption," Economics Letters, 138, January 2016, pp. 100103. 

Korinek, A. and J. E. Stiglitz, "Political Economy in a Contestable Democracy: The Case of 
       Dividend Taxation,"2008 Meeting Papers, Society for Economic Dynamics. 
______2009, "Dividend Taxation and Intertemporal Tax Arbitrage," Journal of Public Economics, 
      93(12), February, pp. 142159. 
______2019, "Artificial Intelligence, WorkerReplacing Technological Progress and Income 
Distribution," in Economics of Artificial Intelligence, NBER/University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Kverndokk, S. and K. E. Rosendahl, "Climate Policies and Learning by Doing: Impacts and Timing 
       of Technology Subsidies," Resource and Energy Economics, 29(1), January 2007, pp 58­
       82. 

Lanz, B., J. D. Wurlod, L. Panzone and T. Swanson, "The Behavioral Effect of Pigovian 
       Regulation: Evidence From a Field Experiment," Journal of Environmental Economics and 
       Management, 87, January 2018, pp. 190205. 

Levinson, A., "Energy Efficiency Standards Are More Regressive Than Energy Taxes: Theory and 
       Evidence," Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 
       University of Chicago Press, 6(S1), 2019, pp. 736.  

Lipsey, R. G. and K. Lancaster, "The General Theory of Second Best," The Review of Economic 
       Studies, 24(1), January 1956, pp. 1132. 

Mankiw, N. G., "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic Model of 
       Monopoly," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(2), May 1985, pp. 529­538.  

Mattauch, L. and C. Hepburn, "Climate Policy When Preferences are Endogenous--and 
       Sometimes They Are," INET Oxford Working Paper no. 201604, July 2016. 
Mattauch, C. Hepburn and N. Stern, "Pigou Pushes Preferences: Decarbonisation Options When 
       Preferences are Endogenous," CESifo Working Paper 7404, December 2018. 


44 
 
 
 

Millar, R., M. Allen, J. Rogelj and P. Friedlingstein, "The Cumulative Carbon Budget and Its 
       Implications," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 32(2), April 2016, pp. 323342. 

Mirrlees, J. A., "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation," Review of Economic 
       Studies, 38(2), April 1971, pp. 175208. 

______1975, "Optimal Commodity Taxation in a TwoClass Economy," Journal of Public 
       Economics, 4(1), February, pp. 2733. 

Narassimhan, E., K. S. Gallagher, S.  Koester and J. R. Alejo, "Carbon Pricing in Practice: A Review 
       of Existing Emissions Trading Systems," Climate Policy, 18(8), April 2018, pp. 125. 

Park, J., C. Hepburn and N. Keohane, "Does Benefit Uncertainty Matter for Climate Policy 
       Design? A Case for Tradable Permit Markets with Banking," June 25, 2013. 

Patrizio, P. S., F. Leduc, S. Kraxner, S. Fuss, G. Kindermann, S. Mesfun, K. Spokas, A. Mendoza, N. 
       MacDowell, E. Wetterlund, J. Lundgren, E. Dotzauer, P. Yowargana and M. Obersteiner, 
       "Reducing US Coal Emissions Can Boost Employment," Joule, 2, November 2018, pp. 1­
       16. 

Pizer, W. A., "Combining Price and Quantity Controls to Mitigate Global Climate Change," 
       Journal of Public Economics, 85(3), September 2002, pp. 409434. 

Roberts, M. J. and M. Spence. "Effluent Charges and Licenses Under Uncertainty," Journal of 
       Public Economics, 5(34), May 1976, pp. 193208. 

Samuelson, P. A., "A Theory of Induced Innovation Along KennedyWeisäcker Lines," The 
       Review of Economics and Statistics, 47(4), November 1965, pp. 343356. 

Sandmo, A., "Optimal Taxation in the Presence of Externalities," The Swedish Journal of 
       Economics, 77(1), January 1975, pp. 8698. 

Sandel, M. J., What Money Can't Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets, Macmillan, New York, 2012.  

Sinclair, P., "High Does Nothing and Rising Is Worse: Carbon Taxes Should Keep Declining to Cut 
       Harmful Emissions," The Manchester School, 60(1), March 1992, pp. 4152. 

_______1994, "On the Optimum Trend of Fossil Fuel Taxation," Oxford Economic Papers, 46(1), 

45 
 
 
 

       October, pp. 869877.    

Sterner, T. (Ed.), Fuel Taxes and the Poor:  The distributional consequences of gasoline taxation 
       and their implications for climate policy, RFF Press, Routledge, Washington, D.C., 2012.   

Stiglitz, J. E., "The Rate of Discount for CostBenefit Analysis and the Theory of the Second 
       Best," Discounting for Time and Risk in Energy Policy, R. Lind (Ed.), Resources for the 
       Future, 1982,  pp. 151204. 

______1986, Economics of the Public Sector, W.W. Norton (2nd edition, 1988, 3rd edition, 2000), 
       New York. 

______1987a, "Learning to Learn, Localized Learning and Technological Progress," Economic 
       Policy and Technological Performance, P. Dasgupta and Stoneman (eds.), Cambridge 
       University Press, London, pp. 125153. 

_____ 1987b, "Pareto Efficient and Optimal Taxation and the New New Welfare Economics," in   
       Handbook on Public Economics, A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (Eds.), Volume 2, North 
       Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 9911042.  

______1998a, "Pareto Efficient Taxation and Expenditure Policies, With Applications to the  

       Taxation of Capital, Public Investment, and Externalities," presented at the Conference 
       in Honor of Agnar Sandmo, Bergen, January. 
______1998b, "The Private Uses of Public Interests: Incentives and Institutions," Journal of 
       Economic Perspectives, 12(2), Spring, pp. 322. (Originally presented  as Society of 
       Government Economists Distinguished Lecture on Economics in Government, ASSA 
       meetings, January 4, 1998.) 

______2006, "Samuelson and the Factor Bias of Technological Change," Samuelsonian 
       Economics and the TwentyFirst Century, M. Szenberg et al. (Eds.), Oxford University 
       Press, New York, pp. 235251. 




46 
 
 
 

______2009, "Simple Formulae for Optimal Income Taxation and the Measurement of 
       Inequality," in Arguments for a Better World: Essays in Honor of Amartya Sen, Volume I, 
       Ethics, Welfare, and Measurement, K. Basu and R. Kanbur (Eds.), Oxford University 
       Press, Oxford, pp. 535566.  (Revision of IMSSS Technical Report No. 215, Stanford 
       University, August 1976). 

______2013, "Sharing the Burden of Saving the Planet: Global Social Justice for Sustainable 
       Development," M. Kaldor and J. E. Stiglitz, (Eds.), The Quest for Security: Protection 
       without Protectionism and the Challenge of Global Governance, Columbia University 
       Press, New York, pp. 161190. 

______2014, "Unemployment and Innovation," NBER Working Paper 20670, November. 

______2017, "Overcoming the Copenhagen Failure with Flexible Commitments," Global Carbon 
       Pricing: The Path to Climate Cooperation, P.Cramton, D. J. C. MacKay, A. Ockenfels, and 
       S. Stoft (Eds.), MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2017, pp. 99­108; also in Economics of 
       Energy and Environmental Policy, 4(2), Symposium on International Climate 
       Negotiations, September 2015, pp. 29­36. 

______ 2018a, "Unemployment, Welfare, and Innovation," paper presented to ASSA meetings, 
       Philadelphia, PA, January. 

______2018b, "Pareto Efficient Taxation and Expenditures: Pre and Redistribution," Journal of 
       Public Economics Special Issue in Honor of Sir Tony Atkinson (19442017), E. Luttmer and 
       H. Kleven (Eds.), 162, June, pp. 101­119.  

______2018c, "Expert Report in Juliana et al vs the United States of America," filed June 28.   

Stiglitz and B. Greenwald, "Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth, 
       Development, and Social Progress," Columbia University Press, New York, 2014. 




47 
 
 
 

Stiglitz, N. Stern and the members of the HighLevel Commission on Carbon Prices, "Report of 
       the HighLevel Commission on Carbon Prices," Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition, 
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and International Development 
       Association/The World Bank, May 29, 2017, accessible at 
       https://www.carbonpricingleadership.org/reportofthehighlevelcommissionon
       carbonprices/. 

Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman, "Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A ReferenceDependent 
       Model," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4), November 1991, pp. 10391061. 

Tvinnereim, E. and M. Mehling, "Carbon pricing and deep decarbonisation," Energy Policy, 
       121, October 2018,  pp. 185189. 

Ulph, A. and D. Ulph, "The Optimal Time Path of a Carbon Tax," Oxford Economic Papers, 46(1), 
       October 1994, pp. 857868. 

Van der Ploeg, F., "The Safe Carbon Budget," Climatic Change, 147(12), March 2018, pp. 4759. 

Wei, M., S. Patadia and D. M. Kammen, "Putting Renewables and Energy Efficiency to Work: 
       How Many Jobs Can the Clean Energy Industry Generate in the US?" Energy Policy, 
       38(2), February 2010, pp. 919931. 

M. L. Weitzman, "Prices vs. Quantities," Review of Economic Studies, 41(4), October 1974, pp. 
       477­491.  

______1977, "Is the Price System or Rationing More Effective in Getting a Commodity to Those 
       Who Need it Most?" Bell Journal of Economics, 8(2), Autumn, pp. 517524 

                                                 




48 
 
