                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE CURRENCY COMPOSITION OF INTERNATIONAL RESERVES, DEMAND
          FOR INTERNATIONAL RESERVES, AND GLOBAL SAFE ASSETS

                                       Joshua Aizenman
                                       Yin-Wong Cheung
                                        Xingwang Qian

                                      Working Paper 25934
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25934


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We would to like thank Shi He, Roger Lee, and Tianyu Wang for research assistance. Useful
comments of Michael Hutchison, Paul Luk, Kishen Rajan, Frank Westermann, Matthew Yiu, and
the participants at the Conference on Global Safe Assets, International Reserves, and Capital
Flow, May 20-21, 2019, Hong Kong are gratefully acknowledged. Of course, we are responsible
for any remaining deficiencies or errors. The work described in this paper was partially supported
by a grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
China (Project #: CityU 11500617). Aizenman gratefully acknowledges the financial support of
the Dockson Chair at the University of Southern California. Cheung gratefully acknowledges the
Hung Hing Ying and Leung Hau Ling Charitable Foundation () for its
support through the Hung Hing Ying Chair Professorship of International Economics (
()). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joshua Aizenman, Yin-Wong Cheung, and Xingwang Qian. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Currency Composition of International Reserves, Demand for International Reserves,
and Global Safe Assets
Joshua Aizenman, Yin-Wong Cheung, and Xingwang Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 25934
June 2019
JEL No. F15,F3,F31

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines determinants of the international reserves (IR) currency composition before
and after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Applying the annual data of 58 countries, we
confirm that countries that trade more with the US, euro zone, UK, and Japan, and issue more
debt denominated in the big four currencies (US dollar, euro, pound, yen) hoard more IR in these
currencies. We find scale effects in which countries tend to diversify from the big four currencies
as they increase their IR/GDP and that a growing shortage of global safe assets (GSAs) induces
countries to hold more big four currencies. Countries hold less big four currencies as IR after the
2008 GFC, while they hold more of such currencies since the tapering of the Fed's quantitative
easing. The 2008 GFC and QE tapering weakened and sometimes reversed the effect of several
economic factors. We also find that TARGET2 balances matter for the currency composition in
the euro zone; commodity-exporting countries tend to diversify their IR from the big four
currencies when their terms of trade improve; and that the valuation effects induced by Euro/USD
exchange rate changes diminish the significance of the GFC in explaining the currency
composition of IR.

Joshua Aizenman                                  Xingwang Qian
Economics and SIR                                Economics and Finance Department
USC                                              SUNY Buffalo State
University Park                                  1300 Elmwood Ave
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043                       Buffalo, NY 14222
and NBER                                         qianx@buffalostate.edu
aizenman@usc.edu

Yin-Wong Cheung
Department of Economics and Finance
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
yicheung@cityu.edu.hk
The currency composition of international reserves, the demand for international reserves,
                                 and global safe assets

1.       Introduction and overview
         The Global Financial Crisis [GFC] and its aftermath focused attention on central banks'
and countries' balance-sheet exposure in a fragile world. A possible interpretation of financial
instability involves the presence of multiple equilibria associated with leverage. Financial
fragility may reflect concerns regarding the commitment and fiscal viability of policies needed to
prevent a run on the banking system in the presence of balance-sheet exposures. 1 In these
circumstances, a country's central banks tend to hold more international reserves (IR)
denominated in a key reserve foreign country if its households and private and public sectors
borrow more debt denominated in the key reserve currency, or when it imports more goods and
services produced by the key reserve country. Henceforth, we refer to this interpretation as the
balance-sheet insurance hypothesis.
         This hypothesis supplements earlier rationales for hoarding and using IR. Heller and
Knight (1978) noted that central banks' currency composition matters in providing temporary
import financing. Dooley et al. (1989) and Eichengreen and Mathieson (2000) focused on
foreign exchange innervations, possibly dealing with accommodating exchange market pressures
associated with financial outflows of debt and other financial assets. The balance-sheet insurance
hypothesis also points to the role of IR currency composition in stabilizing the financial market
by hedging the risk of currency mismatch (Schneider and Tornell, 2004). Aizenman and Lee
(2007) interpreted the takeoff of precautionary IR hoarding by emerging markets in the 1990s as
a response to the growing exposure to financial fragility and sudden stop crises (Calvo, 1998).
This fragility was induced by the rise of financial openness of emerging markets, as well as



1
  Bocola and Lorenzoni (2017) provide an insightful model illustrating and explaining these issues in the context of
Emerging Markets characterized by limited credibility of their fiscal backstop mechanisms. Domestic authorities can
eliminate the crisis equilibrium by acting as a lender of last resort, but these interventions only work if they are
fiscally credible. Foreign currency reserves holding hedge the government's fiscal position and enhance its
credibility, thus improving financial stability. According to this interpretation, the "state of fundamentals" (like
fiscal space, growth rates, etc.) determines the existence and multiplicity of equilibria. If the fundamentals are very
strong, the private sector does not have the incentive to "run on the system," and the regime is stable. If the
fundamentals are very weak, the private sector attacks the system, and the regime collapses. In between the very
strong and the weak equilibria, a range of multiple equilibria exist. Earlier examples of such systems include
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Obstfeld (1996).


                                                           1
developing economies (EMDEs) embracing greater financial liberalization after the 1980s
external debt crises.
         The insurance and defensive role of IR during a financial crisis also points to the
association between global safe assets (GSAs) and the IR currency composition. Central banks
sell foreign exchange reserves to prop up the falling value of domestic currencies during
financial crises and to stabilize the foreign exchange market (Dominguez et al., 2012). Amidst a
financial crisis, investors may experience heightened risk aversion, inducing flight to safe haven
assets, even at a cost of domestic assets' fire sales. 2 Holding a certain portion of IR in the
currencies of GSA countries allows central banks to defend flight-to-quality more effectively and
at a lower cost. Caballero (2006) and Caballero et al. (2017) interpreted the GSA shortage
conundrum as the outcome of higher demand for GSAs by EMDEs, highlighting the association
between GSAs and the IR currency composition.
         This paper aims at explaining the changing currency composition of IR in recent decades,
controlling for pertinent financial and real variables as identified by the literature, as well as new
factors that have emerged during and after the GFC. Such factors include access to elastic swap
lines offered by the US FED and other key-currency countries; heightened demand for GSAs at
times of global fragility; and the growing role of sovereign wealth funds (SWFs).
         Due to a lack of detailed data on countries' actual currency composition, we use the
aggregate share of IR of the currencies whose share of global IR exceeded 4% in 2018: the US
dollar, the euro, the yen, and the British pound, whose respective shares were 62.5%, 20.4%,
4.8% and 4.7%. 3 We call these four currencies the "big four" currencies, and the US, Euro area,
Japan and Britain the big four countries. 4 These data are from the IMF International Reserves
and Foreign Currency Liquidity [IRFCL], which is composed of 58 countries, annual data, from
2000 to 2017. 5


2
  Obstfeld et al. (2010) describe the twin drains of sudden stops in external capital flows and internal drain from
domestic M2.
3
  Not surprisingly, these four currencies are also the most heavily traded currencies in the global foreign exchange
market (Bank for International Settlements, 2016).
4
  The aggregate share in the Chinese renminbi, despite its growing role in the international monetary system, is not
included in our exercise. The IR share of the Chinese renminbi have increased from a low base to reach 1.4% by the
first quarter of 2018. The data on China's share of allocated currency reserves are only partially available in the last
few years.
5
  See Reuters, July 1, 2018, Richard Leong's report on the Foreign Exchange Analysis. Appendix B provides
country names in data sample.

                                                           2
        Our study reveals complex, heterogeneous, and evolving patterns. The balance-sheet
insurance motive applies to emerging markets and developing economies [EMDEs], but less so
to advanced countries [ADVs]. Specifically, EMDEs that trade more with the big four countries
and issue more debts denominated in their currencies tend to hold more IR denominated in the
big four currencies. In contrast, IR holdings of the big four currencies decline in countries with
higher (SWFs and the gold share relative to the official IR. Holding higher levels of IR/GDP
encourages EMDEs to diversify their IR to currencies other than the big four. Euro countries,
mostly ADVs, seem to behave differently from EMDEs--the more a euro country holds IR, the
more it concentrates its IR into the big four currencies. An euro country tends to hold higher big
four currencies of IR stock when it has more TARGET2 liability balance.
        Lower availability of GSAs, as defined by the debt instruments of the big four countries,
leads EMDEs to hold more IR in big four currencies. This finding holds using different
measurement for GSAs, including treating TARGET2 payment balance as part of GSAs. The
terms of trade (ToT) changes of commodity-exporter countries have a sizable impact on their IR
currency composition--their IR diversification increases with stronger ToT and higher IR/GDP.
We also find that the presence of SWFs significantly affects IR currency composition--an
advanced country with a large SWF tends to diversify the IR currency composition from big four
currencies, whereas an EMDEs' SWF does not impact the share of IR in big four currencies. 6
        The GFC was a watershed for the IR share of big four currencies. This share hovered
around 98% until 2008, dropping to about 92% at the end of our sample (Figure 1). As these shift
patterns coincide with the global financial cycle (Rey, 2015), we also study how the currency
composition evolves over different phases of the financial cycle (Miranda-Agrippino and Rey,
2019). Specifically, we evaluate the impact of the Fed's quantitative easing (QE), changes in the
market's risk tolerance, monetary tightening and interest rate tapering, and policies associated
with the euro crisis.



6
  SWFs are by now major global players, with combined valuation was about 8 trillion US$ at the end of 2018. The
formation of SWF signals the wish to opt for greater divarication of the assets controlled by the public sector,
impacting thereby the demand for international reserves (Aizenman and Glick, 2009). As of 2019, Q1, the
Norwegian SWF, the largest and the most transparent fund reported that 28% of its assets were invested in fixed
assets, and that US Treasuries accounted for 22 % of its fixed-income investments. These developments imply that
SWFs are a major player impacting the demand for GSAs, and indirectly the IR diversification pattern. The limited
information about the asset composition of SWFs does not allow us to control fully for their global impact. Instead,
we control for the sizes, subject to the available information.

                                                         3
         Indeed, we identified a regime shift after 2008 and after the Fed's interest rate tapering in
both EMDEs and ADVs. The share of IR denominated in the big four currencies is lower after
the 2008 financial crisis, but higher after the Fed's tapering. The balance-sheet motive still exists
in EMDE after the 2008 financial crisis, but it is less prominent. The effect of IR/GDP on IR
currency composition reversed its sign after the 2008 crisis--a higher level of IR/GDP is
associated with a lower level of big four currencies in the IR held in EMDEs before the crisis,
but with a higher level of big four currencies after 2008. 7
         These effects do not occur in ADVs. ADVs diversify from the big four currencies by
holding more gold as non-big four reserves before 2008. The 2008 financial crisis does not alter
the effect of IR/GDP on the currency composition of IR in ADVs' economies. This result is in
line with the view that elastic swap lines offered by the US FED to key OECD countries during
the GFC provided credible reassuring signals, stabilizing these economies without the need to
adjust their IR hoarding strategy. The effect of GSAs on IR currency composition does not
change after 2008. In contrast, the Fed's QE tapers, signaling a future drop in GSAs availability
that leads both EMDEs and ADVs to rush for more holding of big four currencies in 2014.
         Observing the switch from a relatively weak US dollar in 2000-2007 to the strong dollar
after 2008 GFC, we investigate the valuation effect that might influence the IR currency
composition (Eichengreen et al, 2016). Under some bold assumptions induced by the lack of
country specific data, the significance of the GFC diminishes once that we control for the
valuation effects induced by Euro/US dollar exchange rate changes.
         We start by analyzing canonical determinants of the currency composition of
international reserves, including trade with the big four countries (Trade with Bigfour), anchors
to reserve currencies, and the exchange rate regime. 8 Next, we add the outstanding debt that a
country issued and denominated in the big four currencies (Debt in USDEuro), and access to
SWAP lines. Data availability enables us to cover 58 countries in our sample, of which 23 are




7
  While the drop of the big four currencies may be viewed as small in the context of the global crisis [from 98% to
about 92%], our analysis shows that the volatility associated with the GFC induces significant results regarding the
factors accounting the trends of IR diversification in the context of shocks impacting the supply and demand for
GSA.
8
  Our analysis is inspired and updates studies that include Frenkel (1974); Heller and Knight (1978); Dooley et al.
(1989); Eichengreen and Mathieson (2000); and Chinn and Frankel (2008).


                                                          4
ADVs and 35 are EMDEs. We test and confirm time-varying and heterogeneous patterns across
these groups, confirming and extending the earlier literature. 9
          We then test the possibility that central banks tend to diversify the currency composition
of IR when the level of IR/GDP becomes high. We also explore the possible effects of GSAs. In
principle, a GSA is any debt issued or guaranteed by a "safe" government, implying a country
with its own central bank, stable currency, and effective protection of property rights (He et al.,
2016a; 2016b). In practice, GSAs are usually safe and liquid assets, denominated in the currency
of major advanced countries--particularly in US dollars and the debt of the euro's core. During
financial turbulence that depletes the supply of GSAs, countries may have to beef up their
holding of reserves in the big four currencies that have a high level of liquidity. Thus, the
availability of GSAs and the demand for GSAs are likely to impact a country's IR currency
composition. Finally, we investigate the regime-shifting role of the 2008 GFC and the Fed's QE
tapering.
          This paper relates to three strands of literature. First, it relates to the literature that
identifies determinants of the IR currency composition (Dooley et al., 1989; Eichengreen and
Mathieson, 2000; Chinn and Frankel, 2008). Previous papers have emphasized the ways the IR
currency composition meets transaction needs (e.g., the payment to imports and external debt),
as well as wealth diversification motives (Papaioannou et al., 2006). Our paper links IR currency
composition to financial fragility and identifies balance-sheet insurance factors and GSAs that
gained prominence after the GFC.
          Second, a growing literature has studied the self-insurance role of IR in the world of
sudden stops and financial crises (Aizenman and Lee, 2007; Cheung and Qian, 2009; Cheung et
al., 2019; Obstfeld et al., 2010). Our paper deals with related issues through the lens of IR
currency composition and illustrates how currency mismatches associated with international
trade and external financial positions affect a central bank's preferred currency composition of
its IR.
          Finally, a more recent literature stream has discussed the relation between central banks'
reserves holding and GSAs. Accordingly, central banks' demand for liquid and safe assets may



9
  While the main purpose of EMDEs' holding IR is the precautionary motive and possibly mercantilism (Aizenman
and Marion, 2003; Aizenman and Lee, 2007; Aizenman and Lee, 2008), ADVs may hold IR for foreign exchange
intervention (Heller and Knight, 1978; Goldberg, Hull, and Stein, 2013).

                                                       5
cause a shortage of GSAs (Bernanke et al., 2011; Caballero et al., 2017; Gourinchas and Jeanne,
2012). Conversely, the availability of GSAs, largely determined by a central country's fiscal
policy, may affect central banks' IR holdings in currencies of GSAs, a concern that we explore in
the current paper.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as the follows. Section 2 lays out the empirical
model specification, explains the variables and interprets empirical results. In Section 3, we
provide additional analyses. Section 4 concludes.


2.      Empirical Analysis
2.1     Basic specifications
        We start the study of currency composition by applying a linear dynamic panel-data
regression:
      (1) , =  +  +   ,-1 +   ,-1 + . ,
where , is the logit transformation of the share of big four currencies in the total IR held by
country i at time t (Chinn and Frankel, 2008), and the lagged dependent variable, ,-1, is
included to account for the persistence or inertia of holding of reserves over time. To account for
possible biases induced by a lagged dependent variable in a fixed effect panel-data regression,
we use the dynamic panel-data system GMM method to estimate the specification (Anderson and
Hsiao, 1982; Arellano and Bond, 1991).
        The vector, ,-1, contains economic determinants; namely,
(a)     the ratio of country i's trade (imports+exports) with the US, Euro area, Japan, and UK to
        its total trade with the rest of the world (Trd with bigfour);
(b)     a dummy variable that assumes the value of one if country i anchors its currency to either
        the US dollar, euro, pound, or yen (Anchor);
(c)     an indicator variable (Xchg_rgm) that captures the exchange-rate regime arrangement of
        country i from hard peg to freely floating (Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff, 2016);
(d)     the share of gold in the total IR holding of country i (Gold Share),
(e)     country i's share of world GDP (GDP Share),
(f)     an SWF variable given by the US dollar value of a country's SWF in log;
(g)     the share of the stock market turnover volumes of the big four countries to the total global
        stock market turnover (Stock Mkt Size); and

                                                   6
(h)     the weighted average of inflation differentials between the big four countries and other
        OECD countries (Inflation Diff). The explanatory variables are lagged one year to
        mitigate endogeneity issues.
        The trade and exchange-rate arrangement factors are canonical economic determinants. 10
We expect a country to hold more IR in the currency of a country with which it trades more; if
the country anchors to an international currency, it tends to hold more of that currency in its IR.
The share of gold is introduced to account for possible motives when a country diversifies away
from foreign currencies to a precious commodity with a long history of serving as international
reserve--namely, gold. The country's share of world GDP controls for possible scale effects that
may affect diversification patterns of large countries. The SWF variable is used to study the
implications of SWFs for reserve-holding behaviors. The two "global" factors--namely the
relative size of the stock markets 11 and the relative inflation rate of the big four countries--are in
line with the scaling conjecture of Chinn and Frankel (2008). In addition, a large financial
market and positive inflation experiences tend to be valuable attributes of an international
reserve currency.
        Due to the differed motives of IR that are held by central banks in EMDEs and ADVs,
the precautionary motive drives IR hoarding in EMDEs, while in ADVs, holding IR is mostly for
foreign exchange interventions (Goldberg et al., 2013; Neely, 2000; Obstfeld, 1983;). Thereby,
we expect EMDEs and ADVs to behave differently in the currency composition in their IR
holdings. In Table 1, we report the results derived from the whole country sample, as well as the
subsamples of EMDEs and ADVs. As expected, the share of the big four currencies exhibits
inertia and path-dependency behavior. The inertia variable (,-1)is significant in both the full
country sample and the two subsamples. The degree of persistence is much higher in the ADVs'
subsample than the EMDEs--the former yields a coefficient estimate of 0.532 while the latter is
0.284. The large degree of persistence displayed by ADVs is likely attributed to the relatively
high degree of homogeneity among such countries. 12




10
   Frenkel (1974), Papaioannou et al. (2006), and Ito et al. (2015).
11
   The potential role of bond markets is studied via the GSA variable in the subsequent subsections.
12
   The higher macroeconomic volatility of EMDEs relative to the ADVs may be another contributing factor to
EMDEs' lower persistence.


                                                       7
       Among the economic determinants, the Trade with bigfour variable is the only variable
that is significant in both the full country sample and the EMDEs' and ADVs' subsamples. In
these three cases, the trade variable yields the expected significant positive sign--the more a
country trades with the big four countries, the more it holds their currencies in its reserves
account. The group of EMDEs shows a stronger trade effect than the ADVs.
       The "Anchor" variable has the expected positive coefficient--indicating that a country
holds more of a currency that it is pegging to. However, it is only statistically significant for the
full country sample and the EMDEs subsample (Beck and Rahbari, 2011), but not for the ADVs'
samples. This may reflect the greater ability of ADVs' economies to borrow in their own
currencies, a factor that reduces their exposure to sudden stop crises. Our results suggest that for
ADVs, a significant and positive association exists between exchange rate flexibility and the
share of big four currencies (Eichengreen et al., 2016). In countries that lean against the wind to
mitigate exchange rate fluctuations, the greater liquidity of the big four foreign exchange market
may increase their attractiveness for intervention operations.
       The "Gold Share" is significant only for the EMDEs sample and has a positive sign,
indicating that EMDEs, but not ADVs, tend to diversify in the big four reserve currencies. The
GDP Share has different signs for the ADVs' and EMDEs' subsamples and is insignificant in the
three cases under consideration.
       While the SWF variable yields an expected negative sign in both the full sample and
subsamples, it is only statistically significant in the full sample. That is, the presence of an SWF
tends to lower the share of holdings in the big four reserve currencies. This finding is consistent
with the argument by Ben-Basset (1984) who proposed to use a substitution account to diversify
away from USD reserves and Papaioannou et al. (2006) who assessed diversification away from
USD to euros with a mean-variance framework. The setup of an SWF signals that a country is
willing to diversity and improve its national wealth management, where IR are usually invested
in low-yield US treasury securities and other safe assets and incur substantial social costs
(Rodrik, 2006). The insignificance in the subsamples can be due to a reduction in sample size
when we moved from the full sample to the subsamples.
       Of the two global factors, the relative size of the stock markets displays the expected
positive sign--a large financial market is a contributing character of a reserve currency. The
significance of the variable is probably supported by the reserve behavior of EMDEs, but not


                                                  8
ADVs. The other global factor, the "Inflation Diff" variable, however, has differential effects for
ADVs and EMDEs and is insignificant for these two subsamples and the full sample.
           The over-identification Hansen J statistics (Hansen, 1982) and the serial correlation
AR(1) and AR(2) statistics (Arellano and Bond,1991) presented near the bottom of Table 1
indicate that the estimated residuals of reported specifications are well behaved. Because our
dependent variable is a logit-transformed variable, we employ the pseudo R2 estimate that is
given by the squared correlation of predicted and actual values of the dependent variable to
assess the performance of a fitted model (Cox and Wermuth, 1992; Everitt, 2002; Zheng and
Agresti, 2000). The pseudo R2 estimates indicate that the model explains the EMDEs slightly
better than the ADVs.
           In sum, results in Table 1 show that the share of big four currencies to total reserves on
average displays a considerable level of persistence and responds to the trade factor for both
ADVs and EMDEs. Another main feature of these results is the differential behavior of ADVs
and EMDEs. The variables "Anchor," "Gold Share," and "Fin Mkt Size" are significant
determinants for EMDEs, but not for ADVs. On the other hand, ADVs, but not EMDEs, respond
significantly to "Xchg_rgm." This finding echoes previous results on different reserve-hoarding
behaviors of developed and developing countries13


2.2        Currency denomination of debts and swap arrangements--the balance-sheet insurance
consideration
           The endogenous interaction between debt denominated in local currency and foreign
currencies in the possible presence of financial instability generates multiple equilibria in which
a bad equilibrium is characterized by dollarization and financial instability (Bocola and
Lorenzoni, 2017). The denominated debt of foreign currencies held by households, private firms,
and public sectors is a source of financial instability in EMDEs. Such currency mismatch on
EMDEs' balance sheet is exacerbated during financial turmoil when the domestic currency is
under substantial devaluation pressure. According to Bocola and Lorenzoni (2017), the holding
of foreign currency reserves enhances the government's fiscal credibility, and thus can eliminate
the bad equilibrium. We label this role of IR as "balance sheet insurance." Following their
argument, we test the balance-sheet insurance hypothesis by examining the association between

13
     See, for example, Aizenman et al. (2015), Bussière et al. (2015), and Cheung and Ito (2009).

                                                            9
a country's IR currency composition and its foreign currency denominated debt. If there is a
balance-sheet insurance motive, a country tends to hold more of a reserve currency in its IR
when it issues more debt that is denominated in that particular reserve currency.
        Table 2 presents the debt roles in the US dollar and the euro. 14 Specifically, we consider
the Debt in USDEuro variable, which is the share of total outstanding international debt
securities that a country issues in US dollars and euros. In addition, we include the SWAP
variable that indicates the presence (or absence) of a currency swap agreement with the Fed, the
ECB, or the Bank of Japan. Obstfeld et al. (2009) and Aizenman et al. (2011) documented the
reliance on central banks' swap lines during the GFC, especially by developed countries, and
suggest that such swap lines substitute for international reserves. To account for this substitution
effect, we include an interaction term, Debt in USDEuro * SWAP, in the regression.
        Column (1) reports the marginal effect of Debt in USDEuro in the presence of significant
economic determinants identified in Table 1. The positive coefficient estimate is in line with the
presumption that a country tends to hold more IR in big four currencies when it issues more debt
securities that are denominated in the leading reserve currencies, US dollar, and euro. Inclusion
of this debt variable improves the model performance--the pseudo R2 estimate is noticeably
larger than that reported for the specification reported in Column 1 of Table 1. The result lends
support to the notion of the balance-sheet insurance effect. 15
        The marginal effect of swap arrangements is presented in Column (2). The SWAP
variable yields a negative but insignificant coefficient estimate. Columns (3) and (4) report the
combined effects of the debt and swap variables. The Debt in USDEuro shows a consistently
significant positive effect, while the SWAP variable effect only comes through its interaction
with the debt variable. Specifically, for a given debt level issued in the US dollar and the euro,
the presence of a swap arrangement tends to lower the share of reserve holdings in the big four
currencies. This result is in line with the view that access to elastic swap lines offered by the US
FED and the central banks of other key currencies can affect a country's IR hoarding behavior,
as such swap lines provide credible fiscal signals that stabilize the economy without the need to
adjust the country's IR hoarding strategy.


14
   We do not have data on debt securities denominated in pounds or yen.
15
   We also considered the case of replacing "Trade with Bigfour" with "Import from Bigfour," which is given by the
ratio of a country's imports from the US, EU, Japan, and UK to its total imports from the rest of the world.
Nevertheless, the import-based variable offers a worse performance and thus is not discussed in the text.

                                                        10
        Tables (3) and Table (4) present the regression results from the EMDEs' and ADVs'
subsamples, respectively. The balance-sheet insurance theory works better for EMDE countries
than ADV countries. The marginal effect of the Debt in USDEuro is positive for the EMDEs
(Table 3), but negative for ADVs (Table 4). The relative Debt in USDEuro result is in line with
Goldberg, Hull, and Stein (2013) who showed that IR in ADVs are mainly used for foreign
exchange market intervention and less for insurance purposes. On swap arrangements, both
EMDEs and ADVs experience a negative effect, though for the former country group the effect
is displayed via the interaction term, while the latter group is displayed via the SWAP variable
directly. This may reflect the fact that the EMDEs' swap lines were more limited than the elastic
access extended by the swap-lines offered to ADVs' economies during and after the GFC.
        Results in Tables 3 and 4 reinforce the inference that the reserve-holding behaviors of
EMDEs and ADVs are quite different. Further, the inclusion of the Debt in USDEuro and SWAP
alters the significance of other economic determinants and, according to the pseudo R2
estimates, improves the specification performance of the ADVs better than that of EMDEs.


2.3     Scale and global safe asset effects
        Will central banks diversify their holdings of IR away from the big four currencies when
their holdings increase? To assess this possibility, we add the IR normalized by GDP as a control
variable to the regression analysis, and a negative coefficient estimate is interpreted as an
(indirect) evidence of diversification attributed to the scale effect.
        In addition to the scale effect, this subsection also considers the implications of GSAs
availability for the share of the big four currencies in holdings of reserves. We construct a GSA
proxy variable that is given by the total consolidated central government debts (Maastricht
definition) of Germany, Japan, the UK, and US, normalized by the world GDP. 16 Recognizing
the complexity of measuring GSAs (Caballero et al., 2017), we consider a few alternative
proxies for GSAs.
        Given the differential reserve-hoarding behaviors documented in previous subsections,
we separately assess the subsamples of EMDEs and ADVs and find that both the normalized IR
and GSA variables are insignificant in all the specifications considered for the ADVs'


16
       Gourinchas and Jeanne (2012), for example, suggest that only public safe assets, if appropriately supported
by monetary policy, provide sufficient insurance against global shocks.

                                                        11
subsample. Thus, for brevity, we only discuss the scale and GSA effects of the subsample of
EMDEs.
        Table 5 shows that, either entered the regression individually or jointly, the normalized
IR and GSA variables are statistically significant and improve the performance of the regression
as indicated by the pseudo R2 estimates. The negative coefficient estimate of the normalized IR
variable is in accordance with the diversification motive; the emerging market and developing
economies, on average, tend to diversify away from the big four currencies when their levels of
reserve holdings are high.
        The negative GSA effect is in line with the view that a shortage of GSAs can shift the
demand for international reserves toward the big four currencies. The result can be attributed to
the complementary of GSAs and other assets denominated in the big four currencies. For
instance, the market typically experiences an insufficient supply of GSAs during turbulent
market conditions--a notable example is the recent GFC. Such conditions are also periods in
which countries would like to have sufficient liquid reserves to fend off impacts of any adverse
shocks. With the shortage of GSAs, countries opt for alternative assets denominated in the big
four currencies. 17
        The estimation results from alternative GSA specifications are presented in Table 6. An
alternative GSA variable is defined by the total OECD central government debts that are rated
AA and normalized by the world GDP (Eichengreen et al., 2016). We label it as GSA_OECD. In
addition to the quantity measure, we consider a price measure that is given by the average yield
of a ten-year government bond of the US, Germany, the UK, and Japan, adjusted by the average
yield of emerging market economies as represented by Korea, Mexico, Russia, and South Africa
(Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012). The proxy variable is labeled GSA_YD. We
postulate that a small value of GSA_YD indicates a (relatively) high availability of safe assets. 18
        In Table 5, either GSA_OECD or GSA_YD qualitatively replicate the GSA effect.
Specifically, GSA_OECD displays a positive effect and GSA_YD a negative effect in Table 6.
The results suggest that the GSA effect is not purely driven by the choice of GSA measure.


17
          Note that high levels of IR demand by EMDEs can drive up the demand for GSAs, which leads to a
shortage of GSAs. Our use of lagged GSA variable should mitigate the endogeneity issue. We will discuss this issue
further in the next section.
18
          The results presented below are qualitatively the same when the proxy variable is adjusted for exchange
rate variations against the USD.

                                                        12
       A decades-long shortage of GSA availability may tilt the financial system toward the
issuance of "private label" pseudo-safe assets--for example, AAA-rated securitized instruments
by the private financial industry. Safe assets are expected to preserve their value during adverse
systemic events (Caballero and Farhi, 2017). However, the eruption of the 2008 financial crisis
suddenly stripped the AAA safety status of such pseudo-safe assets, causing a sudden drop in the
GSA supply. At the same time, the demand for GSAs surged due to the flight to safety during the
financial crisis. Thus, the dynamic of the GSA demand-and-supply relation during crises periods
is quite different than during tranquil times; as such, we expect the different effect of GSAs on
the IR currency composition during turmoil vis-a-vis tranquil times. To investigate this
possibility, we use the VIX index, the global financial fear factor, to indicate turmoil and tranquil
financial situation--the VIX is higher when financial markets experience more turmoil. As
shown in Column (3), a higher lagged VIX is associated with a lower share of big four currencies
in IR, perhaps again reflecting a flight-to-quality situation during tumultuous times, and thus
inducing a drop in the big four share of international reserves. This flight-to-quality argument is
reinforced by the positive estimate of the interaction term, GSA * VIX.


2.4    The regime-shift effect of the 2008 GFC
       Important financial events that potentially reshape the global financial landscape impose
a regime-shift effect on the currency composition of IR. For example, Eichengreen et al. (2016)
found that the breakdown of the Breton Woods system when most advanced countries switched
from a fixed exchange rate to a floating rate caused a shift in determinants of the IR currency
composition. To what extent was the evolution of the international reserves' share in the big four
currency affected by the 2008 GFC?
       Figure 1 shows an apparent change in the world's holding big four currencies as IR
versus other reserve currencies around 2008 GFC--that is, less than 10 years after 2008, the
share of big four dropped about 98% to about 92%. Using the EMDEs' and ADVs' samples that
we are examining in this paper, we plot the average IR share in the big four currencies for both
EMDEs and ADVs in Figures 2 and 3. Both figures indicate the watershed moment of the 2008
GFC in shifting IR currency composition, although ADVs seem to be impacted more.
       To further assess the GFC implications, we include a GFC dummy variable (GFC08) and
its interaction with other potential determinants in the regression exercise. Table 7 summarizes

                                                 13
the results and presents the specifications with significant estimates for the EMDE and ADV
subsamples. 19
        The specification of EMDEs is presented under the "EMDE" column in Table 7. As
expected, we find a significant negative GFC08 coefficient estimate, which indicates a drop in
the share of the big four currencies after the GFC. This may reflect the partial depletion of
reserves due to flight-to-quality during the crisis, as well as the greater use of prudential
regulations aimed at reducing hard-currency borrowing by EMDE, and capital inflows from key
OECD countries searching for higher yields [Aizenman, Chinn, Ito (2017)].
        Notice also that three economic factors' interaction term with GFC08 are estimated
significantly and the signs are opposite to that of the corresponding stand-alone economic factor.
These results suggest that the effects of these economic factors were either weakened or reversed
after the 2008 GFC. First, the importance of trade with big four countries on the share of reserves
allocated to big four currencies declined after the 2008 GFC. Second, larger-sized EMDEs (GDP
Share) that diversify away from the big four reversed their behavior and accumulated big four
currencies after the 2008 GFC. Finally, higher IR/GDP is found to be associated with a higher
share of international reserves allocated to the big four currencies after the crisis, reversing the
pattern before the GFC.
        These changes may reflect a heightened sensitivity of EMDEs to volatile financial flows
during and after the GFC. This volatility reflects mixed patterns--periods dominated by the
search for yields following the decline in interest rates in the big four-induced inflows to
EMDEs, and periods dominated by growing global uncertainty induced occasional outflows from
EMDEs in search of a "safe haven." These post-GFC "regime switches" might explain the
changes in the key parameters from the before-to-after GFC subsamples that we identified in the
regression.
        In the presence of the GFC08 effect, GSAs are not found to significantly affect the share
of big four currencies in EMDEs' IR until the Fed's QE tapering. This is consistent with those in
Tables 5 and 6 in which the shortage in GSA supply shifts EMDEs to a demand for more big
four currencies.



19
  For consistency, we use Tables 3 and 4 as the standard specifications for EMDEs and ADVs sample regressions,
respectively. Independent variables that are presented in Table 3 are presented in the "EMDE" column of Table 7;
those in Table 4 are included in the "ADVs" column "ADVs".

                                                       14
       Similar to GFC08, the Fed's QE tapering (QE TAPER) caused a regime-switch effect on
EMDEs' IR currency composition behavior. Contrasting this to that of GFC08, EMDEs hold
more big four currencies in their international reserves after QE tapering and the regime-shift
effect of QE tapering is five times higher than that of the 2008 GFC (e.g., 25 versus -5).
       In the case of ADVs, we find the same regime-switch effect of both the 2008 GFC and
the Fed's QE tapering, although both coefficients are smaller than those in the EMDEs' samples.
The financial crisis and monetary shocks in the center country seem to insert a larger spillover
effect on EMDEs than ADVs. After controlling for the significant and persistent GFC effect, the
diversification effect of gold (Gold Share) is weakened.
       The estimation of the same 2008 GFC effect and the Fed's QE tapering on the currency
composition of IR for both EMDE and ADV countries suggests that the global financial cycle
(Rey, 2015) plays an important role in determining IR currency composition. The 2008 GFC
followed by a QE policy and subsequent QE tapering are essentially financial and monetary
policy shocks, which, according to Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2019), altered the global
financial cycle, including the global co-movements of risky assets prices, capital flows, and
credit growth. While the QE policy from the center country creates easy credit and capital flows
to peripheral EMDEs in search of yield, QE tapering results in global money contraction and
leads to deleveraging in global financial institutions, credit tightening, and strong retrenchments
of international credit flows from EMDEs. Thus, both QE and QE tapering change the domestic
and global financial environment as well as the risk perception of both private investors and
central bank policy makers. These changes are eventually reflected in the change in IR currency
characteristics that are designed to safeguard a country's systematic risk.
       To recap, this section offers an updated empirical analysis of the currency composition of
international reserves. In addition to the canonical determinants of IR currency composition, we
account for balance-sheet insurance motives and find that such motives that apply in EMDEs but
not in ADVs. If a country holds more IR, it tends to diversify from major reserves currencies.
The shortage of GSAs induces EMDEs to hold more IR in the big four currencies. The 2008
global financial crisis and the Fed's QE tapering impose a significant regime switch, effecting
and reshaping the currency composition of IR in both EMDEs and ADVs. These results suggest
that the global cycle is an important determinant of IR currency composition.



                                                 15
3.      Additional Analyses: Euro Countries, Commodity Countries, and Valuation Issues
        One of the observations made in the previous section is that shares of reserves in the big
four currencies in EMDEs and ADVs display different patterns and dynamics. Such differences
are likely attributable to distinct economic characteristics shared by these two groups of
countries. In this section, we explore the reserve hoarding of two other groups of countries--
namely the group of euro countries and the group of commodity exporters.


3.1     Euro area countries
        Currently, the euro is the officially currency of 19 EU member countries. Is the reserve
behavior of this currency bloc different from other countries? Arguably, for the euro area
countries, debts denominated in euros may not trigger the balance-sheet insurance motive of
reserve hoarding the same way as non-euro countries. Further, open positions in the
eurosystem's clearing system, called TARGET2, reflects net capital balances between euro
countries that can affect their reserve-hoarding behavior. Table 8 presents results of
considerations of these two factors. 20
        To capture the balance sheet effect for euro countries, we replaced Debt in USDEuro
with Debt in USD--the share of total outstanding international debt securities issued in US
dollars. For the TARGET2 balance effect, we consider the following three channels via which it
can affect reserve-hoarding behaviour:
(1)     One channel is the direct effect of TARGET2 balance on IR currency composition
        [TB2/GDP]. Since TARGET2 balance is a liability for the majority of euro countries, we
        expect a higher liability in euros leads a country to hold more IR in euros.
2)      We assume the German TARGET2 balance 21 is an alternative form of GSAs of other
        euro countries and add it to the GSA variable [GSA_T2], and



20
         TARGET2 balances are akin to swap line arrangements implemented via the ECB, where creditor
Eurozone countries (mostly Germany and other core countries) provide access to credit lines to the indebted
countries (mostly to the Eurozone countries affected the most by the Euro crisis ­ Italy, Ireland, Greece, Portugal,
and Spain). Similarly to swap lines, the provision of these lines is subject to the discretion of the ECB and the
creditor countries. In 2012, at the peak of the Euro crisis, German's TARGET2 credit reached about 700 Billion
euro, and the combined TARGET2 debit reached more than trillion euro. Uncertainties regarding the stability of the
Eurozone triggered by the Euro crisis may be a factor constraining the viability and future functionality of
TARGET2. See Steiner et al. (2019) and the references therein for further analysis.
21
         Germany is the major TARGET2 system creditor that provides euros to "common pool" of the T2 payment
system. Due to the special position of Germany in the TARGET2 system, we exclude it from our sample.

                                                         16
3)      We presume that TARGET2 liability has heightened risk implications when it crosses
        some thresholds. We use one standard deviation of TB2/GDP as the threshold and use the
        amount of T2B exceeding 1 s.d. threshold [T2B_threshold] as an independent variable.
        Additionally, we single out five euro-crisis-inflicted countries--Cyprus, Greece, Ireland,
        Portugal, and Spain--to examine whether they behave differently with the TARGET2
        effect.
        Table 8 shows the results are consistent in general with those in the previous section,
finding the presence of the balance-sheet insurance motive, SWF diversification, strong inertia,
and a significant GSA effect. An exception is that the scale effect appears to be reversed--in the
euro zone, countries tend to hold more in big four currencies when they increase the IR hoarding
level. 22 As expected, higher-level TARGET2 liability is found to increase the share of big four in
IR [Column (2)]. This is consistent with our balance-sheet insurance argument. Treating German
TAREGET2 as an alternative GSA increases the supply of GSAs, possibly alleviating the GSA
shortage effect on IR holding in the big four currencies. This expectation is confirmed in Column
(3) in which the coefficient of GSA_T2 is slightly smaller than GSA in Column (1).
        Column (4) shows whether a country's holding above a threshold of TARGET2 liability
poses an insignificant effect on the country's currency composition structure in IR. Similarly,
five euro-crisis-affected countries do not behave differently than others in the holding of big four
currencies. Interestingly, it seems that these five countries reduce their share of big four
currencies when their TARGET2 liability becomes higher; however, this estimate is
insignificant.
        In passing, we also consider cases of non-euro countries and non-euro EMDE countries.
The empirical results are quite similar to those in Table 5; specifically, the Debt in USDEuro
effect is positive and both IR/GDP and GSA effects are negative. 23


3.2     Commodity exporters
        Table 9 presents the results obtained for commodity-exporting countries. We consider a
country is a commodity exporter if its exports of fuel, ores, and metals exceed 25% of its total

22
         This result is true when all ADVs are included in the regression. The results from the sample of ADVs are
available upon request.
23
         These results are not presented for brevity, and are available upon request.


                                                        17
merchandise exports. 24 It is conceived that the commodity exporter's term of trade has non-
negligible implications for its economy and, hence its reserve-hoarding behavior; a case in point
is the Russian experience (Aizenman and Sun, 2012). We include a terms of trade variable (ToT)
that measures the term of trade improvement when its value is higher. When a country's ToT
improves, it tends to hoard more IR, which induces the scale effect to diversify away from big
four currencies in IR. To capture the interaction dynamic between ToT and IR/GDP level and
their combined effect on the currency composition of IR in commodity exporters, we add an
interaction term, IR/GDP * ToT, in the regression.
        Results in Table 9 show that for these commodity exporters, ToT has a negative effect;
that is, when ToT improves, commodity exporters are inclined to diversify their IR from big four
currencies. Although the scale effect from IR/GDP exists in commodity exporters, the effect is
stronger when compared to EMDE sample results in Table 5. Thus, both ToT and IR/GDP pose
diversification effects on the share of big four currencies in commodity-exporting countries.
        Besides the significant effect from both ToT and IR/GDP, their interaction term, IR/GDP
* ToT, is estimated to be positive and significant. Since both ToT and IR/GDP are negative, a
positive interaction term suggests that the diversification effect of ToT is reduced when the
IR/GDP is high; or the effect of IR/GDP weakens if ToT improves in commodity-exporting
countries.
        In passing, we note that the ToT variables are not significant for the sample of all
EMDEs.


3.3     The valuation effect
        Due to the exchange rate changes among currencies held as IR, the IR currency
composition could change even in the absence of active reserve management. This valuation
effect is largely neglected in the literature, but recent IR studies 25 have pointed out its
importance. For instance, Eichengreen et al. (2016) showed that the fall of the sterling pound as
a major reserve currency around the time of the collapse of the Bretton Woods System reflects
the impact of the pound devaluation. Similarly, Frankel (2007) pointed out that the declining
global share of US dollars after 1976 is partly due to the depreciation of USD. Indeed, as Figure


24
        The list of commodity-exporting countries is given in Appendix B.
25
        See for example, Dominguez et al. (2012) and Eichengreen et al. (2016).

                                                       18
4 shows, a strong correlation exists between euro value (plot as the dash-line) and the global
share of euros as reserve currency (red line). According to this data plot, one could argue for a
plausible valuation effect, at least for the euro.
        In this section, we assess the robustness of our results by taking the valuation effect into
consideration. To account for the valuation effect due to the exchange rate change, 26 we need to
find a numeraire currency. As the IR currency composition data are accounted in USD, and the
Euro and USD are two major reserve currencies, we choose to use the Euro as the numeraire
currency and study the valuation effect caused by the changes in the euro/USD exchange rate.
The IMF moving average exchange-rate approach is used to convert USD-denominated IR data
into Euros counted IR data. 27 Since we do not have country-specific data for the composition of
each individual currency in the IR, we assume all countries hold the same currency composition
as the world (IMF COFER data).
        To save space, we opt to report Table 10 that replicates the regressions in Table 7, where
we examine the impact of the 2008 GFC and the Fed's rate tapering on the currency composition
of IR. Overall, the results are similar to those in Table 7, but with three important exceptions: (1)
the impact of the 2008 GFC becomes insignificant, although it is still negative in EMDEs'
sample; (2) the scale effect from the IR level (IR/GDP) is now insignificantly negative; and (3)
the GSA effect becomes significantly positive before the Fed's interest rate tapering, but is
reversed after tapering. The decline in the significance of the 2008 GFC dummy variable once
we control for the euro/dollar rate probably reflects the fact that the 2008 GFC variable captures
the switch from a relatively weak dollar during 2000­2007 to the strong dollar during 2008­
2017. This market adjustment is in line with the dollar shortage triggered by the GFC and the
"safe haven" and greater liquidity of the dollar market.
        The lack of country-specific data implies that we have to interpret our results on the
valuation effect with caution. In this subsection, we assume all countries possess the same IR
currency composition as the world does; and we focus only on accounting for the euro/USD
valuation. Undoubtedly, having more refined data may alter some of the results, allowing a
sharper identification of the unique role of the dollar before and after the GFC.



26
         The valuation effect could stem from either exchange rate fluctuation or the gain/loss from investments of
IR assets (Dominguez et al, 2012). This paper considers only the exchange-rate valuation effect.
27
         Wong (2007) provided technical details for the IMF moving average approach.

                                                         19
4.     Concluding Remarks
       Our paper illustrates the dynamic changes modifying the demand for IR, the IR share of
the big four currencies, and the varying importance of "safe assets" over time. In the context of
the evolving literature, we recall that the 1997 East Asian Crisis was a watershed event
explaining the reserve-hoarding takeoff observed in that part of the world, as well as in other
emerging markets in the 1990s. The Global Financial Crisis validated the potential benefits of
hoarding, but it also illustrated the need to supplement the hoarding of IR in "good times" with
macro prudential regulation and other ways of buffering the economy in turbulent times. The
crises brought to the fore the supplementary role of sovereign wealth funds, access to swap lines,
Target2 credit arrangements, and the quest for "safer assets." Our paper identifies these factors
and explores their impact on the IR share on the big four currencies. Over time, we expect more
changes to come, including a growing role of China in the global monetary system and credit
arrangements, and experimentations with new policies and hedging mechanisms.




                                                20
Reference:
Aizenman, J., Cheung, Y-W., H., Ito 2015: International Reserves Before and After the Global
Crisis: Is There No End to Hoarding? Journal of International Money and Finance 52 (April),
102-126.
Aizenman, J., Lee, J., 2007. International reserves: precautionary versus mercantilist views,
theory and evidence. Open Economies Review, 18, 191-214.
Aizenman, J., Lee, J., 2008. Financial versus monetary mercantilism: longrun view of large
international reserves hoarding. World Economy 31, 593-611.
Aizenman, J., Marion, N., 2003. The high demand for international reserves in the Far East:
What is going on? Journal of the Japanese and international Economies 17, 370-400.
Aizenman, J., Glick, R.. 2009. Sovereign wealth funds: Stylized facts about their determinants
and governance. International Finance 12.3: 351-386.
Aizenman, J. Y. Jinjarak, D. Park, 2011. International reserves and swap lines: substitutes or
complements? International Review of Economics and Finance, (2011), 20, pp. 5-18.
Aizenman, J., Y. Sun., 2012. The financial crisis and sizable international reserves depletion:
From `fear of floating' to the `fear of losing international reserves'? International Review of
Economics & Finance 24 (2012): 250-269.
Aizenman, J., M. Chinn, H. Ito., 2017. Financial Spillovers and Macroprudential Policies, NBER
WP 24105.
Anderson, T.W., Hsiao, C., 1982. Formulation and estimation of dynamic models using panel
data. Journal of econometrics 18, 47-82.
Arellano, M. and S. Bond, 1991. Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
evidence and an application to employment equations. The Review of Economic Studies 58: 277-
97.
Beck, R., Rahbari, E., 2011. Optimal reserve composition in the presence of sudden stops.
Journal of International Money and Finance 30, 1107-1127.
Beck, R and Mehl, A., 2013. "Global safe asset shortage, non-traditional reserve currencies and
the global financial crisis", in The International Role of the Euro, European Central Bank,
Frankfurt am Main
Ben-Bassat Avraham, 1984. Reserve-Currency diversification and the substitution account,
Princeton Studies in International Finance, No. 53, March 1984.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Bertaut, Carol C. and DeMarco, Laurie and Kamin, Steven B.,
International Capital Flows and the Return to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003-2007 (April
11, 2011). FRB International Finance Discussion Paper No. 1014.
Bussière, M., Cheng, G., Chinn, M. D., & Lisack, N., 2015. For a few dollars more: Reserves
and growth in times of crises. Journal of International Money and Finance, 52, 127-145.
Caballero, R.J., 2006. On the macroeconomics of asset shortages. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Caballero, R., Farhi, E., 2017. The safety trap. The Review of Economic Studies 85, 223-274.

                                                21
Caballero, R.J., Farhi, E., Gourinchas, P.-O., 2017. The safe assets shortage conundrum. Journal
of Economic Perspectives 31, 29-46.
Calvo, G. A. 1998. Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of sudden
stops. Journal of applied Economics 1.1 (1998): 35-54.
Chinn, M., Frankel, J.A., 2008. Will the euro eventually surpass the dollar as leading
international reserve currency? In: G7 Current account imbalances: sustainability and
adjustment. University of Chicago Press, pp. 283-338.
Cheung, Y-W., Ito, H., 2009. A Cross-Country Empirical Analysis of International Reserves.
International Economic Journal 23, 447-481.
Cheung, Y-W., Qian, X., 2009. Hoarding of international reserves: Mrs Machlup's wardrobe and
the Joneses. Review of International Economics 17, 824-843.
Cheung Y-W., Qian, X., Remolona, E., 2019. The Hoarding of International Reserves: It's a
neighborly day in Asia. Pacific Economic Review (24), 208-240.
Cox, D. R. and N. Wermuth, 1992. A comment on the coefficient of determination for binary
responses. American Statistician 161: 1­4.
Dominguez, K.M., Hashimoto, Y., Ito, T., 2012. International reserves and the global financial
crisis. Journal of International Economics 88, 388-406.
Dooley, M.P., Lizondo, S., Mathieson, D., 1989. The currency composition of foreign exchange
reserves. International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 36 (2), 385­434.
Eichengreen, B., Mathieson, D., 2000. The Currency Composition of Foreign Exchange
Reserves: Retrospect and Prospect. IMF Working Paper 131.
Eichengreen, B., Chiu, L., Mehl, A., 2016. Stability or upheaval? The currency composition of
international reserves in the long run. IMF Economic Review 64, 354-380.
Everitt, B. S., 2002. Cambridge Dictionary of Statistics (2nd ed.).
Frenkel, J. A., 1974. The Demand for International Reserves by Developed and Less-Developed
Countries, Economica, 141, pp. 14-24.
Frankel, J. A., 2007. Exchange Rate Policy. in American Economic Policy in the 1980s, ed. by
Martin Feldstein (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 293­341.
Goldberg, L. S., C. Hull, and S. K. Stein, 2013. Do industrialized countries hold the right foreign
exchange reserves? Current Issues in Economics and Finance 19, no. 1.
Gorton, G. B. and G. Ordonez, 2013. The supply and demand for safe assets, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jeanne, Olivier, 2012. Global Safe Assets. BIS Working Paper
No. 399.
Hansen, Lars Peter, 1982. "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
Estimators". Econometrica. 50 (4): 1029­1054.
He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt, 2016a. A model of safe asset
determination, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                22
He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt, 2016b. What makes us
government bonds safe assets? American Economic Review 106, 519-23.
Heller, H.R., Knight, M.D., 1978. Reserve-currency preferences of central banks. International
Finance Section, Dept. of Economics, Princeton University.
Ito, H., McCauley, R.N., Chan, T., 2015. Currency composition of reserves, trade invoicing and
currency movements. Emerging Markets Review 25, 16-29.
Jeanne, O., and Rancière, R., 2011. The optimal level of international reserves for emerging
market countries: A new formula and some applications. The Economic Journal 121, 905-930.
Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2012. The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt.
Journal of Political Economy 120, 233-267.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Helene Rey, 2019. Us Monetary Policy and the Global Financial
Cycle (November 2015). NBER Working Paper No. w21722.
Neely, C.J., 2000. Are changes in foreign exchange reserves well correlated with official
intervention? Fed. Reserve Bank St. Louis Rev. 82 (5), 17­32.
Obstfeld, M., 1983. Exchange rates, inflation, and the sterilization problem: Germany, 1975-
1981. European Economic Review 21, 161-189.
Obstfeld, M., 1996. Models of currency crises with self-fulfilling features. European Economic
Review 40, 1037-1047.
Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J.C., Taylor, A.M., 2009. Financial instability, reserves, and central
bank swap lines in the panic of 2008. American Economic review 99, 480-86.
Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J.C., Taylor, A.M., 2010. Financial stability, the trilemma, and
international reserves. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 57-94.
Papaioannou, E., Portes, R., Siourounis, G., 2006. Optimal currency shares in international
reserves: the impact of the euro and the prospects for the dollar. Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies. Elsevier 20 (4), 508­547.
Rey, H., 2015. Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy
independence. NBER Working Paper 21162.
Rodrik, D., 2006. The social cost of foreign exchange reserves. International Economic Journal
20, 253-266.
Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell, 2004, Balance sheet effects, bailout guarantees and
financial crises, The Review of Economic Studies 71, 883-913.
Steiner, Andreas, Sven Steinkamp, and Frank Westermann. 2019, Exit strategies, capital flight
and speculative attacks: Europe's version of the trilemma. European Journal of Political
Economy (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2019.02.003).
Wong, A., 2007. Measurement and inference in international reserve diversification. Peterson
Institute for International Economics Working Paper.
Zheng, B. and A. Agresti, 2000. Summarizing the predictive power of a generalized linear
model. Statistics in Medicine 19: 1771­1781.


                                                23
Appendix A: variable definitions
IR in Bigfour: the aggregate share of international reserves in big four currencies, namely US dollar,
                 Euro, Sterling Pounds, and Japanese Yen, in total IR excluding Gold. The data of big four
                 currencies in international reserves are retrieved from IMF's International Reserves and
                 Foreign Currency Liquidity (IMF IRFCL) http://data.imf.org/?sk=2DFB3380-3603-
                 4D2C-90BE-A04D8BBCE237&sId=1390030341854. IRFCL publishes the annual
                 data for the amount (in US dollar) of SDR basket currencies (US dollar, Euro, Sterling
                 Pounds, and Japanese Yen; RMB is included in 2016 and 2017) from 1999 to 2017. Due
                 to short periods for the RMB data, we purge them by subtracting countries' holding of
                 RMB as reserve currency in 2016 and 2017. The holding of RMB as IR in 2016 and 2017
                 are published in IRFCL.
Trade with Bigfour: the ratio of a country's imports and exports of goods with US, Euro area, UK, and JP
                 to its total imports and exports with the world. Source: Direction of Trade
Anchor:          the dummy variable for a country that anchor its currency exchange rate to US Dollar.
                 Source: Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2016);
                 (http://www.carmenreinhart.com/data/browse-by-topic/topics/11/)
Xchg rgm:        the dummy variable for exchange rate regime, constructed from the coarse measurement
                 of Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2016), in which the authors indexed from 1 to 5 for
                 exchange regime according to its flexibility from "NO separate legal tender", "De facto
                 peg" to "freely floating" and "freely falling". The higher the index, the more flexible the
                 exchange regime is.
Gold Share:      the ratio of gold reserve assets in total international reserves including gold, IMF IFS.
GDP Share:       the share of a country's GDP in the World GDP, WDI.
Debt in USDEuro:           the share of outstanding international debt security that a country issued in US
                 Dollar and Euro in its total international debt. Source: BIS statistics warehouse
                 (https://stats.bis.org/#ppq=CBS_C_AND_OTH_EXP_UR;pv=11~10,5,6~0,0,0~name)
SWAP:            a dummy for bilateral swap agreements (SWAP). SWAP = 1, if a country is in an
                 agreement of bilateral currency swap (regardless of the currency of the agreement) such
                 as the Fed, the ECB, and the Bank of Japan. Otherwise, 0. The data are compiled using
                 website information (Aizenman, Cheung, and Ito, 2015).
SWF:             The size of sovereign wealth fund in billion USD, in logarithm value. Source: the SWF
                 Institute (http://www.swfinstitute.org/fund-rankings/).
IR/GDP:          the ratio of international reserves excluding gold to GDP. Source: IMF IFS.
Stock Mkt Size:            the share of stock trade turnover of US, Euro area, UK, and Japan in the world's
                 total stock trade turnover. Source: WDI
Inflation diff: the GDP share weighted average of inflation difference between US, Euro, UK, and
                 Japan and other OECD countries. Source: WDI
Inertia:         lagged dependent variable, the share of currency in USD, Euro, Pound, and Yen in total
                 reserves, to capture the inertial bias in favor of whatever currency is used in the past in
                 reserves (Chinn and Frankel, 2008).
GSA              Global safe assets, measured as total consolidated central government debt (Maastricht
                 definition) of Germany, Japan, UK, and US, weighted by world GDP. Source: ECB
                 Statistical Data Warehouse.
GSA_OECD Global safe assets, measured as total OECD central government debt rated AA and
                 above, then weighted by world GDP. Source: ECB Statistical Data Warehouse and WDI.
GSA_YD:          Global safe assets measured as the average yield of 10-year government bond of big four
                 (US, Germany, UK, and Japan) and emerging markets (represented by Korea, Mexico,
                 Russia, and South Africa). Source: FRED St. Louis Fed.


                                                    24
GSA_T2:         The alternative GSA measurement for Euro countries where German T2 payment balance
                is considered as one type of GSAs, which is added to GSAs provided by Germany, Japan,
                UK, and US government debt.
VIX:            Financial fear gauge, the CBOE Volatility Index that measured by market expectation of
                near-term volatility conveyed by stock index option prices. Source: FRED St. Louis Fed.
ToT:            Net barter terms of trade index (2000 = 100), in logarithm value. A high index indicates
                the improvement of term of trade. Source: WDI
T2B:            The Target 2 payment balance in million Euro, converted into USD using period average
                spot rate. T2 liability is turned to positive number before regressions, therefore, high T2B
                indicates high T2 liability. Source: Euro Crisis Monitor
                http://www.eurocrisismonitor.com/
GFC08           As time dummy variable measures the 2008 global financial crisis (GFC08 = 1 if
                year>2008; otherwise, 0)
QE Taper        As time dummy variable measures Fed's QE tapering (Taper = 1 if year>2013;
                otherwise, 0)



Appendix B: Country samples
Advanced economies: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland

Emerging markets and developing economies: Albania, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Korea, Latvia,
Lithuania, Macedonia, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Russian Federation, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
Uruguay

Commodity exporter countries (country exporting fuel and ores and metals more than 25% of its total
merchandise exports): Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Egypt,
Greece, Iceland, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Norway, Peru, Russia, South Africa

Euro countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain

OECD sovereign rated AA or above by S&P: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United
Kingdom, United States




                                                    25
Table 1: the determinants of currency composition in international reserves

                                        All                 EMDE                    ADV
     Trade with Bigfour              0.561***              0.539***                0.230*
                                      (0.107)               (0.108)                (0.119)
           Anchor                     7.627*                7.585**                 7.109
                                      (3.950)               (3.226)                (5.911)
          Xchg_rgm                     1.926                  0.581                3.673*
                                      (2.223)               (1.948)                (2.028)
         Gold Share                    0.036                 0.101*                -0.019
                                      (0.036)               (0.051)                (0.032)
         GDP Share                     1.632                 -0.126                 0.164
                                      (2.136)               (2.993)                (0.705)
            SWF                      -4.606**                -2.068                -0.918
                                      (2.063)               (1.576)                (0.622)
       Stock Mkt Size                0.166***              0.193***                 0.046
                                      (0.030)               (0.030)                (0.027)
        Inflation Diff                -0.536                 -0.625                 0.034
                                      (0.403)               (0.458)                (0.314)
            Inertia                  0.225***              0.284***               0.532***
                                      (0.064)               (0.057)                (0.092)
           Constant                 -44.542***            -42.249***             -22.653**
                                      (7.741)               (6.613)                (9.501)

        Hansen J stats.                   52.84                 48.08                 22.49
             AR(1)                        -3.89                 -4.28                 -2.25
             AR(2)                        -0.89                 -0.84                 -0.73
        Adj. Pseudo R2                    0.240                 0.315                 0.259
              Obs.                        1218                   828                   390
Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. All independent variables are lagged
one year. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and "*" mark for significant at 1%, 5%,
and 10%, respectively.




                                               26
Table 2: the results for the balance sheet insurance effect on the currency composition of IR, all
countries sample

                                    (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)
  Trade with Bigfour            0.456***          0.441***           0.438***          0.444***
                                 (0.125)           (0.130)            (0.118)           (0.118)
        Anchor                   9.694**           7.804*           11.062***           9.082**
                                 (3.655)           (4.448)            (3.286)           (3.586)
    Stock Mkt Size              0.070***          0.086***            0.048*           0.066***
                                 (0.025)           (0.025)            (0.027)           (0.024)
     Inflation Diff             -0.808**          -0.999**           -0.769**          -0.893**
                                 (0.376)           (0.394)            (0.348)           (0.363)
         Inertia                0.375***          0.380***           0.338***          0.372***
                                 (0.086)           (0.071)            (0.088)           (0.084)
   Debt in USDEuro               0.041**                             0.095***           0.042**
                                 (0.019)                              (0.030)           (0.019)
         SWAP                                         -0.909          -0.189             0.594
                                                      (0.621)         (0.619)           (0.838)
Debt in USDEuro*SWAP                                                                    -0.023*
                                                                                        (0.013)
        Constant              -34.847***         -31.600***         -36.072***        -33.393***
                                (8.008)            (8.109)            (7.421)           (7.450)

     Hansen J stats.                54.68            55.05             51.61              53.45
          AR(1)                     -3.67            -4.21             -3.36              -3.73
          AR(2)                     -1.24            -1.06             -1.19              -1.13
     Adj. Pseudo R2                 0.377            0.393             0.359              0.402
           Obs.                      845              845               845                845
Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. All independent variables are lagged
one year. All countries are in data sample. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and "*"
mark for significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.




                                                 27
Table 3: the results for the balance sheet insurance effect on the currency composition of IR,
EMDE countries sample

                                        (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)
     Trade with Bigfour              0.217**         0.250***          0.189**           0.213**
                                     (0.088)          (0.089)          (0.087)           (0.085)
         Xchg_rgm                     0.450            0.203            0.656*            0.451
                                     (0.295)          (0.310)          (0.325)           (0.295)
       Stock Mkt Size               0.115***         0.141***         0.098***          0.113***
                                     (0.032)          (0.032)          (0.033)           (0.032)
        Inflation Diff              -0.973**         -1.163**         -0.909**          -0.979**
                                     (0.390)          (0.460)          (0.339)           (0.388)
           Inertia                  0.407***         0.398***         0.381***          0.404***
                                     (0.097)          (0.082)          (0.094)           (0.097)
      Debt in USDEuro                0.032**                          0.063***           0.033**
                                     (0.014)                           (0.015)           (0.014)
           SWAP                                       -0.358             0.112            0.217
                                                      (0.904)          (0.809)           (0.767)
 Debt in USDEuro * SWAP                                                                 -0.015**
                                                                                         (0.006)
          Constant                 -20.304***        -21.119***      -20.022***        -19.855***
                                     (5.299)           (4.715)         (4.906)           (5.018)

        Hansen J stats.                  32.39          32.51            32.79             31.69
             AR(1)                       -3.86          -4.12            -3.75             -3.83
             AR(2)                       -1.52          -1.26            -1.53             -1.55
       Adj. pseudo R2                    0.353          0.338            0.315             0.366
              Obs.                        463            463              463               463
Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. All independent variables are lagged
one year. EMDE countries are in data sample. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and
"*" mark for significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.




                                                28
Table 4: the results for the balance sheet insurance effect on the currency composition of IR,
ADV countries sample

                                    (1)                  (2)             (3)               (4)
       Gold Share               -0.052**              -0.033*        -0.038**          -0.044**
                                 (0.020)              (0.018)         (0.017)           (0.017)
          SWF                   -0.465**               -0.320         -0.444*           -0.479*
                                 (0.221)              (0.190)         (0.231)           (0.240)
     Stock Mkt Size              0.050**                0.027          0.017             0.031*
                                 (0.021)              (0.016)         (0.013)           (0.016)
         Inertia                0.538***             0.590***        0.512***          0.513***
                                 (0.078)              (0.039)         (0.077)           (0.080)
   Debt in USDEuro               -0.028*                             -0.030**           -0.039*
                                 (0.015)                              (0.014)           (0.020)
         SWAP                                        -1.065*        -1.869***           -1.918*
                                                     (0.599)          (0.657)           (1.021)
Debt in USDEuro * SWAP                                                                   0.013
                                                                                        (0.011)
        Constant                  0.472               0.375          3.925***           3.094**
                                 (1.511)             (1.074)          (1.178)           (1.426)

     Hansen J stats.                21.09            22.04             20.35              20.01
          AR(1)                     -1.99             -2.36             -1.95              -1.95
          AR(2)                     -0.81             -0.13             -0.13              -0.12
     Adj. pseudo R2                 0.546            0.585             0.532              0.521
           Obs.                      382               382               382                382
Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. All independent variables are lagged
one year. ADV countries are in data sample. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and
"*" mark for significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.




                                                29
Table 5: the results for the currency composition of IR with the balance sheet insurance effect,
scale effect and the effect of GSA, EMDE countries sample

                                          (1)                     (2)                   (3)
    Trade with Bigfour                 0.118**                 0.209**               0.113**
                                       (0.053)                 (0.083)               (0.045)
         Xchg_rgm                       1.136*                  0.394                 0.533*
                                       (0.639)                 (0.277)               (0.308)
      Stock Mkt Size                     0.045                0.103***                 0.032
                                       (0.032)                 (0.030)               (0.029)
       Inflation Diff                 -0.623**               -1.246***              -0.738**
                                       (0.272)                 (0.404)               (0.289)
           Inertia                    0.411***                0.382***              0.408***
                                       (0.077)                 (0.098)               (0.076)
     Debt in USDEuro                   0.028**                 0.030**               0.025**
                                       (0.013)                 (0.013)               (0.011)
          SWAP                           0.368                  0.841                  0.853
                                       (0.570)                 (0.871)               (0.685)
 Debt in USDEuro*SWAP                 -0.015**               -0.018***               -0.015*
                                       (0.008)                 (0.006)               (0.008)
          IR/GDP                      -0.092**                                      -0.087**
                                       (0.044)                                       (0.041)
            GSA                                              -0.184***              -0.115**
                                                               (0.069)               (0.051)
          Constant                    -9.445**                -10.308*                -1.673
                                       (4.072)                 (5.396)               (3.835)

        Hansen J stats.                   28.15                 26.63                   26.32
            AR(1)                         -3.81                  -3.76                  -3.89
            AR(2)                         -1.43                  -1.54                  -1.38
       Adj. pseudo R2                     0.474                 0.469                   0.495
             Obs.                          463                    463                    463
Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. Independent variables are lagged one
year and the inclusion of independent variables is based on Table 3 as the standard. EMDE
countries are in data sample. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and "*" mark for
significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.




                                                 30
Table 6: the results for the currency composition of IR with the balance sheet insurance effect,
scale effect and alternative measurements for GSA, EMDE countries sample
                                           (1)                   (2)                    (3)
      Trade with Bigfour               0.114***               0.090**                0.098**
                                        (0.044)               (0.042)                (0.041)
          Xchg_rgm                        0.507                 0.290                  0.354
                                        (0.314)               (0.294)                (0.314)
        Stock Mkt Size                    0.010               0.061**               0.097***
                                        (0.028)               (0.029)                (0.032)
         Inflation Diff               -0.846***               -0.625*              -1.997***
                                        (0.327)               (0.334)                (0.660)
            Inertia                    0.427***              0.431***               0.433***
                                        (0.076)               (0.079)                (0.071)
       Debt in USDEuro                  0.025**               0.025**                0.022**
                                        (0.012)               (0.012)                (0.011)
            SWAP                          0.351                -0.335                  0.138
                                        (1.166)               (1.094)                (1.060)
  Debt in USDEuro*SWAP                   -0.006                -0.016                 -0.005
                                        (0.018)               (0.016)                (0.016)
           IR/GDP                      -0.091**              -0.090**              -0.107***
                                        (0.040)               (0.041)                (0.037)
         GSA_OECD                      -0.276**
                                        (0.111)
           GSA_YD                                             0.250**
                                                              (0.119)
             GSA                                                                   -0.599***
                                                                                     (0.224)
             VIX                                                                    -0.989**
                                                                                     (0.387)
          GSA * VIX                                                                  0.021**
                                                                                     (0.009)
           Constant                     2.832                -8.464**               18.041**
                                       (4.951)                (3.489)                (9.163)

         Hansen J Stats.                  23.48                 29.32                  26.89
              AR(1)                        -3.93                -3.90                  -4.00
              AR(2)                        -1.35                -1.37                  -1.40
         Adj. pseudo R2                   0.491                 0.539                  0.509
               Obs.                         463                  463                    463
Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. Independent variables are lagged one
year and the inclusion of independent variables is based on in Table 3 as the standard. EMDE
countries are in data sample. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and "*" mark for
significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

                                                 31
Table 7: the results for the effect of 2008 global financial crisis and the Fed's QE taper to the
currency composition of IR
                                      EMDE                                                 ADV
     Trade with Bigfour               0.087**                 Gold Share                 -0.040*
                                      (0.039)                                            (0.021)
Trade with Bigfour*GFC08             -0.080**            Gold Share*GFC08                 0.036*
                                      (0.038)                                            (0.021)
         GDP Share                     -2.256                    SWF                       0.049
                                      (1.824)                                            (0.087)
    GDP Share*GFC08                    5.109*
                                      (2.679)
         Xchg_rgm                     2.161**
                                      (1.074)
       Stock Mkt Size                   0.015               Stock Mkt Size               0.060**
                                      (0.037)                                            (0.028)
        Inflation Diff               -1.085**
                                      (0.552)
           Inertia                    0.207**                   Inertia                 0.523***
                                      (0.084)                                            (0.061)
     Debt in USDEuro                   0.037*             Debt in USDEuro                 0.014
                                      (0.021)                                            (0.017)
           SWAP                        -0.220                   SWAP                      1.765
                                      (1.381)                                            (1.569)
Debt in USDEuro * SWAP                  0.000         Debt in USDEuro * SWAP             -0.020
                                      (0.019)                                            (0.019)
           GFC08                    -5.101***                   GFC08                   -2.060**
                                      (1.793)                                            (1.044)
          IR/GDP                     -0.161**
                                      (0.074)
     IR/GDP * GFC08                   0.195**
                                      (0.096)
          QE Taper                    25.511*                 QE Taper                  16.167**
                                     (14.308)                                            (7.490)
            GSA                         0.032                    GSA                      0.037
                                      (0.120)                                            (0.041)
      QE Taper*GSA                    -0.529*              QE Taper*GSA                 -0.330**
                                      (0.292)                                            (0.154)
          Constant                     -5.477                  Constant                  -5.254
                                      (6.992)                                            (3.469)

       Hansen J stats.                  22.29                Hansen J test               16.25
            AR(1)                        -3.45                   AR(1)                   -2.08
            AR(2)                        -0.98                   AR(2)                   -0.97
       Adj. pseudo R2                   0.490                 Pseudo R2                  0.703
             Obs.                         435                     Obs.                    382
Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. All independent variables are lagged
one year. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and "*" mark for significant at 1%, 5%,
and 10%, respectively.

                                                 32
 Table 8: the results for the currency composition of IR, Euro countries sample

                                (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)
  Trade with Bigfour          0.058*          0.081**       0.068**         0.071**       0.079**
                              (0.030)         (0.034)       (0.028)         (0.031)       (0.031)
         SWF                  -0.244        -1.005***        -0.733       -0.906***      -1.043**
                              (0.417)         (0.362)       (0.494)         (0.317)       (0.527)
         Inertia             0.373***        0.384***      0.380***        0.381***      0.387***
                              (0.085)         (0.114)       (0.090)         (0.116)       (0.116)
     Debt in USD              -0.002           0.023*         0.007          0.017         0.024*
                              (0.014)         (0.012)       (0.014)         (0.013)       (0.014)
        IR/GDP               0.158***         0.113**      0.150***         0.122**       0.113**
                              (0.047)         (0.045)       (0.048)         (0.049)       (0.044)
         GSA                 -0.131**         -0.059*                     -0.080***        -0.048
                              (0.062)         (0.034)                       (0.030)       (0.035)
       T2B/GDP                               1.769***                                    1.755***
                                              (0.555)                                     (0.427)
       GSA_T2                                              -0.128**
                                                            (0.058)
    T2B_threshold                                                           2.808
                                                                           (2.483)
     Euro Crisis 5                                                                          0.547
                                                                                           (0.859)
Euro Crisis 5 *T2B/GDP                                                                     -2.052
                                                                                           (2.558)
       Constant                2.513         -2.513          1.618         -0.921          -2.984
                              (3.698)        (2.700)        (3.425)        (2.226)         (2.672)

     Hansen J stats.             10.75           8.05          11.06          8.07            6.28
         AR(1)                   -2.01          -1.94          -2.02         -1.96           -1.94
         AR(2)                   -0.13          -1.55          -0.28         -1.80           -1.55
    Adj. pseudo R2               0.709         0.693           0.719         0.669           0.676
          Obs.                    283            233            249           233             233
 Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
 variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. Column (1) reports results with 18
 Euro countries, excluding Germany; Column (2) adds TARGET2 liabilities as an independent
 variable; Column (3) reports when Germany's TARGET2 balance is treated as alternative GSA.
 Column (4) add TARGET2 liabilities that are exceeding 1 s.d. threshold as an independent
 variable. Column (5) singles out five Euro crisis inflicted countries. Germany is also excluded
 from regression samples in Column (2), (3), (4), and (5) as well. All independent variables are
 lagged one year. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and "*" mark for significant at
 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.


                                                 33
Table 9: the results for the currency composition of IR, commodity exporter countries sample

                                          (1)                   (2)                   (3)
        Stock Mkt Size                 0.063**              0.153***               0.055**
                                       (0.028)               (0.047)               (0.027)
         Inflation Diff                 0.007                -1.199*                -0.140
                                       (0.379)               (0.681)               (0.362)
            Inertia                   0.509***              0.518***              0.498***
                                       (0.037)               (0.127)               (0.041)
           IR/GDP                     -1.555**                                     -1.338*
                                       (0.788)                                     (0.719)
        IR/GDP * ToT                   0.321**                                      0.275*
                                       (0.163)                                     (0.149)
             ToT                      -8.043**               -5.234*              -7.018**
                                       (3.261)               (2.763)               (2.812)
             GSA                                            -0.135**                -0.064
                                                             (0.060)               (0.042)
           Constant                   35.878**                21.304              34.595**
                                      (15.759)              (14.843)              (14.360)

         Hansen J stats.                   12.51                 14.02                   8.77
             AR(1)                         -2.96                  -2.72                 -2.98
             AR(2)                         -0.78                  -1.27                 -0.86
        Adj. pseudo R2                     0.622                 0.543                 0.626
              Obs.                          288                    288                   288
Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. All independent variables are lagged
one year. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and "*" mark for significant at 1%, 5%,
and 10%, respectively.




                                                 34
Table 10: the results for the currency composition of IR after taking consider in the valuation
effect from Euro/US dollar exchange rate changes
                                     EMDE                                                ADV
    Trade with Bigfour              0.014***                Gold Share                   0.002
                                     (0.003)                                           (0.002)
Trade with Bigfour*GFC08           -0.019***            Gold Share*GFC08               -0.005*
                                     (0.003)                                           (0.003)
         GDP Share                  -0.760**                   SWF                      -0.021
                                     (0.315)                                           (0.013)
    GDP Share*GFC08                 0.847***
                                     (0.323)
         Xchg_rgm                    0.193**
                                     (0.087)
      Stock Mkt Size                   0.001              Stock Mkt Size              0.005***
                                     (0.002)                                           (0.001)
       Inflation Diff                 0.059*
                                     (0.032)
           Inertia                  0.153***                   Inertia                 0.169***
                                     (0.016)                                            (0.005)
     Debt in USDEuro                   0.000             Debt in USDEuro                -0.004
                                     (0.002)                                            (0.002)
           SWAP                        0.074                   SWAP                   -0.840***
                                     (0.086)                                            (0.308)
Debt in USDEuro * SWAP                -0.000         Debt in USDEuro * SWAP             0.006*
                                     (0.001)                                            (0.003)
           GFC08                      -0.059                  GFC08                      0.225
                                     (0.146)                                            (0.171)
          IR/GDP                      -0.005
                                     (0.004)
     IR/GDP * GFC08                    0.003
                                     (0.008)
         QE Taper                   6.726***                 QE Taper                  5.255***
                                     (0.889)                                            (0.219)
            GSA                     0.036***                    GSA                     0.004**
                                     (0.006)                                            (0.001)
      QE Taper*GSA                 -0.138***              QE Taper*GSA                -0.107***
                                     (0.019)                                            (0.005)
          Constant                    -0.288                  Constant                 1.655***
                                     (0.402)                                            (0.162)

       Hansen J stats.                  28.06                Hansen J test               22.98
            AR(1)                        -2.57                   AR(1)                   -3.02
            AR(2)                        -0.29                   AR(2)                   -0.38
       Adj. pseudo R2                   0.562                 Pseudo R2                  0.731
             Obs.                         407                     Obs.                    339
Note: this table reports the results of dynamic panel data system GMM with a lagged dependent
variable, labeled as "Inertia", as an independent variable. All independent variables are lagged
one year. Robust errors are in parentheses. "***", "**", and "*" mark for significant at 1%, 5%,
and 10%, respectively.

                                                35
Figure 1: The global share of big four versus other reserves currencies

 99                                                                                                    9

 98                                                                                                    8
 97                                                                                                    7
 96
                                                                                                       6
 95
                                                                                                       5
 94
                                                                                                       4
 93
                                                                                                       3
 92

 91                                                                                                    2

 90                                                                                                    1

 89                                                                                                    0
      1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                             Share of bigfour         Share of other reserve currencies

Data source: IMF COFER data


Figure 2: The average share of holding of big four currencies in IR: EMDE v.s. ADV




Data source: IMF IRFCL and IMF IFS



                                                     36
Figure 3: The aggregate share of holding of big four currencies in IR: EMDE v.s. ADV




Data source: IMF COFER


Figure 4: The global share of US$ and Euro and the Euro/US$ exchange rate




Data source: IMF COFER and IFS


                                           37
