                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         LOSING INSURANCE AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH INPATIENT CARE:
          EVIDENCE FROM A LARGE-SCALE MEDICAID DISENROLLMENT

                                     Johanna Catherine Maclean
                                        Sebastian Tello-Trillo
                                          Douglas Webber

                                        Working Paper 25936
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25936


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2019




We thank Chandler McClellan, Brant Callaway, Ben Cook, Salma Freed, Andrew Goodman-Bacon,
Steven Hill, Edward Miller, Ryan Mutter, Samantha Harris, and seminar participants at the Southern
Economics Association Conference, American Society of Health Economists Conference, and Association
for Public Policy and Management for helpful comments, and the Tennessee Department of Health,
Division of TennCare for excellent data assistance. Errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Johanna Catherine Maclean, Sebastian Tello-Trillo, and Douglas Webber. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Losing insurance and behavioral health inpatient care: Evidence from a large-scale Medicaid
disenrollment
Johanna Catherine Maclean, Sebastian Tello-Trillo, and Douglas Webber
NBER Working Paper No. 25936
June 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. I1,I11,I18

                                             ABSTRACT

We study the effects of losing insurance on behavioral health ­ defined as mental health and substance
use disorder (SUD) ­ on community hospitalizations. We leverage variation in public insurance coverage
eligibility offered by a large-scale and unexpected Medicaid disenrollment in Tennessee. Losing insurance
did not influence behavioral healthcare hospitalizations. Mental illness hospitalization financing was
partially shifted to other forms of insurance while SUD treatment financing shifted entirely to patients.
Combining our findings with previous work on public insurance gains suggests that demand for behavioral
healthcare services is asymmetric: service use increases following a gain but does not decline after
a loss. We are the first to document this finding. We also investigate the implications of reliance on
data that is not representative at the level of treatment and propose a possible solution.


Johanna Catherine Maclean                           Douglas Webber
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Temple University                                   Temple University
Ritter Annex 869                                    Ritter Annex 877, 1301 Cecil B. Moore Ave
Philadelphia, PA 19122                              Philadelphia, PA 19122
and NBER                                            douglas.webber@temple.edu
catherine.maclean@temple.edu

Sebastian Tello-Trillo
Frank Batten School of Leadership and Public Polic
University of Virginia
Charlotesville, VA 22903
sebastian.tello@virginia.edu
1. Introduction

        In this study, we provide the first evidence on the effect of losing insurance on behavioral

healthcare hospitalizations ­ defined as mental illness and substance use disorder (SUD) services

received in community hospitals. We exploit exogenous variation in public insurance coverage

eligibility generated by one of the largest disenrollments in the history of the Medicaid program:

a 2005 disenrollment in the state of Tennessee. This disenrollment resulted in 190,000 enrollees,

10% of those enrolled in Medicaid in Tennessee and 3% of the total state population (Chang and

Steinberg 2014), losing Medicaid (also referred to as `TennCare'). A conservative estimate

suggests that 31% of TennCare disenrollees ­ approximately 59,000 individuals ­ had a serious

behavioral health condition in 2004. 1 TennCare generously covered a wide range of efficacious

behavioral healthcare services including medications, counseling services, and specialty inpatient

treatment. Thus, the disenrollment plausibly reduced access to affordable and valuable

treatment. We examine administrative data on behavioral health-related hospitalizations coupled

with differences-in-differences methods to study TennCare effects.

        Evidence gleaned from the TennCare disenrollment can offer insight into the effects of

public insurance on behavioral health more broadly within the U.S. The population that lost

TennCare coverage shares similar demographics with the population that gained Medicaid

eligibility under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010: low-income childless and non-disabled

adults (Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo 2014). This population has elevated prevalence of


1
  Authors' analysis of the public use 2004 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. We calculated the share of
adult Medicaid enrollees ages 21 to 64 years of age with no children who had serious psychological distress or an
SUD. 24% of this population had serious psychological distress and 12% had an SUD, leading to 31% of this
sample either condition. We consider this estimate to understate the number disenrolled individuals who could
benefit from the behavioral healthcare services offered by TennCare coverage as we consider only serious
conditions. For instance, 92% of this population had some level of psychological distress. Further, the financial
strain and general shock associated with unexpectedly losing insurance could potentially exacerbate behavioral
health conditions, translating a less serious condition into a serious one.
                                                         2
mental illness and SUDs relative to groups traditionally Medicaid eligible and the privately

insured (Garfield et al. 2011, Busch et al. 2013), and may therefore value TennCare coverage.

        Understanding the effects of losing public insurance generally, and coverage for

behavioral health conditions specifically, is important given that the future of the ACA Medicaid

expansion and the Medicaid program itself is not secure. There have been multiple recent

Congressional attempts to repeal Medicaid expansion and required coverage of behavioral

healthcare services (e.g., 115 Congress of the United States (2017)). 2 Healthcare scholars note

that losses from such government actions will be disproportionately borne by those will mental

illness and SUDs (Frank and Glied 2017). There are also calls from policymakers to convert

Medicaid from an entitlement to a block grant program. Such a change in program structure

could lead to large-scale coverage losses (Goodman-Bacon and Nikpay 2017). Further, 27 states

have an 1115 Medicaid Waiver pending or approved that compels some Medicaid enrollees to

work, seek employment, or perform other pro-social activities to remain eligible (Kaiser

Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured 2019). Simulation analyses imply that these

waivers, if applied nationally, will cause up to 4M of the 23.5M currently eligible enrollees to

lose coverage (Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured 2018).

        Demand theory predicts that insurance, by reducing the out-of-pocket price faced by

consumers, should increase the quantity of healthcare demanded (Grossman 1972). Further, if

ambulatory care and hospitalizations are substitutes, a loss of insurance may lead patients to

substitute to emergency room treatment as federal law requires hospitals to stabilize patients




2
 In addition, see for example, https://www.politico.com/story/2019/01/11/trump-bypass-congress-medicaid-plan-
1078885 (last accessed February 16th, 2020).
                                                       3
regardless of ability to pay. 3 Numerous studies that rely on quasi-experimental methods

document behavioral healthcare service use increased and service financing shifted to Medicaid

following a Medicaid expansion (Maclean and Saloner 2019; Grooms and Ortega 2019; Maclean

et al. 2018; Meinhofer and Witman 2018; Wen, Hockenberry, and Cummings 2017; Wen, Druss,

and Cummings 2015; Wen et al. 2017; Golberstein and Gonzales 2015).

         A contribution of our study is that we are able to test the effect of losing, as opposed to

gaining, insurance. We are the first to study this change within the context of behavioral

healthcare service use and financing. The literature has focused on the effect of insurance gains

due to available sources of quasi-experimental variation, but the effects of insurance gains and

losses are not likely symmetric. For instance, an individual who loses insurance can retain

accumulated `patient education,' which includes information on one's health stock, how to

manage chronic conditions, the importance of a healthy lifestyle, how to interact with the

healthcare system, and so forth. This education may allow a patient to continue to maintain

health after a coverage loss more effectively than a patient with no insurance experience.

         Several studies have used the TennCare experience to investigate the question of

insurance elasticity asymmetry in the context of general health and healthcare (see Section 2.3).

However, there are numerous reasons to suspect that the noted asymmetry in insurance

gains/losses differs for general vs. behavioral health and service use, and thus offers premise for

a separate study of behavioral health. First, a substantial fraction of SUD and mental illness care

has historically been provided for free and/or at a heavy discount, with insurance playing a

relatively modest role in the financing of behavioral healthcare (this is particularly true for SUD


3
  The extent to which emergency department care is an empirical substitute for ambulatory care is unclear, however.
In particular, following a public insurance gain, Medicaid enrollees appear to use more emergency care and other
forms of care, thus use of all services increases. See, for example, Nikpay et al. (2017) and Finkelstein et al. (2012).
                                                           4
care). Charity care may act as a substitute for paid care, thereby muting the effect of an

insurance loss on service use. Relatedly, and distinct from much of general healthcare, federal

policy in the U.S. has limited the ability to use Medicaid to pay for treatment in important

settings, in particular `Institutions of Mental Disease (IMDs)' that offer inpatient treatment.4

Further, many healthcare professionals will not accept Medicaid patients, and this practice is

particularly common within behavioral healthcare (Wen et al. 2019). 5 More specifically, losing

insurance that cannot be used to pay for treatment may not lead to substantial reductions in use

or shifts in payment source. Second, the risk of a drug overdose is elevated after prolonged

periods of abstinence among those with SUDs (Merrall et al. 2010). An abrupt termination in

access to effective treatment could be especially relevant for those in this population. Third,

there are severe behavioral healthcare provider shortages in the U.S. (Bishop et al. 2014; Buck

2011); e.g., 77% of counties are classified as having a mental healthcare provider shortage. If

losing insurance curtails a patient's access to his/her provider, the patient may be unable to find

alternative care. Fourth, patient education may be uniquely important for behavioral health

outcomes; e.g., forming relationships with non-substance users, avoiding situations in which

substances are used and/or that present triggers for anxiety or depression, and cognitive

behavioral techniques to minimize anxiety and/or substance use.

         We have several findings. First, we observe no change in mental illness and SUD

community hospitalizations in Tennessee post-disenrollment, which mirrors findings for general

hospitalizations (Ghosh and Simon 2015). Second, while overall service use was unchanged, the



4
  IMDs are healthcare facilities that offer inpatient treatment for behavioral health conditions with 16 or more beds
allocated to behavioral healthcare.
5
  Nearly 50% of specialty SUD treatment providers did not accept Medicaid insurance in 2004 (authors' calculations
based on the 2004 National Survey of Substance Abuse Treatment Services, full details available on request).
                                                         5
financing of this care was substantially altered, with the probability that Medicaid was used to

pay for treatment declining 25% to 30% post-disenrollment. Mental illness patients were able to

substitute lost Medicaid coverage with private and Medicare, but SUD patients financed care

themselves. In an extension, we observe no evidence that use of other common modalities of

behavioral healthcare -- prescriptions for medications used to treat behavioral health conditions

in outpatient settings and treatment in specialized behavioral health facilities -- changed. Thus,

our findings stand in contrast to previous work that examines changes in behavioral healthcare

service use following an insurance gain attributable to a Medicaid expansion and imply that there

is asymmetry in insurance effects for behavioral health. In particular, demand may be elastic

when there is a gain and inelastic when there is a loss.

         We also investigate the use of data that is not representative at the level of treatment, in

particular, the implications of using regionally representative data to study a state-level policy.

While survey administrators often discourage this practice, it is common in economics. 6 Taking

TennCare as a case study, we document using the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) that, due to

year-to-year sampling variability, a regionally representative dataset may produce inaccurate

estimates at the state-level which can lead to erroneous estimates of treatment effects. We first

establish this phenomenon with a Monte Carlo simulation and then document its practical

existence by comparing Tennessee data in the NIS with the universe of hospitalizations in

Tennessee. Second, to address this issue empirically, we propose a combination of NIS and


6
  For instance, many studies -- including studies that we ourselves have written -- utilize data that is representative at
the national or regional level to study state-level treatments. We note that data at the level of treatment is often not
available, but nonetheless this study limitation, based on our understanding, is often overlooked, or at least not
mentioned, by researchers. We simply note that researchers, when faced with this empirical challenge, could more
carefully note this study limitation. See Currie and Gruber (1996), Schmeiser (2009), Kahn (2010), Kaestner and
Yarnoff (2011), Kolstad and Kowalski (2012), Miller (2012), Hamersma and Kim (2013), Maclean (2013), Maclean
(2014), Anderson, Hansen, and Rees (2015), Maclean (2015), Pacula et al. (2015), Tello-Trillo (2016), Wherry and
Miller (2016), DeLeire (2018), and Nicholas and Maclean (2019).
                                                            6
administrative data. Our methods can be applied in other analyses that present this challenge. At

minimum, our findings suggest that researchers should be cautious in interpreting findings from

data that is not representative at the level of treatment.

2. Background, conceptual framework, and prior research

2.1 Behavioral health and healthcare

        The American Psychiatric Association (APA) defines mental illnesses as `...health

conditions involving changes in thinking, emotion, or behavior (or a combination of these)'

(2015). Further, the APA defines SUDs as conditions that occur `...when the recurrent use of

alcohol and/or drugs causes clinically and functionally significant impairment, such as health

problems, disability, and failure to meet major responsibilities at work, school, or home'

(American Psychiatric Association 2013). Mental illnesses and SUDs impose substantial

internal costs on the affected individual in terms of morbidity/mortality, healthcare costs,

employment problems, and relationship difficulties.

        These conditions are common. In the U.S. 19.1% (47.6M) and 7.4% (20.3M) of adults

met diagnostic criteria for a mental illness and an SUD respectively in 2018 (Center for

Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality 2019). Moreover, the U.S. is in the midst of an

alarming and unprecedented fatal drug overdose epidemic, largely attributed to opioids. Indeed,

there are 130 fatal opioid overdoses each day (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2018).

In 2017, over 47,000 U.S. residents died by suicide (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

2018) and the misuse of alcohol is associated with over 88,000 deaths each year (Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention 2013). Annually, mental illness and SUDs cost the U.S.




                                                   7
economy over $1 trillion in healthcare expenditures, disability payments, a less productive work

force, and so forth (Insel 2008; Caulkins, Kasunic, and Lee 2014). 7

           There are numerous effective treatment options for mental illness and SUDs (Olfson

2016; Popovici and French 2013; Cuijpers et al. 2011; Hunot et al. 2006; American Psychiatric

Association 2006; Scott, Colom, and Vieta 2007; Murphy and Polsky 2016; Lu and McGuire

2002; National Institute on Drug Abuse 2018). For instance, individuals with mental illness can

be prescribed psychotropic medications or receive counseling services from primary care

providers. Patients can obtain specialized treatment in outpatient, residential, or hospital settings

from psychologists, psychiatrists, counsellors, and other healthcare professionals. Comparable

modalities of care are available for individuals with SUDs. The majority of inpatient behavioral

healthcare in the U.S. is received in community hospitals (Substance Abuse and Mental Health

Services Administration 2013), which is the setting that we measure in our data.

           Despite the availability of effective treatment options, many individuals with mental

illness and SUDs do not receive care or may have substantial delay in receiving care. In 2018,

less than half of U.S. adults who could benefit from mental healthcare did not receive any

treatment while approximately one in ten adults meeting diagnostic criteria for an SUD received

care (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality 2019). Commonly reported barriers to

treatment receipt are inability to pay and lack of insurance coverage (Rowan, McAlpine, and

Blewett 2013; Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality 2019). Treatment is likely

unaffordable for many low-income and uninsured individuals. For instance, reimbursement rates

for a psychiatrist range from $74 to $136 per visit and treatment typically involves a series of




7
    The original estimates are inflated by the authors to 2020 dollars using the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
                                                            8
visits (Mark et al. 2018).8 Medications used to treat opioid use disorder (i.e., methadone,

buprenorphine, and naltrexone) cost $6,359 to $15,008 per year (National Institute on Drug

Abuse 2018).9 Finally, there is evidence that delays in receiving care, which could plausibly

occur following an insurance loss, can have negative effects on behavioral health (Reichert and

Jacobs 2018; Penttilä et al. 2014).

           Behavioral healthcare specialists argue that, for care to be effective, treatment must be

appropriate to the patient's needs and be of sufficient duration to stabilize and manage the

condition(s) (National Institute on Drug Abuse 2018). One policy approach to addressing

underuse (quantity and/or quality) of behavioral healthcare services is the provision of affordable

insurance that covers a range of treatment options that allow care to match patient needs.

TennCare provided such insurance to low-income and uninsurable Tennessee residents.

2.2 An overview of TennCare and the 2005 disenrollment

           Tennessee originally offered a fee-for-service Medicaid program. Due to high costs, the

state transitioned to a managed care program in 1994. State legislators anticipated that the

transition would reduce program overall costs. The expected savings were allocated to support a

large-scale increase in Medicaid eligibility to low-income, non-disabled childless adults and

uninsurable adults, defined as adults with pre-existing conditions that lead to prohibitively high

premiums (Farrar et al. 2007). The expansion was popular: TennCare covered 22% of the state's

population in 2004 (Farrar et al. 2007). TennCare, which used a behavioral healthcare carve out

in throughout our study period, generously covered a wide range of efficacious behavioral

healthcare services (e.g., medications, assessment and evaluation services, and counseling) at



8
    Authors inflated the original estimates, derived from commercial claims, to 2020 dollars using the CPI.
9
    Estimates inflated by the authors to 2020 dollars using the CPI.
                                                            9
low cost-sharing with limited application of utilization management; e.g., prior authorization

(Farrar et al. 2007; Kaiser Family Foundation 2020; Chang and Steinberg 2014).

        Due to its popularity and generosity, enrollment surged and TennCare became financially

unsustainable for the state (Bennett 2014). In 2004 TennCare accounted for one-third of the state

budget (Farrar et al. 2007). Between August 2005 and July 2006 Medicaid eligibility was

curtailed along several margins, with changes announced in November 2004. Eligibility for

childless non-disabled and uninsurable adults was terminated. 190,000 enrollees or 10% of the

total Medicaid population lost TennCare coverage (Bureau of TennCare 2005; Chang and

Steinberg 2014). 10 Indeed, as discussed in Section 2.3, several studies document substantial

declines in Medicaid coverage, primarily among childless adults, following the dis-enrollment.

2.3 TennCare disenrollment literature

        The TennCare disenrollment reduced Medicaid coverage and overall insurance coverage

with some private insurance substitution (Tarazi, Green, and Sabik 2017; Garthwaite, Gross, and

Notowidigdo 2014; Tello-Trillo 2016; DeLeire 2018). For instance, Garthwaite, Gross, and



10
   We emphasize disenrollment effects in our study. We acknowledge that coverage generosity was curtailed to
some extent among continuing Medicaid enrollees. Nonetheless, coverage remained relatively generous and, in line
with the broader TennCare literature, we assume that the effects of insurance losses dwarfed the effects of other
changes. Moreover, we note that most large-scale insurance policies (e.g., ACA, Massachusetts healthcare reform)
include various coverage changes. However, three features of the disenrollment are important to consider. First,
continuing enrollees were limited to four prescriptions per month and 20 days of inpatient care per year. All
enrollees were treated which complicates the use of a within-state comparison group in a triple difference model
(e.g., non-elderly adults with children). Second, the state developed a Health Care Safety Net program, funded with
$193M (2020 dollars; inflated by the authors from the original estimate using the CPI), to provide care and
assistance to disenrollees. This program included the Mental Health Safety Net (MHSN). There was no such
program for SUDs. Reports indicate that registration with the MHSN by disenrollees with a serious mental health
disorder was 65%. Disenrollees who registered with MHSN were eligible for some mental healthcare services. The
safety net program may have provided a buffer for those who lost insurance. However, this program was financed
through a single allotment of state funds which translates to $971 per disenrollee in 2020 dollars. At best, the
program was able to provide temporary assistance to disenrollees. Third, community health centers and faith-based
organizations were able to absorb some demand from the newly uninsured, but these organizations likely could not
offer a full continuum of care. Interviews with disenrollees suggest that many had substantial difficulty accessing
needed healthcare services after TennCare was terminated (Farrar et al. 2007). In sum, the available literature
clearly shows that the disenrollment had a substantial negative effect on Medicaid enrollment and coverage overall.
                                                        10
Notowidigdo (2014) find that, post-disenrollment, the probability of having Medicaid declined

by 33% among low-income, childless, and non-disabled adults. DeLeire (2018) documents a

similar decline in Medicaid coverage: 31%.

       Five studies have examined the effect of the disenrollment on health and healthcare

outcomes using quasi-experimental methods, though none have examined behavioral health

outcomes. Given the unique role that insurance has played within the behavior healthcare

delivery system, and the characteristics of behavioral healthcare providers and patients, the

findings based on general samples of patients and providers are difficult to extrapolate to

behavioral health. Our contribution to this literature is to offer a careful study of TennCare on

behavioral healthcare use and financing. Further, we consider a wide range of treatment settings

to rule out treatment substitution by patients who have lost Medicaid coverage. To the best of

our knowledge, we are the first to examine these questions.

       Ghosh and Simon (2015) use the NIS and show that, post disenrollment, the share of

adult hospitalizations reimbursed by Medicaid decreased by 21% and uninsured hospitalizations

increased in Tennessee relative to a comparison group. There was no change in the number of

hospitalizations post-disenrollment. Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo (2018) use American

Hospital Association data and confirm that uncompensated care increased in Tennessee post-

disenrollment. Tello-Trillo (2016) leverages survey data from the National Health Interview

Survey (NHIS) and Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (BRFSS), and finds that post-

disenrollment, primary care visits declined and reported physical health problems increased in

Tennessee. There were no changes in days in poor mental health or use of inpatient services.

Tarazi, Green, and Sabik (2017) use the BRFSS and show that the disenrollment increased cost-

related barriers to seeing a doctor but did not change the probability of having a personal doctor.

                                                11
DeLeire (2018) uses the Survey of Income and Program Participation and finds that self-assessed

health and several forms of healthcare declined post-disenrollment while reports of unmet

healthcare need and reliance on charity care increased.

3. Data, variables, and methods

3.1 Community hospitalization data

         Our primary dataset is the NIS, an administrative database compiled by the Healthcare

Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP). These data allow us to study community hospitalizations

and are the largest publicly-available U.S. all-payer inpatient healthcare database. 11 The sample

reflects a 20% stratified sample of U.S. community hospitals, with five to eight million

hospitalizations occurring at over 1,000 hospitals each year. Community hospitals are sampled

on region, ownership status, and bed size. In 2007 (the last year of our study period) the

weighted NIS sample covered 90% of the universe of discharges and 78% of all community

hospitals (Barret, Wilson, and Whalen 2010). The American Hospital Association defines

community hospitals as `all nonfederal, short-term general, and other special hospitals'

(American Hospital Association 2018). The NIS does not include psychiatric hospitals. We

focus on hospitals that have positive hospitalizations for patients 21 to 64 years of age. We

aggregate the data to the hospital-quarter level and have 15,799 hospital-quarter observations. 12




11
   Due to the IMD exclusion, Medicaid could be used to pay for treatment received in some hospitals during our
study period. Based on our review, there were possibly five IMDs in operation in Tennessee during our study
period, suggesting that the influence of these facilities did not likely biasing our results. Further, we have reviewed
state budgets for mental health and SUD treatment services in Tennessee over the disenrollment period and we do
not observe any substantial changes in these expenditures. Details available on request.
12
   We considered using elderly adults as a within-state comparison group in a triple difference estimator. The
elderly have very different trends in behavioral healthcare service use and financing than the non-elderly. We
suspect that elderly adults are different from non-elderly adults in terms of behavioral health; e.g., 7.4% of adults 18
years and older met diagnostic criteria for an SUD while the share was just 1.9% for elderly adults in 2018 (Center
for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality 2019).
                                                          12
           In our main analysis, we study the effects of TennCare on behavioral health outcomes

treated in inpatient settings within the general healthcare delivery system, in particular in

community hospitals. Hospitalizations, including community hospitalizations we study,

themselves are an important healthcare service to study as, while relatively rare, they are costly

and an essential target in any attempt to contain overall healthcare costs. The median

hospitalization cost is $12,497 13 and hospitalizations account for one-third of all civilian

healthcare costs (Mirel and Carper 2013; Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 2019).

Hospitalizations may be avoidable through effective, and generally less costly, outpatient care

(Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon 2015); outpatient care is a modality that patients may no

longer be able to easily access following an insurance loss. Moreover, the majority of

psychiatric inpatient admissions in the U.S. occur in community hospitals that are captured by

the NIS (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 2013). Although we

focus on a single modality in our main analysis, this modality is both common and relevant.

           Our study period is January 2000 to December 2007. Following Garthwaite, Gross, and

Notowidigdo (2014), we close the study period in 2007 to avoid contamination from the large

recession of 2008 to 2010. Recessions are linked with insurance (Cawley, Moriya, and Simon

2015; Cawley and Simon 2005), behavioral health (Hollingsworth, Ruhm, and Simon 2017;

Carpenter, McClellan, and Rees 2017; Ruhm 2015), and behavioral healthcare use (Bradford and

Lastrapes 2013; Maclean, Cantor, and Horn 2019). However, as we show in robustness

checking, our results are insensitive to incorporating this time period. Of note, our study period

overlaps with the escalation in misuse of prescription opioid medications (e.g., Oxycontin),

which may have fueled the current opioid epidemic (Alpert, Powell, and Pacula 2018).

13
     Inflated by the authors to 2020 dollars using the CPI from the original estimate.
                                                            13
         The NIS is not designed to be state representative. Instead, the dataset is representative at

the national and regional level over our study period. HCUP administrators strongly advise

researchers against using the NIS for single-state estimates. 14 We study a subset of the

population (ages 21 to 64) and specific types of hospitalizations (mental illness and SUD). There

are important differences across hospitals that provide different service lines (Horwitz 2005).

For instance, behavioral healthcare is a low profit service line, and for-profit hospitals are less

likely to offer this line. We are concerned that using the NIS data for Tennessee could lead to

reliance on an unrepresentative sample of hospitals. 15 We propose an alternative empirical

approach, in which we use a state-representative data for Tennessee (from administrative

sources) instead of the Tennessee included in the NIS and then use the other southern states (i.e.,

the comparison group) from NIS. Since we are combining data, we perform a simulation to test

if our proposed strategy will allow us to estimate more accurate disenrollment effects.

         We first provide suggestive evidence on the implications of relying on a regionally

representative dataset to study TennCare through a Monto Carlo simulation. First, we use data

from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW)

database to determine the total number of community hospitals in each Southern state in each

year over the period 2000 to 2007.16 This information provides us with the universe of

community hospitals. We construct variables that take on three values (1, 2, and 3) for (i)

ownership and (ii) bed size, to mimic the variables used by AHRQ administrators to select


14
   See: `...strongly advises researchers against using the NIS to estimate State-specific statistics. ... However, these
NIS samples were not designed to yield a representative sample of hospitals at the State level': https://www.hcup-
us.ahrq.gov/db/nation/nis/nis_statelevelestimates.jsp (last accessed February 16th, 2020).
15
   We are less concerned with this issue in our comparison group as the NIS is designed to be representative at the
regional level over our study period and our comparison group covers all other states in the South region. We have
confirmed this assumption with an economist at the Agency for HealthCare Quality and Research, the agency that
administers the HCUP. Further, we establish this point in our Monte Carlo simulation. Details available on request.
16
   We use the six digit North American Industry Classification System code 622110.
                                                          14
hospitals for inclusion in the NIS; we note that our simulation does not exactly replicate the NIS

sampling method. Second, we generate an outcome variable where the data generating process

emulates a standard DD functional form. 17 Third, we perform various draws from the universe

of hospitals: (1) a 100% sample; (2) a 20% sample by year, ownership, and bed size and

retaining only hospitals that provide behavioral healthcare and that treat non-elderly adult

patients; 18 and (3) a 100% sample in Tennessee and a 20% sample by year, ownership, and bed

size in other Southern states that are included in the NIS data set (see Section 3.3) for hospitals

that provide behavioral healthcare and that treat non-elderly adult patients. We select the data in

this manner to reflect the universe of hospitals (1), the NIS sample after making exclusions

necessary for our research question (2), and the value of our proposed combination of NIS and

other administrative data which we describe in more detail later (3). We then estimate a DD

specification in each sampling scheme across 1,000 simulated populations. Full simulation

details are available on request.

         The simulation results are reported in Figure 1, and the implications of reliance on the

NIS are immediately apparent. First, all distributions of beta hat are centered on the true

parameter value (constructed to have a value of 2). However, the sampling framework employed

has consequential implications for the likelihood that the estimated DD parameter will be

significantly over- or under-estimated. The difference between region- and state-

representativeness matters in a DD context, particularly one in which only a single state is




17
   We generated a variable  that is determined by a DD estimate (Tennessee interacted with a post-disenrollment
period indicator), state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and a random error term. We used Southern states that
appear in the NIS (see Section 3.3) to form the comparison group.
18
   We constructed these variables to have different distributions in Tennessee and other Southern states included in
the NIS data set and they are designed to mimic, albeit imperfectly, our focus on behavioral health hospitalizations
among non-elderly adults in our main analysis.
                                                         15
treated. In a regionally-representative dataset such as the NIS, a state like Tennessee may

contribute a very small number of observations within any given conditional cell (e.g.,

ownership, bed size, and year). Intuitively, when the identifying variation is small number of

observations which by design are not necessarily representative of the treatment group, the

variability in coefficient estimates increases substantially.

        Using the 100% sample, we see that the distribution of betas is tightly centered around

the true value, as we would expect. The 20% sample with exclusions required to form our

analysis sample produces a very wide distribution of estimates, with many estimates differing

substantially from the true treatment effect. However, using a combination of the universe of

Tennessee hospitals and a 20% sample of hospitals in other Southern states, while not fully

alleviating the increase in distribution spread, substantially tightens the distribution of beta hats

and nearly offsets the increase in the width of the distribution induced by sampling. In sum, this

simulation exercise implies that sampling used to construct the NIS, while not leading to bias,

substantially increases the chance that the researcher will have an unrepresentative sample which

can lead to inaccurate estimates of treatment effects. This is what NIS administrators state will

occur when the NIS is used for state-level analyses, but researchers often ignore this caution.

        A high-variance estimator, like the one arising from the typical state-level analysis NIS

administrators warn researchers against applying when using the NIS data, is underpowered to

detect small and modest effect sizes. When using an underpowered estimator, the distribution of

statistically significant coefficient estimates will be biased away from zero, see Gelman and

Carlin (2014) for a comprehensive discussion of this issue. This situation illustrates the real

danger of using such estimators: researchers who find statistically significant evidence are

potentially overstating the true effect size.

                                                  16
        Using the simulation evidence above to help us identify the best possible estimation

strategy, we propose a combination of the NIS and administrative data for Tennessee. We

replace the NIS Tennessee observations with the universe of hospitalizations at community

hospitals for this state that we obtained from the Tennessee Department of Health (`DOH'

data). 19 This combination mimics (3) in our simulation and, we hypothesize, will allow more

accurate estimates of treatment effects than reliance on the NIS data alone. We note that

combining datasets in this manner is not uncommon in economic research (Farber et al. 2018;

Schwandt and von Wachter 2020; Altonji, Kahn, and Speer 2016; Webber 2016). 20

        We further investigate the value of our combined dataset by comparing NIS and DOH

data for Tennessee over our study period. We exclude non-community hospitals from the DOH

data to match the NIS sample frame; we confirmed our definition of community hospitals with

administrators at the Tennessee DOH (details available on request). We plot trends in the

average number of hospitalizations among non-elderly adults per hospital in each quarter of our

study period in Tennessee in the NIS and the DOH data. Trends in mental illness and SUD

hospitalizations (Figures 2 and 3) display more period-to-period variation in the NIS data than

the DOH data, and the variation in the NIS occurs around the disenrollment period. Differences

in trend between NIS hospitals and the universe of hospitals in the DOH are arguably more

pronounced for total hospitalizations (Figure 4). Of note, based on our analysis of the data,

review of Tennessee DOH hospital directories, and discussions with DOH staff, the deviations

apparent in the NIS data for Tennessee do indeed reflect the unrepresentative nature of the


19
   Of note, the Tennessee NIS data is drawn from the DOH data. Thus, the measures are standardized across the two
datasets. However, the parameters of our data use agreement with the Tennessee Department of Health do not
permit us to link data in the DOH to the Tennessee NIS data to compare hospitals. Full details available on request.
20
   The State Inpatient Database or the State Emergency Department Database for Tennessee are not available to the
public (https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/db/availability_public.jsp; last accessed February 16th, 2020).
                                                        17
hospitals sampled for the NIS, which further underscores our concern that reliance on the NIS for

a single-state analysis may be problematic. The correlation between the DOH and NIS time

series are 0.74 (mental illness), 0.76 (SUD), and 0.52 (total). Thus, while the DOH and NIS time

series generally follow similar trends, there are clear and non-trivial differences, in particular at

pivotal periods relative to the TennCare disenrollment.

         Tables 1 and 2 report the shares of mental illness and SUD hospitalizations, and total

hospitalizations respectively that appear in the NIS in each year of our study period. We include

only hospitals that have positive mental illness or SUD hospitalizations in at least one quarter

during our study period in our calculations. 21 There are substantial differences across the DOH

and the NIS data suggesting that the NIS data are not representative of all community hospitals

in Tennessee, which is perhaps not unexpected based on our simulation exercise and cautions

from NIS administrators. For instance, in 2000 22% of all community hospitals in Tennessee

appeared in the NIS while in 2004 the share had increased to 38%. In 2005 this share declined to

32%, and by 2007 the share fell to 20%. Changes in sample that are concurrent with the policy

under study can lead to inaccurate estimates; see for example Clemens and Hunt (2017).

         We refer to the combined NIS (for non-Tennessee states) and DOH (for Tennessee)

dataset as the `hospitalizations dataset.' We view our large sample size for Tennessee, we have

the universe of community hospitals, as an advantage over previous TennCare studies that have

relied on smaller, non-state representative datasets for Tennessee. Other studies seeking to use



21
   Some hospitals have zero discharges in a given year-quarter. When creating a percentage measure, we could not
divide by zero as this value is undefined. Thus, to avoid losing these observations, we added a value of one to each
hospital in our sample. The minimum for year-quarters is therefore one as opposed to zero. This change shifts the
distribution but does not affect the coefficient estimates. We test whether the disenrollment influenced the
probability that a hospital has any mental illness or SUD hospitalizations using the empirical model outlined in
Equation (1). The coefficient estimate and associated standard error for are -0.004 and 0.008. Thus, we observe no
statistically significant evidence that the disenrollment influenced this probability.
                                                         18
NIS, or other datasets, to investigate single-state treatments may consider such a combination.

Or, if data are not available, the potential limitation could be noted in the study.

3.2 Outcome variables

        First, we consider the number of mental illness and SUD hospitalizations. We separately

classify mental illness and SUD hospitalizations based on ICD-9 codes available on the

discharge record (specific codes available on request). 22 Second, we consider indicators for

expected payment source: Medicaid, any insurance, private insurance, Medicare, and self-pay

(which plausibly includes uninsured patients). We have information on up to two expected

payers listed by the hospital and code these variables one if the payer is listed as primary or

secondary payer, and zero otherwise. We also examine total hospitalizations and payments.

3.3 Empirical model

        We estimate the differences-in-differences (DD) model outlined in Equation (1):

(1)      ,,, = 0 + 1 ,, + , 2 +  +  +  + ,,,

         ,, , is a behavioral healthcare outcome for hospital i in state s in quarter q in year t.

, , is an interaction between the treatment state (Tennessee) and the post-disenrollment

period (August 2005 to December 2007). , is a vector of state-level characteristics:

demographic information (age, sex, race/ethnicity, and education) from the monthly Current

Population Survey (Flood et al. 2020) and the poverty rate from the University of Kentucky

Center for Poverty Research (2020).  and  are vectors of quarter and year fixed effects.  is




22
  We classify these conditions using reports from Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research (https://www.hcup-
us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb117.pdf and https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb191-Hospitalization-
Mental-Substance-Use-Disorders-2012.pdf; last accessed February 16th, 2020).
                                                        19
a vector of hospital fixed effects which incorporate state fixed effects. We do not control for

patient-level variables as the disenrollment plausibly influences them. ,,, is the error term. 23

         We estimate Equation (1) with least squares (LS). We apply NIS weights to the (non-

Tennessee) NIS data and weight the DOH data equally. We follow Garthwaite, Gross, and

Notowidigdo (2014), and Tello-Trillo (2016) and apply a modified block-bootstrap procedure to

calculate standard errors in our main analysis. 24

         We follow, as closely as possible given the states that appear in the NIS, the TennCare

literature and use other Southern states as our comparison group (Tello-Trillo 2016; Garthwaite,

Gross, and Notowidigdo 2014): Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, North

Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia. 25 The NIS is an

unbalanced panel at both the hospital and state level, hence the hospitals and states that appear in

the comparison group vary across years. 26


23
   We have also estimated a dynamic model in which we divide the post-period into two sub-periods: `during' the
disenrollment (2005; Q3-2006; Q2) and `after' the disenrollment (2006; Q3-2007; Q4). The dynamic model allows
disenrollment effects to vary across the post-period. However, we observe limited evidence of dynamic effects, that
is the coefficient estimates on the `during' and `after' variables are very similar in sign, magnitude, and statistical
significance. Full results available on request.
24
   The standard approach in a DD specification is typically to cluster standard errors at the state-level, see for
example the well-known study by Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004). However, our context provides
additional empirical challenges to the standard case. In particular, (1) there are only 12 clusters in the data (i.e., a
small number of clusters) and (2) only one of the 12 clusters is treated (i.e., the share of the clusters treated is small).
Clustering when faced with these two empirical realities can lead to inaccurate estimates of precision. To date the
economics literature has not reached consensus on the appropriate inference approach in this context (e.g., the wild
bootstrap is the usual suggestion for a small number of clusters, but this approach is not recommended when the
percentage of treated clusters is small). Hence, as in several previous TennCare papers, we follow a method that
addresses these two issues and has been shown in simulations to have appropriate rejection rates: a modified version
of block-bootstrap (Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo 2014; Tello-Trillo 2016). In addition, we report results
using alternative approaches to inference in robustness checking (see Appendix Tables 1A and 1B).
25
   In particular we observe Arkansas 2004 to 2007; Florida 2000 to 2007; Georgia 2000 to 2007; Kentucky 2000 to
2007; Maryland 2000 to 2007; North Carolina 2000 to 2007; Oklahoma 2005 to 2007; South Carolina 2000 to 2007;
Tennessee 2000 to 2007; Texas 2000 to 2007; Virginia 2000 to 2005 and 2006 to 2007; and West Virginia 2000 to
2007. We note that some studies within the TennCare literature use within-county variation in Tennessee only, see
for example a recent study by Argys et al. (2017).
26
   We considered using synthetic control methods (SCM) (Abadie and Gardeazabal 2003; Abadie, Diamond, and
Hainmueller 2010). We do not have a sufficiently long pre-period as required for SCM because ICD codes, which
we use to select behavioral health hospitalizations, were updated between 1998 and 1999. There is no method to
                                                            20
        A necessary assumption for canonical DD models to recover causal estimates is that the

treatment and comparison group would have followed the same trends in outcomes had the

treatment group not received treatment (i.e., `parallel trends'). 27 The assumption is untestable as

the treatment group is treated in the post-period and hence counterfactual trends are not

observed. We attempt to provide suggestive evidence on the ability of our hospitalization data to

satisfy this version of the parallel trends assumption. We conduct an event study following

Autor (2003) to explore the extent to which our data can potentially satisfy parallel trends.

4. Results

4.1 Summary statistics

        Quarterly hospital-level summary statistics using data from the pre-disenrollment period

in Tennessee and other Southern states are reported in Table 3. The average numbers of

community hospitalizations per quarter for mental illness and SUDs were 107 and 36 in

Tennessee hospitals, and 111 and 37 in other Southern hospitals. Total hospitalizations were 671

per quarter in Tennessee hospitals and 927 in other Southern hospitals. Medicaid was the

expected payer for 35%, 40%, and 25% of mental illness, SUD, and total hospitalizations in

Tennessee. The Medicaid payment shares in other Southern states were: 26 %, 22%, and 25%.

The relatively substantial use of Medicaid payment for hospital care within Tennessee vs. other

Southern states is in line with the documented generosity of TennCare (see Section 2.2).

4.2 Differences-in-differences analysis of hospitalizations




crosswalk across the two sets of codes for SUD outcomes. Therefore, we have just five pre-treatment years to
establish trends which is not sufficient.
27
   We note that our regression model is a `reverse' DD model. In the canonical DD treatment is `turned off' in the
pre-period and then `turned on' in the post-period. Our treatment was turned on in the pre-period and turned off in
the post-period. However, as we document in an event study reported later in the manuscript, the comparison states,
in the treated state, appear to provide a suitable counterfactual for Tennessee post-disenollment.
                                                        21
       Table 4 contains results from the basic DD model outlined in Equation (1). We observe

no statistically significance evidence that behavioral healthcare hospitalizations changed

following the disenrollment. Moreover, the coefficient estimates are small relative to the

baseline means. Further, we do not observe any change in total hospitalizations and the

coefficient estimate is, again, very small relative to the baseline mean. We have also explored

the effect of the disenrollment on non-behavioral health hospitalizations. We define these as

hospitalizations that do not have any code flagging a mental illness or SUD on the entry record.

The coefficient estimate is -9.79 and the block-boot-strapped standard error estimate is 19.90.

Thus, we observe no evidence that non-behavioral health hospitalizations were altered.

4.3 Internal validity

       We estimate an event study in the spirit of Autor (2003) to explore whether our treatment

and comparison groups followed parallel trends after adjusting for covariates. More specifically,

we include interactions between an indicator for Tennessee and leads and lags reflecting periods

around the disenrollment. To smooth out noise in the data, we use six-month period bins to

define periods in our event study. The omitted category is the six-month period prior to the

TennCare disenrollment (i.e., 2005; Q1-Q2).

       Event study estimates (Figures 5 to 7) do not reveal evidence of policy endogeneity or

anticipatory behavior by enrollees (e.g., increasing service use prior to losing insurance):

coefficient estimates on the lead indicators are small and imprecise, and change signs in a

manner that does not suggest a clear trend. We interpret these results to provide suggestive

evidence that our hospitalization data can satisfy the above-noted modified version of parallel

trends. Examination of the lags confirm our DD estimates: we observe no change in mental

illness- or SUD-related hospitalizations post-disenrollment.

                                                 22
4.4 Differences-in-differences analysis of hospitalization payments

        We next document the effect of the TennCare disenrollment on the financing of

community hospital care (Table 5). Several findings emerge from this analysis. First, in line

with previous work, we document a substantial decline in the use of both Medicaid and any

insurance to pay for hospitalization care, this pattern is observed across mental illness, SUD, and

total hospitalizations although the magnitude for the reduction in any insurance varies to some

extent. In particular, we observe a 9 percentage point (`ppt') or 26% (comparing the coefficient

estimate with the proportion in Tennessee prior to the disenrollment), 12 ppt (30%), and 7 ppt

(28%) reduction in the probability that Medicaid was used to pay for mental illness, SUD, and

total hospitalization care. Thus, our findings of Medicaid losses are similar to those documented

in the general healthcare literature (see Section 2.3). In terms of any insurance, the declines were

as follows: 4 ppts (4%) for mental illness, 10 ppts (11%) for SUD, and 4 ppts (5%) for total

hospitalizations. One interpretation of these findings is that SUD patients experienced larger

declines in the use of any insurance to pay for treatment than mental illness or all patients.

However, confidence intervals overlap and we do not wish to overstate heterogeneity, instead we

simply note this possibility. Further, because we do not observe changes along the extensive

margin (i.e., the number of hospitalizations), we do not believe that compositional shift in

patients receiving treatment can fully explain our findings. 28

        We next explore how patients financed care following the disenrollment, and the ensuing

loss of Medicaid, by examining other insurance forms and self-pay. Put differently, were

patients able to `fill the Medicaid gap?' Mental illness patients replaced lost Medicaid coverage



28
  Of course, we acknowledge that we cannot rule out the possibility that there were identical increases and
decreases in the types of patients in treatment, leaving the net number unchanged.
                                                         23
with private coverage (2 ppts or 7%) and Medicare (2 ppts or 6%). SUD patients instead used

self-payments to offset lost Medicaid (9 ppts or 69%). Among all patients, Medicaid losses were

replaced with Medicare only (2 ppts or 13%). These findings offer suggestive evidence that

different types of patients potentially had heterogeneous responses to losing Medicaid coverage.

Mental illness patients and patients overall were able to, at least partially, fill the Medicaid gap

with other insurance forms (a mixture of private coverage and Medicare for the former and

Medicare for the latter), while SUD patients relied on their own finances (self-pay). Given that

self-payments often translate into uncompensated care, hospitals that delivered SUD treatment in

Tennessee may have also borne some of the financial burden of lost Medicaid coverage.

4.5 Comparison of the universe of community hospitals with NIS data for Tennessee

       We next consider the effect of the disenrollment on mental illness, SUD, and total

hospital hospitalizations and payments using the NIS data only; our treatment group is now

defined using the NIS data and our comparison group is unchanged (Tables 6 and 7). Our

findings based on the NIS depart from our main results in several non-trivial ways.

       First, the baseline means and proportions in the NIS and DOH data differ; this pattern

was foreshadowed in Section 3.1. For instance, the number of mental illness, SUD, and total

hospitalizations in Tennessee prior to the disenrollment was 92, 29, and 764, respectively (Table

6) vs. 107, 36, and 671 in the DOH data (Table 3). Thus, Tennessee community hospitals

appearing in the NIS are smaller in terms of quarterly discharges than the average community

hospital in this state. Second, in terms of payments, following the disenrollment we observe

declines in Medicaid as a source of payments for mental illness, SUD, and total hospitalizations

but the relative effect sizes were more modest: 19% vs. 26%, 22% vs. 30%, and 17% vs. 28%,

respectively. The absolute effect sizes are more comparable across datasets, but the baseline

                                                  24
payment proportions are quite different. For instance, pre-disenrollment in the NIS Medicaid

coverage was 52%, 45%, and 47% for mental illness, SUD, and total hospitalizations while in

the DOH the comparable coverage rates were 35%, 40%, and 25%. Thus, the NIS Tennessee

community hospitals were substantially more likely to accept Medicaid than the average

community hospital within the state, which implies that relative effect sizes are much smaller.

Interestingly, when using the NIS data to form the treatment group, we find no statistically

significant evidence that patients for any type of service were able to find alternative sources of

coverage: the coefficient estimates for private and Medicare coverage are small and statistically

indistinguishable from zero. Thus, using the NIS data to form the comparison group appear to

over-estimate the extent to which many patients bore the financial hospitalization costs

attributable to the disenrollment.

4.6 Additional treatment settings and behavioral health outcomes

       Thus far we have focused our attention on community hospitalizations only. While this

is an important modality (see Section 1), we acknowledge that there are other settings that are

also valuable to patients. Further, other modalities may be substitutes for hospitalizations. Thus,

we next use additional datasets that capture different treatment modalities that are commonly

used within the U.S. (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality 2019).

       First, we consider prescriptions for mental illnesses and SUDs prescribed in outpatient

settings using the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Database (SDUD). These data are comprised

of all filled outpatient prescriptions purchased at online or retail pharmacies and covered under

the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program financed by Medicaid (U.S. Department of Health and

Human Services 2012). Medicaid programs collect these data to bill pharmaceutical

manufacturers for rebates, and states pass this information to the Centers for Medicare and

                                                 25
Medicaid Services (CMS). The SDUD have been used to study Medicaid expansion effects on

behavioral health prescription fills (Maclean and Saloner 2019; Maclean et al. 2018; Cher,

Morden, and Meara 2019; Meinhofer and Witman 2018).29

        We follow coding schemes developed by Maclean et al. (2018), and Maclean and Saloner

(2019) to classify medications likely to be used to treat mental illness and SUDs in outpatient

settings, we note that medications are often used to treat multiple conditions; e.g., bupropion is

used to for both smoking cessation and depression (Maclean, Pesko, and Hill 2019). We

aggregate the SDUD to the state-year-quarter level and convert prescription counts to the rate per

100,000 non-elderly adults in each state.

        Second, we draw data from the Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS), a federally

mandated database for all specialty SUD treatment providers that accept public funding or are

otherwise subject to state regulation. These data are maintained by the Substance Abuse and

Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) and capture approximately two-thirds of

specialty SUD treatment in the U.S. and disproportionately measure facilities that receive public

funding (Dave and Mukerjee 2011), thus TEDS plausibly includes facilities in which Medicaid

enrollees and the uninsured may receive specialty treatment. Specialty care is treatment received

in a hospital, 30 residential facility, or outpatient facility with a specific program for SUD

treatment. Further, TEDS are regularly used by economists to study SUD treatment (Maclean

and Saloner 2019; Meinhofer and Witman 2018; Grooms and Ortega 2019; Saloner et al. 2018;




29
   Over our study period the SDUD included prescriptions reimbursed by fee-for-service (FFS) Medicaid programs
only. However, managed care Medicaid, such as TennCare, generally carved behavioral healthcare delivery from
the managed care program and used FFS to cover associated services. Thus, we expect that the medications for
TennCare, which did use a carve out plan for behavioral health, will appear in the SDUD.
30
   Hospitals captured in TEDS are not likely community hospitals as TEDS captures specialty SUD providers and
are therefore more likely to be psychiatric hospitals.
                                                      26
Popovici et al. 2018; Dave and Mukerjee 2011; Grecu, Dave, and Saffer 2019; Powell, Pacula,

and Jacobson 2018). We consider two outcomes: the total number of admissions and the number

of admissions for patients with a co-occurring mental illness. 31 Unfortunately, we do not have

access to a comparable data set for mental healthcare treatment, thus our second measure acts as

a proxy (albeit imperfect) for specialty mental illness treatment receipt. We convert our

admissions to the annual rate per 100,000 non-elderly adults using data on age-shares from the

CPS and population from the U.S. Census (Flood et al. 2020; University of Kentucky Center for

Poverty Research 2020). The TEDS does not include admission date, thus we cannot use a finer

time period than the year.

         For comparability with our hospitalization analysis, we use only state-year pairs in the

South region (i.e., our comparison group) that are recorded in the NIS data (as outlined in

Section 3.3) although results are not appreciably different if we use all Southern states to form

the comparison group, these results are available on request from the authors. Similar to our

main hospitalization analysis, we observe no change in either medications or specialty care

admissions (Tables 8 and 9). Broadly, we conclude that losing Medicaid coverage did not

restrict access to behavioral healthcare, at least across the modalities that we are able to consider.

         We next examine TennCare effects on behavioral health outcomes: (i) suicides, and (ii)

unintentional fatal alcohol poisonings and drug overdoses. The purpose of this exercise is allow

us to examine if losing TennCare influenced behavioral health. While we show that there was no




31
  We note that TEDS includes both inpatient and outpatient SUD treatment. Thus, not all entries in the TEDS
reflect a patient being admitted to treatment. We use the term admissions for brevity and to be in line with language
used in previous TEDS studies; e.g., Maclean and Saloner (2019). We have also estimated similar regressions using
the National Survey of Substance Abuse Treatment Services (N-SSATS). The N-SSATS is also maintained by
SAMHSA but has a different survey frame than the TEDS. Results are comparable. We choose to emphasize the
TEDS in our study as this data set allows us to better proxy treatment for mental illness than N-SSATS.
                                                         27
change in treatment receipt, i.e. the extensive margin of treatment, we have not explored the

possibility that quality of treatment changed following the disenrollment. For example,

uninsured patients may have had shorter stays and/or lower quality treatment more broadly (e.g.,

less time spent with healthcare professionals). Further, we show changes in how hospitalizations

were financed post-disenrollment, in particular, SUD patients appeared to shoulder the burden of

treatment post-disenrollment and treatment is costly (see Section 1). Relatedly, Argys et al.

(2017) establish that losing public insurance reduced financial security and financial strain has

been linked with behavioral health outcomes (Maclean, Webber, and French 2015).

         We use the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's National Vital Statistics System

(NVSS) Underlying Cause of Death public use files. These data record the universe of deaths in

the U.S. and classify deaths by cause, and are used by economists to study behavioral health

(Lang 2013; Ruhm 2018). We select all related deaths for adults 21 to 64 in each quarter 2000 to

2007 for Tennessee and other Southern states that appear in the NIS data. Deaths are expressed

as a quarterly rate per 100,000 adults 21 to 64 and weighted by the state non-elderly adult

population. 32 Results are reported in Table 10. We observe no change in suicides post-

disenrollment, which is in line with the null findings of Tello-Trillo (2016) using survey data on

days in bad mental health, but fatal alcohol poisonings and drug overdoses increased by 0.97

deaths per 100,000 non-elderly adults (36%).33

5. Robustness checks



32
   All state-month cells in the public use NVSS with less than ten suicides are suppressed for confidentiality reasons.
We impute these cells with a value of five. Results are not sensitive to imputing a value of zero (the smallest
possible value) or nine (the largest possible value). More details available on request
33
   Recent work raises the concerns related to statistical power in estimating the effects of insurance policies on
mortality because this outcome is rare (Black et al. 2019). In unreported analyses, we conduct a post-hoc power
analysis. Results, available on request, suggest that we are able to detect effect sizes of the magnitudes that we
estimate for (i) suicides, and (ii) fatal alcohol poisonings and drug overdose deaths with approximately 80% power.
                                                          28
       We report a serious of robustness checks. Reassuringly, are findings are generally stable.

For brevity, when examining our hospitalization data, we report results for behavioral health

treatment only. Results for total hospitalizations are available on request.

5.1 Alternative approach to statistical inference

       In our main analysis, we apply a block-bootstrap approach to calculate our standard

errors. However, we next show that the precision of our estimates is not markedly different if we

instead apply other approaches: estimate classical standard errors that assume homoscedasticity,

clustering standard errors at the state-level (Ghosh and Simon, 2015), or applying randomization

inference. In randomization inference, we sequentially treat each Southern state that appears in

the NIS data as the treated unit and re-estimate Equation (1), then observing where our main

coefficient estimate (i.e., correctly treating Tennessee as the state that experienced a major

Medicaid disenrollment) falls within this distribution. Results from these additional analyses are

reported in Appendix Tables 1A and 1B. We note that assuming homoscedasticity leads to

smaller estimated standard errors.

5.2 Alternative comparison groups, specifications, and time periods

       We re-estimate Equation (1) using alternative time periods, comparison groups, and

specifications. We: (i) exclude 2005 (the year of the disenrollment), (ii) exclude the 3rd and 4th

quarters of 2007 (as we observe, in unadjusted trends available on request, an uptick in

hospitalizations for mental illness in that time period in Tennessee), (iii) include the 2008 to

2010 recession period, (iv) drop Texas and Georgia from our comparison group -- we exclude

these states as their Medicaid programs appear, based on available evidence, to cover behavioral

healthcare services less generously than Tennessee over our study period (Kaiser Family

Foundation 2020), (v) estimate unweighted LS regressions, (iv) include a separate linear trend

                                                 29
for Tennessee and all other Southern states in the NIS, (vii) exclude time-varying controls, and

(viii) aggregate to the state-time level. Results are reported in Appendix Tables 2A, 2B, and 2C.

While there are some changes in the coefficient estimates and their precision, overall our

findings on SUD are broadly robust to these various checks.

5.3 Program-induced migration

       An empirical concern in policy analysis is that the policy under study may have induced

individuals to migrate away from or towards the affected locality leading to biased estimates

(Moffitt 1992). To explore this possibility, we draw micro-level data from the Annual and

Social Economic Supplement (ASEC) to the CPS between 2001 and 2008 and model past-year

across-state migration among respondents ages 21 to 64 years as a function of the disenrollment

using a modified version of Equation (1). ASEC data over the period 2001 to 2008 pertains to

migration 2000 to 2007. We exclude those respondents with family income > 400% FPL as such

respondents are not likely to be eligible for Medicaid in any state in our analysis sample. We

apply ASEC sample weights. Results are reported in Appendix Table 3. We observe no

statistically significant evidence that the disenrollment altered migration propensities.

6. Discussion

       We provide new evidence on the effect of losing public insurance on behavioral health

community hospitalizations and related outcomes. Our findings are relevant from both an

economic and a policy perspective. First, we extend the economic literature that has estimated

the insurance-elasticity of demand for behavioral healthcare by leveraging plausibly exogenous

variation offered by a large and unexpected Medicaid disenrollment. To the best of our

knowledge, we are the first study to document this elasticity. Second, the source of variation in

our empirical models, TennCare disenrollment ­ one of the largest disenrollments in the history

                                                 30
of the Medicaid program, allows us to provide evidence that can inform the current policy debate

surrounding proposed changes to the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and Medicaid generally. In

particular, we can shed light on the possible behavioral health implications from repealing ACA

Medicaid expansions, converting Medicaid to a block grant program, and imposing work and

other pro-social activity requirements on enrollees, all of which could reduce Medicaid

enrollment and have been proposed by policy makers (Goodman-Bacon and Nikpay 2017).

These findings are potentially in non-U.S. settings as well as they speak to the insurance

elasticity of demand for behavioral healthcare services and can inform policy decisions regarding

curtailing coverage for lower-income populations.

       We note that a series of studies have estimated TennCare effects on general healthcare

and health outcomes. Our unique contribution is to provide the first evidence on how this major

disenrollment influenced behavioral healthcare, coverage among those with behavioral health

conditions, and behavior health. There are stark differences in terms of patients, insurance, and

providers across behavioral and general health, thus separate study of behavior health is

necessary to fully understand the impact of losing Medicaid.

       We find no evidence that mental illness- or SUD-related community hospitalizations

decline following an insurance loss. Further, we do not observe changes in other common

modalities of care (i.e., treatment received in specialized behavioral health facilities or primary

care). Therefore, and distinct from studies that examine the effects of gaining public coverage

on these outcomes, we find that demand for these services is inelastic. While there is no change

in service use post-disenrollment, there is a non-trivial shift in treatment financing, with

heterogeneity across patients with behavioral health conditions. In particular, and similar to

previous work on general healthcare, the use of Medicaid and any insurance to pay for

                                                 31
behavioral healthcare declined post-disenrollment by 25% to 30%, which is in line with findings

based on general populations. Mental illness patients are able to partially substitute other

insurance, but SUD patients fully finance treatment post-disenrollment. We suspect that the

deeper penetration of insurance payments within the mental healthcare delivery system explains

this heterogeneity, although we note that there are potentially other factors such as differences in

patients who receive these two types of care. Shouldering the costs of SUD treatment, which

include chronic conditions and multiple treatment episodes for most individuals, potentially

implies a non-trivial increase in medical financial burden for disenrolled Medicaid patients.

        We can compare our findings to studies that have examined the effect of pre- and post-

ACA state Medicaid expansions (Wen, Hockenberry, and Cummings 2017; Wen, Druss, and

Cummings 2015; Meinhofer and Witman 2018; Maclean et al. 2018; Ghosh, Simon, and

Sommers 2019; Cher, Morden, and Meara 2019; Grooms and Ortega 2019) and the Oregon

Medicaid experiment (Baicker et al. 2017). Broadly studies that rely on quasi-experimental

methods show that gaining public insurance increases service use, with effect sizes as large as a

more than 100% increase (Meinhofer and Witman 2018). In contrast, we find no change in

hospitalizations, prescription medications obtained in outpatient settings, or specialty care

following an insurance loss. Our null findings for SUD treatment are similar to results based on

experimental data from the Oregon Medicaid experience (Baicker et al. 2017). 34 However, we

do observe a comparable decline in the use of Medicaid as a source of payments, our effect sizes

are similar in size but ­ as expected ­ opposite in sign. Thus, as we hypothesized, the insurance-

demand for behavioral healthcare is asymmetric: service use increased following a gain but did



34
  The authors find no difference in the use of medications used to treat opioid use disorder between low-income
adults randomized to the treatment group and the control group (Baicker et al. 2017).
                                                        32
not decline following a loss. This finding suggests that, instead of foregoing treatment, the

financial burden shifted from Medicaid to other payers.

       Finally, our case study of Tennessee suggests that researchers should be cautious when

using regionally representative datasets to study state-level interventions. This caution plausibly

extends to a broader set of studies in which the selected dataset is not representative at the level

of treatment; we encourage more work on this understudied question.

       In summary, we offer the first evidence of the effect of losing insurance on behavioral

healthcare and financing. These findings may be useful for policymakers considering changes to

Medicaid. Finally, we highlight that researchers must take particular care in the estimation of

single-state treatments. While previous work has documented the importance of carefully

selecting a comparison group (Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller 2010, Angrist and Pischke

2010), we add to this discussion by showing that the data used to study such treatments must

provide the researcher with accurate representation at the treatment state-level.




                                                 33
Table 1. Share of all hospitalizations captured by NIS: Hospitals with discharges among patients ages 21-64
years
  Year          Share of all Tennessee hospitals with >0 behavioral health hospitalizations appearing in NIS
  2000                                                       24.31
  2001                                                       27.91
  2002                                                       25.56
  2003                                                       27.56
  2004                                                       27.11
  2005                                                       26.33
  2006                                                       21.99
  2007                                                       22.26
Notes: Denominator is the number of community hospitalizations in the Tennessee Department of Health data.
Numerator is the number of community hospitalizations in the NIS. The numbers are very similar when mental
illness and SUD hospitalizations are measured separately.


Table 2. Share of all hospitalizations captured by NIS: Hospitals with discharges among patients ages 21-64
years
 Year                               Share of all Tennessee hospitalizations appearing in NIS
 2000                                                        22.25
 2001                                                        23.99
 2002                                                        29.61
 2003                                                        34.79
 2004                                                        38.20
 2005                                                        31.71
 2006                                                        32.91
 2007                                                        20.20
Notes: Denominator is the number of community hospitalizations in the Tennessee Department of Health data.
Numerator is the number of community hospitalizations in the NIS.




                                                     34
Table 3. Quarterly Hospital-level summary statistics in Tennessee and other Southern states in the pre-
TennCare disenrollment period among adults 21 to 64 years: Hospitalization data 2000-2005 Q2
 Sample:                                                              Tennessee            Other Southern states
 Hospitalizations:(Average per hospital per quarter)
 Mental illness                                                         107.01                      110.50
 SUD                                                                     36.21                       37.17
 Total                                                                  670.82                      927.32
 Expected primary payer mental illness hospitalizations
 Medicaid                                                                 0.35                        0.26
 Any insurance                                                            0.96                        0.76
 Private insurance                                                        0.29                        0.34
 Medicare                                                                 0.32                        0.25
 Self-pay                                                                 0.04                        0.13
 Expected payer SUD hospitalizations
 Medicaid                                                                 0.40                        0.22
 Any insurance                                                            0.87                        0.55
 Private insurance                                                        0.23                        0.22
 Medicare                                                                 0.24                        0.16
 Self-pay                                                                 0.13                        0.22
 Expected payer total hospitalizations
 Medicaid                                                                 0.25                        0.25
 Any insurance                                                            0.74                        0.82
 Private insurance                                                        0.34                        0.45
 Medicare                                                                 0.15                        0.19
 Self-pay                                                                 0.04                        0.16
 State level demographics
 Age                                                                     36.04                       35.67
 % male                                                                   48.9                        48.8
 % female                                                                 51.1                        51.2
 % white                                                                  80.8                        79.1
 % African American                                                       17.0                        17.0
 % other race                                                             2.2                         3.9
 % Hispanic                                                               4.7                         16.0
 % less than high school                                                 39.09                       40.01
 % high school                                                           26.39                       24.19
 % some college                                                          19.06                       19.36
 % college or more                                                       15.46                       16.44
 % poverty                                                               14.55                       13.69
 Population 21-64 years                                               3,529,292                    7,164,659
 Observations (Hospitals x time)                                         3,195                       8,440
 Observations (Hospitals)                                                 143                        1,059
Notes: The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. The data are equally weighted in the Tennessee
Department of Health data and weighted by NIS weights for the comparison group.
We include other Southern states that appear in the NIS (see Section 3.3).




                                                       35
Table 4. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on hospitalizations by adults 21-64 years per hospital-quarter:
Hospitalizations data 2000-2007
                                                  Mental illness               SUD                       Total
  Outcome:                                       hospitalizations       hospitalizations           hospitalizations
  Mean in TN adults 21-64 years, pre-                107.01                   36.21                     670.82
  disenrollment
  DD                                                   0.49                    -2.67                     -10.55
                                                     (10.33)                  (4.70)                    (26.09)
  Observations                                       15,554                  15,554                     15,799
Notes: The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, and quarter, year, and hospital fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The data are equally weighted in the Tennessee Department of Health data and weighted by NIS
weights for the comparison group. We note that sample sizes are modestly smaller in the mental illness and SUD
hospitalization samples than in the total hospitalization sample. The difference is attributable to 245 observations
that lack ICD-9 information that we use to classify mental illness and SUD hospitalizations.
***,**, *= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                          36
Table 5. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on expected payer source among adults 21-64 years:
Hospitalization data 2000-2007
                                                             Any
 Outcome:                                Medicaid        insurance        Private         Medicare         Self-Pay
 Mental illness hospitalizations
 Proportion in TN adults 21-64              0.35             0.96            0.29             0.32            0.04
 years, pre-disenrollment
 Baseline model
 DD                                       -0.09***         -0.04**         0.02*             0.02*            0.02
                                           (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.01)
 Observations                              15,522          15,522         15,522            15,522          15,522
 SUD hospitalizations
 Proportion in TN adults 21-64              0.40             0.87            0.23             0.24            0.13
 years, pre-disenrollment
 Baseline model
 DD                                       -0.12***        -0.10***           0.00             0.01          0.09***
                                           (0.02)           (0.02)         (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.02)
 Observations                              15,276          15,276         15,276            15,276          15,276
 Total hospitalizations
 Proportion in TN adults 21-64              0.25             0.74            0.34             0.15            0.04
 years, pre-disenrollment
 Baseline model
 DD                                       -0.07***         -0.04**          -0.00          0.02***            0.02
                                           (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.01)
 Observations                              15,799          15,799         15,799            15,799          15,799
Notes: The unit of observation is the discharge-hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LPM and control
for state demographics, and quarter, year, and hospital fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The data are equally weighted in the Tennessee Department of Health data and weighted by NIS
weights for the comparison group. We note that sample sizes are modestly smaller in the mental illness and SUD
hospitalization samples that in the total hospitalization sample. The difference is attributable to 245 observations
that lack ICD-9 information that we use to classify mental illness and SUD hospitalizations. Further, we have some
missing information on payment, leading to differences in the payment samples vs. the hospitalization samples.
***,**, *= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                          37
Table 6. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on hospitalizations among adults 21-64 years using NIS data for
Tennessee: NIS only data 2000-2007
                                                  Mental illness               SUD                    Total
 Outcome:                                        hospitalizations        hospitalizations        hospitalizations
 Mean in TN adults 21-64 years, pre-                   91.59                   28.99                 764.01
 disenrollment
 Baseline model
 DD                                                   -11.25                   -0.05                  -26.22
                                                      (9.30)                  (4.22)                 (25.85)
 Observations                                         12,580                  12,580                 12,580
Notes: The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, and quarter, year, and hospital fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The data are weighted by NIS weights.
***,**, *= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.


Table 7. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on expected payer source among adults 21-64 years using NIS data
for Tennessee: NIS only data 2000-2007
                                                           Any
 Outcome:                                Medicaid       insurance         Private        Medicare         Self-Pay
 Mental illness hospitalizations
 Proportion in TN adults 21-64              0.52           0.84              0.26           0.30             0.07
 years, pre-disenrollment
 Baseline model
 DD                                      -0.10***        -0.06***            0.02           0.01          0.04***
                                           (0.02)         (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                             12,580          12,580          12,580          12,580           12,580
 SUD hospitalizations
 Proportion in TN adults 21-64              0.45           0.67              0.17           0.19             0.13
 years, pre-disenrollment
 Baseline model
 DD                                      -0.10***        -0.09***           -0.01           0.02          0.08***
                                           (0.02)         (0.02)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.02)
 Observations                             12,580          12,580          12,580          12,580           12,580
 Total hospitalizations
 Proportion in TN adults 21-64              0.47           0.90              0.38           0.23             0.09
 years, pre-disenrollment
 Baseline model
 DD                                      -0.08***        -0.07***            0.00           0.00          0.05***
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                             12,580          12,580          12,580          12,580           12,580
Notes: The unit of observation is the discharge-hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LPM and control
for state demographics, and quarter, year, and hospital fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The data are equally weighted by NIS weights for the comparison group.
***,**, *= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                         38
Table 8. The effect of the TennCare disenrollment on Medicaid-financed prescriptions per 100,000 non-
elderly adults for behavioral health medications prescribed in outpatient settings: SDUD 2000-2007
 Outcome:                                           Mental health medications              SUD medications
 Mean in TN adults 21-64 years, pre-                        1,139,167                            6,895
 disenrollment
 DD                                                          215,379                             3,987
                                                             (98,193)                           (5,801)
 Observations                                                  352                                350
Notes: The unit of observation is the state-year-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, and state, year, and quarter fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in parentheses.
The data are weighted by the state population ages 21-64 years.
***,**,*= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.


Table 9. The effect of the TennCare disenrollment on admissions to specialty behavioral healthcare treatment
per 100,000 non-elderly adults: TEDS 2000-2007
                                                                                 Admissions for patients with co-
 Outcome:                                             All admissions                  occurring mental illness
 Mean in TN adults 21-64 years, pre-                        251.8                                18.05
 disenrollment
 Panel B:
 DD                                                        161.09                                67.77
                                                          (111.79)                              (46.16)
 Observations                                                85                                   85
Notes: The unit of observation is the state-year-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, and state, year, and quarter fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in parentheses.
The data are weighted by the state population ages 21-64 years.
***,**,*= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                         39
Table 10. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on suicide rates, and fatal alcohol poisonings and drug overdoses
among adults ages 21-64 years: NVSS 2000-2007
                                                              Suicides               Fatal alcohol poisonings and
 Outcome:                                                  per 100,000               drug overdoses per 100,000
 Mean in TN adults 21-64 years, pre-                            4.25                              2.72
 disenrollment
 Baseline model
 DD                                                             0.36                            0.97***
                                                               (0.18)                            (0.29)
 Observations                                                   544                               544
Notes: The unit of observation is the state-year-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, and state, year, and quarter fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in parentheses.
The data are weighted by the state population ages 21-64 years.
***,**,*= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                         40
Figure 1. Monte Carlo simulation of estimated treatment effects
   8
   6
   4
   2
   0




                                     5




                                                                         5
            1




                                                              2




                                                                                                   3
                                 1.




                                                                        2.
                                                      Beta hat
                       100% sample                                       20% sample + exclusions

                       100% TN sample, 20% non-TN sample + exclusions




Notes: Each of the four simulations are conducted using 1,000 repetitions. Data is generated such that the true value
of the treatment effect is 2. See text for full details.

Figure 2. Trends in mental illness hospitalizations: NIS vs. DOH administrative data




Notes: Outcomes are quarterly averages of hospitalizations among patients 21 to 64 years. DOH = Tennessee
Department of Health data.

                                                                   41
Figure 3. Trends in SUD hospitalizations per hospital-quarter: NIS vs. DOH administrative data




Notes: Outcomes are quarterly averages of hospitalizations among patients 21 to 64 years. DOH = Tennessee
Department of Health data. NIS = National Inpatient Sample.


Figure 4. Trends in Total hospitalizations per hospital-quarter: NIS vs. DOH administrative data




Notes: Outcomes are quarterly averages of hospitalizations among patients 21 to 64 years. DOH = Tennessee
Department of Health data. NIS = National Inpatient Sample.




                                                      42
Figure 5. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on mental illness hospitalizations by adults ages 21-64 years per
hospital-quarter using an event study: Hospitalization data 2000-2007




Notes: The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, six-month period fixed effects (rather than quarter fixed effects), year fixed effects, and hospital
fixed effects. 95% confidence intervals reported with dashed lines and are calculated with a modified block-
bootstrap procedure. 2005 Q1-Q2 is the omitted category. The data are equally weighted in the DOH data and
weighted by NIS weights for the comparison group. DOH = Tennessee Department of Health data. S1 = Q1 to Q2.




                                                       43
Figure 6. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on SUD hospitalizations by adults ages 21-64 years per hospital-
quarter using an event study: Hospitalization data 2000-2007




Notes: The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, six-month period fixed effects (rather than quarter fixed effects), year fixed effects, and hospital
fixed effects. 95% confidence intervals reported with dashed lines and are calculated with a modified block-
bootstrap procedure. 2005 Q1-Q2 is the omitted category. The data are equally weighted in the DOH data and
weighted by NIS weights for the comparison group. DOH = Tennessee Department of Health data. S1 = Q1 to Q2.




                                                        44
Figure 7. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on total hospitalizations by adults ages 21-64 years per hospital-
quarter using an event study: Hospitalization data 2000-2007




Notes: The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, six-month period fixed effects (rather than quarter fixed effects), year fixed effects, and hospital
fixed effects. 95% confidence intervals reported with dashed lines and are calculated with a modified block-
bootstrap procedure. 2005 Q1-Q2 is the omitted category. The data are equally weighted in the DOH data and
weighted by NIS weights for the comparison group. DOH = Tennessee Department of Health data. S1 = Q1 to Q2.




                                                        45
Appendix Table 1A. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on hospitalizations among adults 21 to 64 years
sample; alternative approaches to inference: Hospitalization data 2000-2007
                                                            Mental illness                          SUD
 Outcome:                                                  hospitalizations                   hospitalizations
 Classical SE                                                      0.89                             0.03
 Cluster SE by state                                               0.95                             0.43
 Randomization inference                                           3/10                             4/10
 Observations                                                    15,554                            15,554
Notes: p-values reported. The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LS and
control for state demographics, and quarter, year, and hospital fixed effects. The data are equally weighted in the
DOH data and weighted by NIS weights for the comparison group. DOH = Tennessee Department of Health data.


Appendix Table 1B. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on expected payer source among adults 21-64 years
sample; alternative approaches to inference: Hospitalization data 2000-2007
                                                       Any
  Outcome:                        Medicaid         insurance           Private         Medicare          Self-Pay
  Mental illness
  hospitalizations
  Classical SE                      <0.001            <0.001             0.004            0.01             0.003
  Cluster SE by state               <0.001             0.01              0.01             0.01             0.09
  Randomization inference           10/10             10/10              2/10             2/10             1/10
  Observations                      15,522            15,522            15,522           15,522           15,522
  SUD hospitalizations
  Classical SE                      <0.001            <0.001             0.77             0.26            <0.001
  Cluster SE by state               <0.001            <0.001             0.66             0.29            <0.001
  Randomization inference           10/10             10/10              4/10             3/10             1/10
  Observations                      15,276            15,276            15,276           15,276           15,276
Notes: p-values reported. The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with an LPM
and control for state demographics, and quarter, year, and hospital fixed effects. The data are equally weighted in
the DOH data and weighted by NIS weights for the comparison group. DOH = Tennessee Department of Health
data.




                                                         46
Appendix Table 2A. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on hospitalizations among adults 21-64 years using
different time periods and samples: Hospitalizations data 2000-2007
                                                               Mental illness                       SUD
 Outcome:                                                     hospitalizations               hospitalizations
 Mean in TN adults 21-64 years, pre-                              107.01                           36.21
 disenrollment+
 2000-2007 (drop 2005)                                               4.63                           -2.63
                                                                  (13.67)                          (6.49)
 Observations                                                     13,510                           13,510
 2000-2007q2                                                        -6.11                           -4.15
                                                                   (9.72)                          (4.59)
 Observations                                                     14,531                           14,531
 2000-2010                                                          -0.44                           -2.91
                                                                   (9.92)                          (4.51)
 Observations                                                     21,771                           21,771
 2000-2007 (drop TX & GA)                                           -1.20                           -4.00
                                                                   (9.87)                          (4.12)
 Observations                                                     10,761                           10,761
 2000-2007 (no weight adjustment)                                   -1.08                           -3.20
                                                                   (7.62)                          (3.42)
 Observations                                                     15,554                           15,554
 2000-2007 (separate trend for TN and other                         -4.79                           -3.36
 states)                                                          (14.03)                          (5.05)
 Observations                                                     15,554                           15,554
 2000-2007 (drop time-varying controls)                             -7.81                         -5.97**
                                                                   (7.04)                          (3.03)
 Observations                                                     15,554                           15,554
 2000-2007 (aggregate to the state-quarter- year                   -10.60                           -7.07
 level)                                                           (16.00)                          (7.18)
 Observations                                                        344                             344
Notes: The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, and quarter, year, and hospital fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The data are equally weighted in the DOH data and weighted by NIS weights for the comparison
group. DOH = Tennessee Department of Health data.
+We use the main sample means.
***,**, *= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                        47
Appendix Table 2B. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on mental illness hospitalization expected payer source
among adults 21-64 years using different time periods and samples: Hospitalizations data 2000-2007
                                                           Any
 Outcome:                             Medicaid        insurance         Private        Medicare          Self-Pay
 Mean in TN adults 21-64                0.347            0.956           0.290            0.319            0.042
 years, pre-disenrollment+
 2000-2007 (drop 2005)                -0.10***            -0.03           0.03            0.03             0.02
                                        (0.03)           (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)
 Observations                          13,480           13,480          13,480           13,480           13,480
 2000-2007q2                          -0.09***          -0.03**         0.03**            0.02             0.02
                                        (0.02)           (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                          14,499           14,499          14,499           14,499           14,499
 2000-2010                            -0.13***         -0.06***           0.00          0.04***          0.04***
                                        (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                          21,733           21,733          21,733           21,733           21,733
 2000-2007 (drop TX & GA)             -0.08***            -0.02        0.03***           0.03**            0.01
                                        (0.02)           (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                          10,729           10,729          10,729           10,729           10,729
 2000-2007 (no weight                 -0.09***          -0.03**         0.03**            0.02            0.02**
 adjustment)                            (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                          15,522           15,522          15,522           15,522           15,522
 2000-2007 (separate trend               -0.04            -0.02        0.05***            0.00           0.04***
 for TN and other states)               (0.03)           (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)
 Observations                          15,522           15,522          15,522           15,522           15,522
 2000-2007 (drop time-                 -0.10**         -0.04***           0.01            0.01             0.01
 varying controls)                      (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.019)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                          15,522           15,522          15,522           15,522           15,522
 2000-2007 (aggregate to the          -0.10***            -0.02          0.05*            0.02             0.01
 state-quarter- year level)             (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.01)           (0.02)
 Observations                             344              344            344              344              344
Notes: The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, and quarter, year, and hospital fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The data are equally weighted in the DOH data and weighted by NIS weights for the comparison
group. DOH = Tennessee Department of Health data.
+We use the main sample means.
***,**, *= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                       48
Appendix Table 2C. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on SUD hospitalization expected payer source among
adults 21-64 years using different time periods and samples: Hospitalizations data 2000-2007
                                                         Any
 Outcome:                             Medicaid        insurance         Private        Medicare          Self-Pay
 Mean in TN adults 21-64                0.403            0.866           0.226            0.236            0.127
 years, pre-disenrollment+
 2000-2007 (drop 2005)                -0.14***         -0.10***            0.00            0.03          0.09***
                                       (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.03)
 Observations                          13,275           13,275          13,275           13,275           13,275
 2000-2007q2                          -0.11***         -0.10***            0.00            0.00          0.08***
                                       (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.02)
 Observations                          14,271           14,271          14,271           14,271           14,271
 2000-2010                            -0.16***         -0.13***           -0.00            0.02          0.12***
                                       (0.02)           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.02)
 Observations                          21,395           21,395          21,395           21,395           21,395
 2000-2007 (drop TX & GA)             -0.10***         -0.09***            0.01            0.01          0.07***
                                       (0.02)           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.02)
 Observations                          10,483           10,483          10,483           10,483           10,483
 2000-2007 (no weight                 -0.11***         -0.10***            0.00            0.00          0.08***
 adjustment)                           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                          15,276           15,276          15,276           15,276           15,276
 2000-2007 (separate trend            -0.06***         -0.09***            0.01           -0.03          0.07***
 for TN and other states)              (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)
 Observations                          15,276           15,276          15,276           15,276           15,276
 2000-2007 (drop time-                -0.14***         -0.12***          0.002             0.01          0.09***
 varying controls)                     (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                          15,276           15,276          15,276           15,276           15,276
 2000-2007 (aggregate to the          -0.12***         -0.09***            0.01            0.02          0.08***
 state-quarter- year level)            (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 Observations                            344              344              344             344              344
Notes: The unit of observation is the hospital-state-quarter. All models estimated with LS and control for state
demographics, and quarter, year, and hospital fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The data are equally weighted in the DOH data and weighted by NIS weights for the comparison
group. DOH = Tennessee Department of Health data.
+We use the main sample means.
***,**, *= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                       49
Appendix Table 3. Effect of TennCare disenrollment on the probability of a past year across-state move:
ASEC 2000-2007
 Outcome:                                                                           Any across state move
 Proportion in TN, pre-disenrollment                                                         0.044
 DD                                                                                           -0.01
                                                                                             (0.01)
 Observations                                                                                  88
Notes: The unit of observation is the state-year. Model estimated with LS and controls for individual characteristics,
state demographics, and state year fixed effects. Block-bootstrap standard errors are reported in parentheses. The
data are weighted by ASEC sample weights.
***,**, *= statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                         50
References:

Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller. "Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case
        Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control Program." Journal of the
        American Statistical Association 105 (490), 2010.493-505.
Abadie, A., and J. Gardeazabal. "The economic costs of conflict: A case study of the Basque
        Country." American Economic Review 93 (1), 2003.113-132.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Mean expenditure per person with expense by
        event type, United States, 2017. Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. Rockville, MD:
        Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2019.
Akosa Antwi, Y., A. S. Moriya, and K. I. Simon. "Access to health insurance and the use of
        inpatient medical care: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act young adult mandate."
        Journal of Health Economics 39, 2015.171-187.
Alpert, A., D. Powell, and R. Pacula. "Supply-Side Drug Policy in the Presence of Substitutes:
        Evidence from the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent Opioids." American Economic
        Journal-Economic Policy 10 (4), 2018.1-35.
Altonji, J. G., L. B. Kahn, and J. D. Speer. "Cashier or Consultant? Entry Labor Market
        Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success." Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1),
        2016.S361-S401.
American Hospital Association. Fast facts on U.S. Hospitals, 2018. 2018.
American Psychiatric Association. American Psychiatric Association Practice guidelines for the
        treatment of psychiatric disorders: Compendium 2006: American Psychiatric
        Publications. 2006.
------. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: American Psychiatric
        Association. 2013.
------. What is mental illness? 2015.
Anderson, M. D., B. Hansen, and D. I. Rees. "Medical marijuana laws and teen marijuana use."
        American Law and Economics Review, 2015.
Argys, L. M., A. Friedson, M. M. Pitts, and D. S. Tello-Trillo. The Financial Instability Cost of
        Shrinking Public Health Insurance. In Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper
        Series. Atlanta, GA: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. 2017.
Autor, D. H. "Outsourcing at will: The contribution of unjust dismissal doctrine to the growth of
        employment outsourcing." Journal of Labor Economics 21 (1), 2003.1-42.
Baicker, K., H. L. Allen, B. J. Wright, and A. N. Finkelstein. "The Effect Of Medicaid On
        Medication Use Among Poor Adults: Evidence From Oregon." Health Affairs 36 (12),
        2017.2110-2114.
Barret, M., E. Wilson, and D. Whalen. Summary 2007 HCUP Nationwide Inpatient Sample
        (NIS) Comparison Report. In HCUP Method Series. Rockville, MD: Agency for
        Healthcare Research and Quality. 2010.
Bennett, C. TennCare, One State's Experiment with Medicaid Expansion: Vanderbilt University
        Press. 2014.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan. "How much should we trust differences-in-
        differences estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1), 2004.249-275.



                                               51
Bishop, T. F., M. J. Press, S. Keyhani, and H. A. Pincus. "Acceptance of insurance by
        psychiatrists and the implications for access to mental health care." JAMA Psychiatry 71
        (2), 2014.176-181.
Black, B., A. Hollingsworth, L. Nunes, and K. Simon. The Effect of Health Insurance on
        Mortality: Power Analysis and What We Can Learn from the Affordable Care Act
        Coverage Expansions: National Bureau of Economic Research. 2019.
Bradford, W. D., and W. D. Lastrapes. "A Prescription for Unemployment? Recessions and the
        Demand for Mental Health Drugs." Health Economics, 2013.
Buck, J. A. "The looming expansion and transformation of public substance abuse treatment
        under the Affordable Care Act." Health Affairs 30 (8), 2011.1402-10.
Bureau of TennCare. Fiscal year 2005-2006 annual report: Bureau of TennCare. 2005.
Carpenter, C. S., C. B. McClellan, and D. I. Rees. "Economic conditions, illicit drug use, and
        substance use disorders in the United States." Journal of Health Economics 52, 2017.63-
        73.
Caulkins, J. P., A. Kasunic, and M. A. Lee. "Societal burden of substance abuse." International
        Public Health Journal 6 (3), 2014.269-282.
Cawley, J., A. S. Moriya, and K. Simon. "The impact of the macroeconomy on health insurance
        coverage: Evidence from the Great Recession." Health Economics 24 (2), 2015.206-23.
Cawley, J., and K. I. Simon. "Health insurance coverage and the macroeconorny." Journal of
        Health Economics 24 (2), 2005.299-315.
Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. Key substance use and mental health
        indicators in the United States: Results from the 2018 National Survey on Drug Use and
        Health In Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Rockville, MD.
        2019.
------. Results from the 2018 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed Tables.
        Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 2019.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Alcohol and Public Health: Frequently Asked
        Questions. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2013.
------. Opioid Overdose: Understanding the Epidemic. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease
        Control and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. 2018.
------. Suicide rising across the US. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
        2018.
Chang, C., and S. Steinberg. TennCare Timeline: Major Events and Milestones from 1992 to
        2014. Memphis, TN: Methodist Le Bonheur Center for Healthcare Economics,
        University of Memphis. 2014.
Cher, B. A. Y., N. E. Morden, and E. Meara. "Medicaid Expansion and Prescription Trends:
        Opioids, Addiction Therapies, and Other Drugs." Medical Care 57 (3), 2019.208-212.
Clemens, M. A., and J. Hunt. "The labor market effects of refugee waves: reconciling conflicting
        results." ILR Review, 2017.0019793918824597.
Cuijpers, P., F. Clignet, B. van Meijel, A. van Straten, J. Li, and G. Andersson. "Psychological
        treatment of depression in inpatients: a systematic review and meta-analysis." Clinical
        Psychology Review 31 (3), 2011.353-360.
Currie, J., and J. Gruber. "Saving babies: the efficacy and cost of recent changes in the Medicaid
        eligibility of pregnant women." Journal of Political Economy 104 (6), 1996.1263-1296.


                                                52
Dave, D., and S. Mukerjee. "Mental health parity legislation, cost-sharing and substance-abuse
        treatment admissions." Health Economics 20 (2), 2011.161-183.
DeLeire, T. The Effect of Disenrollment from Medicaid on Employment, Insurance Coverage,
        Health and Health Care Utilization. In National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper Series. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. 2018.
Farber, H. S., D. Herbst, I. Kuziemko, and S. Naidu. Unions and Inequality Over the Twentieth
        Century: New Evidence from Survey Data: National Bureau of Economic Research.
        2018.
Farrar, I., D. Eichenthal, B. Coleman, and C. Reese. TennCare Reform, One Year Later: An
        Assessment of the Impact of the 2005-2006 Changes in the TennCare Program: Robert
        Wood Johnson Foundation. 2007.
Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse, H. Allen, and
        K. Baicker. "The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 2012.1057-1106.
Flood, S., M. King, S. Ruggles, and J. R. Warren. Integrated public use microdata series, Current
        Population Survey. Minneapolis, MN. 2020.
Garthwaite, C., T. Gross, and M. J. Notowidigdo. "Public Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and
        Employment Lock." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2), 2014.653-696.
Garthwaite, C., T. Gross, and M. J. Notowidigdo. "Hospitals as insurers of last resort." American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10 (1), 2018.1-39.
Gelman, A., and J. Carlin. "Beyond power calculations: Assessing type S (sign) and type M
        (magnitude) errors." Perspectives on Psychological Science 9 (6), 2014.641-651.
Ghosh, A., and K. Simon. The Effect of Medicaid on Adult Hospitalizations: Evidence from
        Tennessee's Medicaid Contraction: National Bureau of Economic Research. 2015.
Ghosh, A., K. Simon, and B. D. Sommers. "The Effect of Health Insurance on Prescription Drug
        Use Among Low-Income Adults: Evidence from Recent Medicaid Expansions." Journal
        of Health Economics 63, 2019.64-80.
Golberstein, E., and G. Gonzales. "The Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Mental Health
        Services and Out-of-Pocket Spending for Mental Health Services." Health Services
        Research 50 (6), 2015.1734-1750.
Grecu, A. M., D. M. Dave, and H. Saffer. "Mandatory access prescription drug monitoring
        programs and prescription drug abuse." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 38
        (1), 2019.181-209.
Grooms, J., and A. Ortega. "Examining Medicaid Expansion and the Treatment of Substance
        Use Disorders." AEA Papers and Proceedings 109, 2019.187-92.
Hamersma, S., and M. Kim. "Participation and crowd out: Assessing the effects of parental
        Medicaid expansions." Journal of Health Economics 32 (1), 2013.160-171.
Hollingsworth, A., C. J. Ruhm, and K. Simon. "Macroeconomic conditions and opioid abuse."
        Journal of Health Economics 56, 2017.222-233.
Horwitz, J. R. "Making Profits And Providing Care: Comparing Nonprofit, For-Profit, And
        Government Hospitals." Health Affairs 24 (3), 2005.790-801.
Hunot, V., R. Churchill, V. Teixeira, and M. de Lima. "Psychological therapies for generalised
        anxiety disorder." Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (1), 2006.
Insel, T. R. "Assessing the economic costs of serious mental illness." American Journal of
        Psychiatry 165 (6), 2008.663-5.

                                               53
Kaestner, R., and B. Yarnoff. "Long-Term Effects of Minimum Legal Drinking Age Laws on
        Adult Alcohol Use and Driving Fatalities." Journal of Law & Economics 54 (2),
        2011.365-388.
Kahn, L. B. "The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college in a bad
        economy." Labour Economics 17 (2), 2010.303-316.
Kaiser Family Foundation. Medicaid Benefits: Rehabilitation Services ­ Mental Health and
        Substance Abuse. 2020.
Kolstad, J. T., and A. E. Kowalski. "The impact of health care reform on hospital and preventive
        care: Evidence from Massachusetts." Journal of Public Economics 96 (11-12), 2012.909-
        929.
Lang, M. "The Impact of Mental Health Insurance Laws on State Suicide Rates." Health
        Economics 22 (1), 2013.73-88.
Lu, M., and T. G. McGuire. "The Productivity of Outpatient Treatment for Substance Abuse."
        The Journal of Human Resources 37 (2), 2002.309-335.
Maclean, J. C. "The health effects of leaving school in a bad economy." Journal of Health
        Economics 32 (5), 2013.951-964.
Maclean, J. C. "Does leaving school in an economic downturn impact access to employer-
        sponsored health insurance?" IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3 (1), 2014.1-27.
Maclean, J. C. "The Lasting Effects of Leaving School in an Economic Downturn on Alcohol
        Use." Industrial & Labor Relations Review 68 (1), 2015.120-152.
Maclean, J. C., J. H. Cantor, and B. P. Horn. "Recessions and Substance Abuse Treatment."
        Contemporary Economic Policy 38 (1), 2019.139-154.
Maclean, J. C., N. Carson, B. Cook, and M. F. Pesko. "Public insurance and psychotropic
        prescription medications for mental illness." BE Journal of Economics and Policy
        Analysis 19 (1), 2018.Online.
Maclean, J. C., M. F. Pesko, and S. C. Hill. "Public insurance expansions and smoking cessation
        medications." Economic Inquiry 57 (4), 2019.1798-1820.
Maclean, J. C., and B. Saloner. "The Effect of Public Insurance Expansions on Substance Use
        Disorder Treatment: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act." Journal of Policy Analysis
        and Management 38 (2), 2019.366-393.
Maclean, J. C., D. Webber, and M. T. French. "Workplace problems, mental health and
        substance use." Applied Economics 47 (9), 2015.883-905.
Mark, T. L., W. Olesiuk, M. M. Ali, L. J. Sherman, R. Mutter, and J. L. Teich. "Differential
        Reimbursement of Psychiatric Services by Psychiatrists and Other Medical Providers."
        Psychiatric Services 69 (3), 2018.281-285.
Meinhofer, A., and A. E. Witman. "The role of health insurance on treatment for opioid use
        disorders: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansion." Journal of
        Health Economics 60, 2018.177-197.
Merrall, E. L., A. Kariminia, I. A. Binswanger, M. S. Hobbs, M. Farrell, J. Marsden, S. J.
        Hutchinson, and S. M. Bird. "Metaanalysis of drugrelated deaths soon after release
        from prison." Addiction 105 (9), 2010.1545-1554.
Miller, S. "The impact of the Massachusetts health care reform on health care use among
        children." American Economic Review 102 (3), 2012.502-07.
Mirel, L. B., and K. Carper. Expenses for Hospital Inpatient Stays, 2010. Rockville, MD:
        Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2013.

                                               54
Murphy, S. M., and D. Polsky. "Economic Evaluations of Opioid Use Disorder Interventions."
        Pharmacoeconomics 34 (9), 2016.863-887.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. Medications to Treat Opioid Use Disorder. 2018.
------. Principles of Drug Addiction Treatment: A Research-Based Guide. Besthesa, MD:
        National Insitutes of Health. 2018.
Nicholas, L. H., and J. C. Maclean. "The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on the Labor Supply
        of Older Adults: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study." Journal of Policy
        Analysis and Management 38 (2), 2019.455­480.
Nikpay, S., S. Freedman, H. Levy, and T. Buchmueller. "Effect of the Affordable Care Act
        Medicaid expansion on emergency department visits: evidence from state-level
        emergency department databases." Annals of Emergency Medicine 70 (2), 2017.215-225.
        e6.
Olfson, M. "Building The Mental Health Workforce Capacity Needed To Treat Adults With
        Serious Mental Illnesses." Health Afairs 35 (6), 2016.983-90.
Pacula, R. L., D. Powell, P. Heaton, and E. L. Sevigny. "Assessing the Effects of Medical
        Marijuana Laws on Marijuana Use: The Devil is in the Details." Journal of Policy
        Analysis and Management 34 (1), 2015.7-31.
Penttilä, M., E. Jääskeläinen, N. Hirvonen, M. Isohanni, and J. Miettunen. "Duration of untreated
        psychosis as predictor of long-term outcome in schizophrenia: systematic review and
        meta-analysis." The British Journal of Psychiatry 205 (2), 2014.88-94.
Popovici, I., and M. T. French. Economic Evaluation of Substance Abuse Interventions:
        Overview of Recent Research Findings and Policy Implications. In Addictions: A
        comprehensive guidebook, edited by B. S. McCrady and E. E. Epstein. Oxford, U.K.:
        Oxford University Press. 2013.
Popovici, I., J. C. Maclean, B. Hijazi, and S. Radakrishnan. "The effect of state laws designed to
        prevent nonmedical prescription opioid use on overdose deaths and treatment." Health
        Economics 27 (2), 2018.294-305.
Powell, D., R. L. Pacula, and M. Jacobson. "Do medical marijuana laws reduce addictions and
        deaths related to pain killers?" Journal of Health Economics 58, 2018.29-42.
Reichert, A., and R. Jacobs. "The impact of waiting time on patient outcomes: Evidence from
        early intervention in psychosis services in England." Health Economics 27 (11),
        2018.1772-1787.
Rowan, K., D. D. McAlpine, and L. A. Blewett. "Access And Cost Barriers To Mental Health
        Care, By Insurance Status, 1999­2010." Health Affairs 32 (10), 2013.1723-1730.
Ruhm, C. J. "Recessions, healthy no more?" Journal of Health Economics 42, 2015.17-28.
Ruhm, C. J. "Corrected US opioidinvolved drug poisoning deaths and mortality rates, 1999­
        2015." Addiction 113 (7), 2018.1339-1344.
Saloner, B., Y. Akosa Antwi, J. C. Maclean, and B. L. Cook. "Access to Health Insurance and
        Utilization of Substance Use Disorder Treatment: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act
        Dependent Coverage Provision." Health Economics 27 (1), 2018.50-75.
Schmeiser, M. D. "Expanding wallets and waistlines: the impact of family income on the BMI of
        women and men eligible for the Earned Income Tax Credit." Health Economics 18 (11),
        2009.1277-1294.
Schwandt, H., and T. M. von Wachter. Socioeconomic Decline and Death: Midlife Impacts of
        Graduating in a Recession: National Bureau of Economic Research. 2020.

                                               55
Scott, J., F. Colom, and E. Vieta. "A meta-analysis of relapse rates with adjunctive psychological
        therapies compared to usual psychiatric treatment for bipolar disorders." The
        International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology 10 (1), 2007.123-129.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. National Expenditures for Mental
        Health Services and Substance Abuse Treatment, 1986­2009. Rockville, MD: Substance
        Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 2013.
Tarazi, W. W., T. L. Green, and L. M. Sabik. "Medicaid Disenrollment and Disparities in Access
        to Care: Evidence from Tennessee." Health Services Research 52 (3), 2017.1156-1167.
Tello-Trillo, D. S. Effects of Losing Public Health Insurance on Healthcare Access, Utilization
        and Health Outcomes: Evidence from the TennCare Disenrollment. Charlottesville, VA:
        University of Virginia Mimeo. 2016.
University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research. State level data of economic, political, and
        transfer program information for 1980-2018. 2020.
Webber, D. A. "Are college costs worth it? How ability, major, and debt affect the returns to
        schooling." Economics of Education Review 53, 2016.296-310.
Wen, H., B. G. Druss, and J. R. Cummings. "Effect of Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance
        Coverage and Access to Care among Low-Income Adults with Behavioral Health
        Conditions." Health Services Research 50 (6), 2015.1787-1809.
Wen, H., J. M. Hockenberry, T. F. Borders, and B. G. Druss. "Impact of Medicaid expansion on
        Medicaid-covered utilization of Buprenorphine for opioid use disorder treatment."
        Medical Care 55 (4), 2017.336-341.
Wen, H., J. M. Hockenberry, and J. R. Cummings. "The effect of Medicaid expansion on crime
        reduction: Evidence from HIFA-waiver expansions." Journal of Public Economics 154
        (Supplement C), 2017.67-94.
Wen, H., A. S. Wilk, B. G. Druss, and J. R. Cummings. "Medicaid Acceptance by Psychiatrists
        Before and After Medicaid Expansion." JAMA Psychiatry 76 (9), 2019.981-983.
Wherry, L. R., and S. Miller. "Early coverage, access, utilization, and health effects associated
        with the Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansions: A quasi-experimental study." Annals
        of Internal Medicine 164 (12), 2016.795-803.




                                                56
