                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      INACCURATE STATISTICAL DISCRIMINATION:
                            AN IDENTIFICATION PROBLEM

                                          J. Aislinn Bohren
                                           Kareem Haggag
                                              Alex Imas
                                            Devin G. Pope

                                        Working Paper 25935
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25935


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2019




We thank Alex Frankel, Emir Kamenica, Emily Nix, and seminar participants at Harvard
Business School, Harvard Kennedy School, the SaMMF Discrimination in Labor Markets
Workshop, Stanford University, UCLA, University of Chicago, University of Melbourne,
University of Pennsylvania, University of Southern California, University of Sydney, University
of Virginia and the Virtual Market Design Seminar for helpful comments and suggestions.
Cuimin Ba and Jihong Song provided excellent research assistance.The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by J. Aislinn Bohren, Kareem Haggag, Alex Imas, and Devin G. Pope. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inaccurate Statistical Discrimination: An Identification Problem
J. Aislinn Bohren, Kareem Haggag, Alex Imas, and Devin G. Pope
NBER Working Paper No. 25935
June 2019, Revised July 2020
JEL No. D90,J71

                                           ABSTRACT

Discrimination has been widely studied in the social sciences. Economists often categorize the
source of discrimination as either taste-based or statistical--a valuable distinction for policy
design and welfare analysis. In this paper, we highlight that in many situations economic agents
may have inaccurate beliefs, and demonstrate that the possibility of inaccurate statistical
discrimination generates an identification problem for attempts to isolate the source of differential
treatment. We introduce isodiscrimination curves--which represent the set of preferences and
beliefs that generate the same level of discrimination--to formally outline the identification
problem: when not accounted for, inaccurate statistical discrimination can be mistaken for taste-
based discrimination, accurate statistical discrimination, or their combination. A review of the
empirical discrimination literature in economics, spanning 1990-2018, reveals the scope of this
issue. While most papers discuss and attempt to distinguish between taste and statistical
discrimination, a small minority--fewer than 7%--consider inaccurate beliefs in the analysis. An
experiment illustrates a methodology for differentiating between the three sources of
discrimination, demonstrating the pitfalls of the identification problem while presenting a
portable solution.

J. Aislinn Bohren                                 Alex Imas
Carnegie Mellon University and                    Social and Decision Sciences
University of Pennsylvania                        Carnegie Mellon University
4765 Forbes Avenue                                Porter Hall 319C
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                              500 Forbes Ave.
abohren@gmail.com                                 Pittsburgh, PA 15213
                                                  aimas@andrew.cmu.edu
Kareem Haggag
Social and Decision Sciences                      Devin G. Pope
Carnegie Mellon University                        Booth School of Business
Porter Hall 208-H                                 University of Chicago
5000 Forbes Avenue                                5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                              Chicago, IL 60637
kareem.haggag@cmu.edu                             and NBER
                                                  devin.pope@chicagobooth.edu




A Data Appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25935
1   Introduction
Economists define discrimination as differential treatment of otherwise identical individuals
from different social groups (i.e. race, gender, age, etc.). Discrimination has been shown to be
prevalent in labor markets, housing markets, credit markets, and online consumer markets
among others. A variety of empirical techniques have been used to document discrimination,
including correspondence studies, own-group bias, correspondence studies and observational
data analysis (for recent reviews of the discrimination literature, see Bertrand and Duflo
(2017); Charles and Guryan (2011)).
    In addition to causally establishing the existence of discrimination, economists typically
categorize discrimination as one of two types. The first type, taste-based discrimination
(Becker, 1957), posits that an individual or firm has animus towards members of a par-
ticular group, and therefore may choose to discriminate against them because he receives
disutility from providing services to or interacting with members of the group. The second
type, statistical discrimination, suggests that discrimination may occur against members of
a particular group because productivity is unobserved and the group is correctly perceived
to have a lower average productivity due to exogenous differences (Phelps, 1972) or as part
of a self-fulfilling equilibrium (Arrow, 1973); alternatively, the group's productivity may be
perceived to have a different variance (Aigner and Cain, 1977) or the precision of auxiliary
information about individual productivity may be perceived to differ.
    Distinguishing between these forms of discrimination is important for several reasons.
First, designing an effective policy intervention to reduce discrimination crucially depends
on the source of discrimination. Second, welfare and efficiency analyses differ as a function
of the source. For example, statistical discrimination is sometimes referred to as "efficient
discrimination," in that it is the optimal response to a signal-extraction problem. Importantly,
statistical discrimination is typically assumed to be driven by rational expectations, or correct
beliefs, about the group distributions of the relevant outcome. Finally, the extent to which
competitive markets will eliminate discrimination depends on its source (see Fang and Moro
(2011) for review).
    In this paper, we argue that in many situations, an individual's beliefs about the produc-
tivity of different social groups may not be correct. We refer to discrimination that stems
from incorrect beliefs as inaccurate statistical discrimination. Just as it is important to dis-
tinguish between taste-based and accurate statistical discrimination for policy design and
welfare analysis, we show that it is also critically important to separate inaccurate from
accurate statistical discrimination. For example, if discrimination stems from inaccurate be-


                                               1
liefs, an effective policy response could be to provide individuals with information about the
correct distributions.1 Moreover, as we formally show in Section 3, allowing for beliefs to
be inaccurate generates an identification problem for common methods used to isolate the
source of discrimination.
     Two broad sources may lead to inaccurate beliefs. First, research in psychology has shown
that biases and heuristics may generate beliefs that are systematically incorrect, leading to
inaccurate stereotypes about certain groups (Schneider, Hastorf, and Ellsworth, 1979; Judd
and Park, 1993; Hilton and Hippel, 1996); see Fiske (1998) for review. Bordalo, Coffman,
Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2016) provide a model for inaccurate stereotype formation based
on the representativeness heuristic. Biased beliefs can also arise in a dynamic learning set-
ting when individuals either have incorrect models of how others evaluate workers (Bohren,
Imas, and Rosenberg, 2019) or have different updating rules that depend on group identity
(Albrecht, Von Essen, Parys, and Szech, 2013). Second, inaccurate beliefs may simply be
due to a lack of information. A completely rational actor may lack the relevant information
necessary to form correct beliefs. For example, an employer may have an unbiased prior
belief about the average productivity of individuals from two different social groups, but be
unaware that there is positive selection into the job application process for members of one
group. This employer will be less likely to hire members of a particular group because she
has an inaccurate belief about productivity differences due to a lack of information about
the selection process.
     Regardless of their source, inaccurate beliefs have been shown to exist in a variety of
important domains, including the value of human capital formation (Jensen, 2010), the
prevalence of affirmative action (Kravitz and Platania, 1993), and the extent of wealth in-
equality in the US (Norton and Ariely, 2011). Learning will mitigate inaccurate beliefs in
some settings. But in other situations, there will be little or no feedback on the decisions
being made, leading to learning traps in which inaccurate beliefs persist. Inaccurate beliefs
may persist in the long run even when employers are perfectly Bayesian if, for example,
they face a trade off between learning about the productivity of groups through hiring or
maximizing cost-effectiveness (Lepage, 2020). Further, as shown theoretically by Gagnon-
Bartsch, Rabin, and Schwartzstein (2018), learning may not correct beliefs if information
is filtered through an incorrect model of the world. Moreover, besides affecting the level of
discrimination of the person holding them, inaccurate beliefs can have negative spillovers on
   1
     See for example, Jensen (2010) in the case of inaccurate beliefs about the returns to education, or
Bursztyn, González, and Yanagizawa-Drott (2018) in the case of inaccurate beliefs about the beliefs of
others, i.e. pluralistic ignorance

                                                   2
the discrimination of other evaluators if people learn from both signals and the actions of
others (Hübert and Little, 2020).
     To examine the extent to which inaccurate beliefs have been considered as a source of
discrimination, we conducted an in-depth review of the economics literature on discrimi-
nation, spanning ten journals and nearly three decades (1990-2018) of papers. Section 2
presents our findings. The vast majority of papers found evidence for discrimination (97.1%)
and a large plurality (61.9%) differentiated between taste-based versus statistical motives
when discussing its source. However, only a small proportion (10.5%) make the distinction
between accurate and inaccurate beliefs, and a smaller fraction still (6.7%) incorporates this
distinction into the analysis. These data highlight that the economics literature has typically
not considered inaccurate beliefs as a source of discrimination.
     Next, we formally demonstrate how the possibility of inaccurate beliefs generates an iden-
tification problem for attempts to isolate the source of discrimination. We also show that
failing to allow for mistaken beliefs can lead to a misclassification of belief-based discrimi-
nation as stemming from taste-based sources. We first distinguish between discrimination,
which is a property of behavior, and partiality which is a primitive of the model (i.e. pref-
erences and beliefs). In the context of the labor market, discrimination occurs when two
workers generate identical signals but are evaluated differently based on their group identity.
Partially refers to the source of this disparity based on model primitives: belief-based partial-
ity corresponds to evaluators having different beliefs about decision-relevant attributes (e.g.
productivity) depending on group identity, while preference-based partiality corresponds to
evaluators setting different hiring thresholds based on group identity. The former is typi-
cally referred to as taste-based discrimination or prejudice, while the latter is referred to as
statistical discrimination when beliefs about the distribution of the job-relevant factor are
correct. We expand the standard approach by considering both accurate belief-based partial-
ity (traditional statistical discrimination) and inaccurate belief-based partiality (inaccurate
statistical discrimination).
     To facilitate the analysis, we define isodiscrimination curves as the set of preferences
and beliefs that lead to equivalent discrimination. Similar to indifference curves in utility
theory, there is a collection of isodiscrimination curves that each correspond to a level of
discrimination on a given set of signals. Notably, it is readily apparent that the same level
of discrimination can stem from a continuum of preference and belief combinations. Isodis-
crimination curves provide a tractable way to examine what a given data set can and cannot
identify.


                                               3
    We first show that collecting data on evaluation decisions, e.g. hiring, as a function of
group identity and signals can be used to identify the isodiscrimination curve and rule out the
case of no discrimination. Consider the correspondence study method, which uses an exper-
imental technique where evaluators receive identical signals from people of different group
identities. Perhaps the most famous example is the resume study by Bertrand and Mul-
lainathan (2004), where experimenters sent out identical resumes to potential employees--
where the only thing that differed was whether the group identity associated with the ap-
plicant's name--and looked at call-back rates as a measure of discrimination. Depending
on the richness of the data, this technique can either identify an upper and lower bound
on the isodiscrimination curve or the specific isodiscrimination curve. However, even if the
latter case is possible, this method does not identify the source or even rule out any form
of partiality. Let belief and preference partiality (neutrality) refer to an evaluator whose be-
liefs or preferences differ (do not differ) by group identity. In the case of the correspondence
study method, for any evaluator with preference partiality and belief neutrality, there exists
a continuum of evaluators with belief-based partiality and lower (or no) preference-based
partiality that would exhibit the same level of observed discrimination. This includes belief-
based partiality about the mean of the relevant distribution, its variance, or the precision
of signals of the relevant characteristic. In turn, additional data is necessary to isolate the
source of discrimination.
    In some cases, researchers have access to not only the evaluation decisions, but also to
the underlying outcome distributions. In these cases, studies attempt to identify the source
of discrimination through a technique often referred to as an outcomes-based test, which
compares evaluation decisions to the true underlying distribution of the relevant characteris-
tics for these decisions. This technique has been used to identify the source of discrimination
in many domains, including lending, policing and bail decisions (Pope and Sydnor, 2011;
Knowles, Persico, and Todd, 2001; Arnold, Dobbie, and Yang, 2018). For example, a re-
searcher may compare differences in lending rates between two groups to differences in their
loan default rates. Under the commonly-made assumption of accurate beliefs, we show that
this technique isolates both the isodiscrimination curve and the exact source of discrim-
ination. However, identification depends critically on the assumption that evaluators have
accurate beliefs. Without this assumption, a continuum of preference and belief combinations
can generate equivalent discrimination regardless of the underlying outcome distribution. As
we formally demonstrate, the only case that can sometimes be ruled out with outcome data
is accurate statistical discrimination, i.e. an evaluator with accurate beliefs and preference


                                               4
neutrality.2
    Further, erroneously assuming that an evaluator has accurate beliefs when using the
outcomes-based method leads a researcher to mistakenly attribute the share of discrimina-
tion arising from inaccurate beliefs to preferences. Depending on whether the inaccurate
beliefs increase or decrease discrimination, the researcher will over- or underestimate the de-
gree to which an evaluator has preferences that favor one of the groups. As an example of this
identification issue, consider a study that measures productivity outcomes and finds evidence
for discrimination in the treatment of two groups. If the researcher observes that both groups
have identical distributions of productivity, she concludes that because accurate statistical
discrimination cannot cannot explain behavior, the source of the observed discrimination
must be preference-based. However, an alternative explanation is that evaluators have incor-
rect beliefs and use these beliefs to engage in inaccurate statistical discrimination. Without
further data, it is impossible to distinguish between preference channels and incorrect be-
liefs. Alternatively, consider a study where discrimination is documented and the underlying
distributions do differ. The study claims no evidence for prejudice as group differences can
explain differential treatment. As we show, any departures from correct beliefs imply that
prejudice does play a role in the observed discrimination.
    Finally, we outline what type of data can be used to overcome the identification problem.
One method, which we illustrate in Section 4, is to collect data on the subjective beliefs
of evaluators. Combined with observing the evaluation decisions and signals, this allows for
identification of preference and belief partiality. Data on the true outcome distributions is
required to determine whether beliefs are accurate. Another method is varying the preci-
sion of information by increasing the number of signal draws supplied to evaluators. We
demonstrate that this method can partially identify the source of discrimination: it identifies
the extent of preference-based partiality, but cannot distinguish between different forms of
belief-based partiality (i.e. differential means and variances of the relevant characteristic, or
differential signal precisions). Notably, this method requires multiple signals from the same
domain (e.g. number of positive reviews); if the multiple signals are from different domains
(e.g. SAT scores and education history), then the identification problem persists.
    We then use a stylized experimental setting to demonstrate the potential pitfalls of the
identification problem and propose a portable method of addressing it. Participants are

   2
      Other papers have highlighted identification challenges for outcomes-based tests, including the problem
of infra-marginality (Ayres, 2002; Simoiu, Corbett-Davies, and Goel, 2017), as well as issues related to relying
on administrative data that may condition on a post-treatment outcome (Knox, Lowe, and Mummolo, 2020).
We raise a complementary concern that remains even if these other issues are solved.

                                                       5
recruited to take part in a hiring experiment, where some are assigned the role of "worker"
and others the role of "employer". Workers begin the first stage of the experiment by answering
a series of questions. Employers are then shown profiles of 20 potential employees (workers
from the initial stage) and asked the maximum wage they would be willing to pay to hire
each. The profiles include a variety of worker-specific characteristics, such as their country of
origin (US vs. India), gender, and age, interspersed amongst other information such as their
beverage and movie preferences. Importantly, profiles do not include any information about
performance on the question task. One worker profile is then selected. If the offered wage
is above a randomly determined threshold, then the employer hires the worker--the worker
earns a bonus and the employer is paid proportional to how many questions the worker
answered correctly; if the offered wage is below the threshold, the worker is not hired.
    We find that employers discriminate based on worker characteristics. Americans and fe-
males receive systematically lower wage offers than Indians and males. We find no evidence
for age discrimination. According to the standard classification, the observed discrimina-
tion is generated by two potential sources. Employers may offer lower wages to American
and female workers because they believe that members of those groups answer fewer ques-
tions correctly on average than Indian and male workers. Because they lack information on
the productivity of any given worker, employers use these group statistics to inform their
compensation decisions. Alternatively, employers may have animus towards members of the
discriminated group and offer them lower wages because they do not want to reward them.
    As discussed above, outcomes-based tests are often used to distinguish between statisti-
cal and taste-based discrimination by comparing the distributions of compensation decisions
to the "ground truth"--the true distributions of performance across groups. If the differ-
ence in the group-specific performance distributions is similar to the difference in wages,
then this is used as evidence that evaluators are statistically discriminating, i.e. they have
belief-based partiality. Otherwise, discrimination is categorized as preference based. Our ex-
periment allows us to measure the "ground truth" by comparing the number of questions
answered correctly across the various groups. We find that Americans and Indians perform
equally well on the task, while females perform less well than males. Under the assumption
of accurate beliefs, we would conclude that the source of discrimination against Americans is
preference based. Further, because the level of discrimination against women is substantially
smaller than the actual gap in performance, this approach would conclude that there was
preference based discrimination against men.
    However, an alternative explanation is that individuals have no preference-based motives


                                               6
towards or against a particular group, but rather have inaccurate beliefs about the respective
performance distributions. To identify this channel, we elicited the beliefs of employers and
compared them to the "ground truth" distributions. Consistent with inaccurate statistical
discrimination, employers mistakenly predicted that American workers perform much worse
than their Indian counterparts, and that female workers only slightly underperform relative
to males. Accounting for these inaccurate beliefs substantially changes the inferred source of
discrimination. What was originally classified as preference-based discrimination in favor of
Indians is mostly explained by mistaken beliefs--if anything, the preference-based channel
goes against Indian workers. Similarly, a large portion of the gender gap in wages can be
explained by inaccurate statistical discrimination.
    The line between inaccurate beliefs and animus may sometimes be blurry. For example,
individuals may develop inaccurate beliefs because they have animus against members of
a particular group. We propose that these channels are separately identifiable through the
provision of information. Specifically, if agents are provided with credible information on the
relevant distributions, those with inaccurate beliefs should adjust their behavior accordingly.
However, if mistaken beliefs merely mask an underlying animus, then agents are unlikely to
change their behavior in response.
    We implement this method in our experiment by providing employers with information
on average performance by gender, nationality, and age. After receiving this information,
participants were asked to make wage offers to 10 additional workers. We find that employ-
ers significantly changed their wage offers in the direction consistent with correcting their
inaccurate beliefs. This methodology is portable outside of our stylized experimental setting
as a way to identify animus-driven inaccurate beliefs.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the economics literature
on discrimination, demonstrating that very few papers consider mistaken beliefs when at-
tempting to isolate its source. Section 3 formally outlines how a failure to account for the
possibility of inaccurate beliefs leads to an identification problem. Section 4 illustrates a
potential methodology for overcoming this identification problem through a stylized experi-
ment. Section 5 concludes.

2   Survey of the Literature
We conducted a systematic survey of the economics literature on discrimination in order to
determine: (1) how often papers seek to distinguish between taste-based and belief-based
(statistical) sources of discrimination; (2) how often papers seek to distinguish between ac-


                                              7
curate and inaccurate beliefs for belief-based sources of discrimination. Table 1 tabulates
the 105 papers published in 10 top economics journals between 1990 and 2018 that test
for evidence of discrimination. Most papers that met our inclusion criteria (outlined below)
found evidence of discrimination: 102 out of 105 papers, or 97.1% documented evidence for
discrimination against at least one group that was considered in the paper. The majority
of papers (61.9%) discussed the source of discrimination as being driven by either prefer-
ences (taste-based) or beliefs (statistical), and nearly half of the papers (46.7%) attempted
to distinguish between these two sources through a formal test. However, very few papers
even discussed the possibility that beliefs may be inaccurate (10.5%), and fewer still ex-
amined whether beliefs were accurate or inaccurate (6.7%).3 Despite the lack of discussion
and explicit tests, we would argue that inaccurate statistical discrimination is a reasonable
alternative to the interpretation chosen by the authors in nearly all of these cases.
    We classified papers as "discuss taste-based versus statistical source" if preference versus
belief-based motives for the documented discrimination were discussed in the text, and as
"test for taste-based versus statistical source" if the paper either explicitly tested between
different models of preference versus belief-based discrimination or implicitly tested the pre-
dictions of a belief-based model while taking the taste-based model as the null hypothesis.
If a paper mentioned inaccurate or biased beliefs as a potential source of discrimination, it
was classified as "discuss accurate versus inaccurate beliefs." Papers that tested whether in-
accurate beliefs could be driving discrimination, either by directly eliciting beliefs or through
other tests, were classified as "test for inaccurate beliefs." Finally, papers that elicited beliefs
were classified as "measure beliefs." Three of the seven papers in this category did not test
whether these elicited beliefs were accurate.
    Method. In this section, we outline the method that we used to determine which papers
to include in the survey and the data that we collected for each paper.
    Inclusion Criteria. We focused on empirical papers published between 1990 and 2018 in
the following journals: American Economic Journal: Applied, American Economic Journal:
Policy, American Economic Review (excluding the Papers & Proceedings issue), Economet-
rica, Journal of the European Economic Association, Journal of Labor Economics, Journal
of Political Economy, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, Review of Economic Studies, and

   3
     The papers that tested for inaccurate beliefs include List (2004); Hedegaard and Tyran (2018); Mobius
and Rosenblat (2006); Fershtman and Gneezy (2001); Arnold et al. (2018); Agan and Starr (2017). Beaman,
Chattopadhyay, Duflo, Pande, and Topalova (2009) use the Implicit Association Test (IAT) to elicit a `taste'
against female politicians, though the authors also interpret IAT scores as a measure of implicit beliefs. We
include this paper on the list as well.

                                                     8
                    Table 1. Summary of Literature Review on Discrimination

                                                     All: 1990 - 2018       Recent: 2014 - 2018
                                                     # Papers % Total       # Papers   % Total
   Papers meeting inclusion criteria                     105      100.0%       31         100.0%
   Evidence of discrimination                            102       97.1%       31         100.0%
   Discuss taste-based versus statistical source         65       61.9%        23         74.2%
   Test for taste-based versus statistical source        49       46.7%        16         51.6%
   Discuss accurate versus inaccurate beliefs            11       10.5%         5         16.1%
   Test for inaccurate beliefs                            7        6.7%        3           9.7%
   Measure beliefs                                        7        6.7%         3          9.7%



Review of Economics and Statistics. We acknowledge that the economics literature on dis-
crimination includes important contributions from other journals. We restricted attention to
these ten journals as a representative sample in order for the scope of the survey to include
a manageable number of papers.
    We proceeded in two steps to determine whether to include a paper published in the
relevant time frame and journals. First, in each journal, we searched for all empirical papers
that had at least one of the following search terms in the title:

        {discrimination, prejudice, bias, biases, biased, disparity, disparities, stereotype,
                                     stereotypes, premium}

or at least one of the following search terms in the abstract:

                                      {discrimination, prejudice}

or at least one of the search terms from each of the following lists in the abstract:

                        {racial, race, gender, sex, ethnic, religious, beauty}
                                                  and
                     {bias, biased, disparity, stereotype, stereotypes, premium}.

Second, we restricted attention to papers that attempted to causally document differential
treatment of individuals based on their group identity. This eliminated papers on unrelated
topics, including the industrial organization literature on price discrimination, the financial
literature on the risk premium, theoretical models, and the experimental literature that
documents behavioral differences such as gender differences in risk preferences.4
   4
       We also excluded some papers that met our objective criteria but which we viewed as not relevant to

                                                     9
                           Table 2. Publications by Journal and Decade

                                                     Number of Papers
                                        1990-99      2000-09 2010-2018          Total
                       AEJ: Applied          0           1             7           8
                       AEJ: Policy           0           0            2            2
                       AER                   4           7            6           17
                       EMA                   0           0             0           0
                       JEEA                  0           1             1           2
                       JLE                   2           8            12          22
                       JPE                   2           6             1           9
                       ReStud                1           2             3           6
                       ReStat                5           6            11          22
                       QJE                   4           4            9           17
                       Total                18          35            52         105



    Data Collection. For each paper that met our inclusion criteria, we recorded the following
information: data source (laboratory experiment, field experiment, audit/correspondence
study, observational data study, other), empirical method (reduced form analysis, structural
analysis), group identity of interest (race, gender, ethnicity, religion, sexuality, class/income,
other), domain of study (labor market, legal, education, financial, consumer purchases--non-
financial, evaluations, other), measure of discrimination (i.e. difference in call back rates),
whether the paper distinguishes between taste-based and statistical discrimination, whether
the paper distinguishes between accurate and inaccurate statistical discrimination, whether
discrimination was documented, whether the study identified the source of discrimination,
and whether the study measured beliefs about an individual's predicted attribute by group
identity.
    Summary Statistics. We found 105 papers that met our inclusion criteria. Table 2 lists
the number of papers broken down by journal and decade of publication. The full list of
papers is included in the Online Appendix. Out of the papers surveyed, 11 conducted audit
or correspondence studies, 7 conducted another type of field experiment, 3 conducted a
laboratory experiment and 84 analyzed observational data.
    Discrimination was studied for a variety of group identities and in a variety of domains.

the spirit of the exercise. More specifically, we excluded papers that could not be classified as either a "Yes"
or "No" for the criteria outlined in Table 1. For example, Gneezy, Niederle, and Rustichini (2003) examine
behavioral differences between men and women but do not study discrimination per se. Similarly, Cameron
and Heckman (2001) examine the extent to which the racial and ethnic gap in college attendance can be
explained by long-run versus short-run factors but do not address discrimination.

                                                      10
                       Table 3. Type and Domain of Discrimination

                                          All Papers Evidence of Discrimination
                                           # Papers  # Papers       % Total
       Group Identity
       Race                                   58          56            96.6%
       Gender                                 37          35            94.6%
       Ethnicity                               6           6            100.0%
       Religion                                1           1            100.0%
       Sexuality                               1           1            100.0%
       Class/Income                            1           1            100.0%
       Physical Traits / Appearance            7           7            100.0%
       Other                                   5           5            100.0%

       Domain
       Labor Market                           58          57            98.3%
       Legal                                  12          12            100.0%
       Education                               9           9            100.0%
       Financial                               5           4             80.0%
       Consumer Markets (not financial)        6           6            100.0%
       Other                                  17          16             94.1%


The most frequent group identities were race (58 papers) and gender (37 papers), followed
by physical traits / appearance (7 papers) and ethnicity (6 papers). The most frequent
domain was labor markets (58 papers), followed by legal contexts (12 papers), education (9
papers), non-financial consumer markets (6 papers) and financial markets (5 papers). Table 3
summarizes the papers by group identity and domain. Some papers in the survey studied
multiple group identities or domains; therefore, some papers are counted in multiple rows of
the table.

3   A Model of Discrimination with Inaccurate Beliefs
In this section, we develop a general model of discrimination with inaccurate beliefs. An eval-
uator learns about a worker's productivity from group identity and a signal, then decides
whether to hire the worker. Inaccurate beliefs refer to the possibility that the evaluator mis-
perceives key population statistics, including how the productivity and signal distributions
vary by group. We show that an identification problem arises when seeking to determine the
source of discrimination: namely, many different combinations of evaluator preferences and
beliefs lead to the same patterns of discrimination. Further, we show that maintaining the
assumption of accurate beliefs when it does not hold can lead a researcher to mistakenly


                                              11
classify discrimination as arising from preferences when it is actually driven by beliefs. Fi-
nally, we demonstrate that two methods ­ eliciting beliefs and manipulating information ­
can at least partially separate whether discrimination stems from preferences or beliefs.

3.1     Set-up
Worker. Consider a worker who has observable group identity g  {M, F } and unobserv-
able productivity a drawn from normal distribution N (µg , 1/g ), with mean µg  R and
concentration g > 0. The worker completes a task, such as an interview or test, that gener-
ates a signal of productivity s = a + , where  N (0, 1/g ) with precision g > 0. Without
loss of generality, we focus on discrimination against workers from group F .
Evaluator. An evaluator decides whether to hire the worker, v  {0, 1} where 1 corre-
sponds to hire and 0 corresponds to do not hire. Before making this decision, the evaluator
observes the worker's group identity g and signal s. The evaluator holds subjective beliefs
^g  R and 
µ             ^g > 0 about the mean and concentration of productivity for group g , and sub-
jective belief ^g > 0 about the precision of the signal for group g . We allow for the possibility
that the evaluator has a misspecified model of the signal or productivity distribution, in that
her subjective distributions differ from the true distributions.5
    Given these subjective distributions, the evaluator uses Bayes rule to update her belief
about the worker's productivity. She hires the worker if her subjective posterior belief about
expected productivity is above a group-specific hiring threshold ug  R. This hiring threshold
is a reduced form representation of how the evaluator's payoff depends on productivity and
group identity.6 We refer to the evaluator's preferences as represented by hiring threshold ug
and subjective beliefs (^
                        µg , ^g , ^g ) for each group g  {M, F } as her type, denoted by . Given
type , let v (s, g, )  1{E    ^ [a|s, g ]  ug } denote the optimal hiring decision for a worker
from group g who generates signal s, where E        ^ denotes the expectation taken with respect
to type 's subjective beliefs.



    5
      An additional form of misspecification that we do not discuss is the possibility that an evaluator believes
that the mean of the signal differs by group identity. For example, all signals for group F are inflated by a
constant b > 0 i.e. s = a + b + , and therefore, the evaluator discounts a signal to s - b for group F .
    6
      The microfoundation for this reduced form is as follows. If the evaluator hires the worker, she earns a
payoff that is linear in productivity and also depends on group identity, mg a + bg , where mg > 0 is a group-
specific marginal value of productivity and bg  R is a group-specific taste parameter. If she does not hire
the worker, she earns outside option u. The evaluator maximizes her expected payoff. She hires the worker
if and only if E^ [mg a + bg |s, g ] > u, or E
                                             ^ [a|s, g ] > (u - bg )/mg  ug , where E
                                                                                    ^ denotes the expectation with
respect to the evaluator's subjective beliefs. Therefore, ug is a reduced form representation of the evaluator's
payoff.

                                                       12
Discrimination. The causal effect of group identity on hiring is captured by the difference
between the hiring decision for a worker from group M versus F , holding fixed the signal of
productivity. Let D(s, )  v (s, M, ) - v (s, F, ) denote the difference between the hiring
decision an evaluator of type  makes for members of group M and F after observing signal
s. Discrimination occurs when two workers who generate identical signals are evaluated
differently based on their group identity, D(s, ) = 0; it occurs against group F if D(s, ) > 0
and against group M if D(s, ) < 0. We say that discrimination exists if there is an s such
that D(s, ) = 0 and there is no discrimination if D(s, ) = 0 for all s  R. We are interested
in when different sets of beliefs and preferences give rise to the same discriminatory behavior,
which we refer to as equivalent discrimination.
Definition 1 (Equivalent Discrimination). Two evaluators of types  and  exhibit equiv-
alent discrimination if D(s, ) = D(s,  ) for all s  R.
Partiality. We next categorize different forms of preferences and beliefs. We use the term
partiality to refer to properties of these model primitives in order to distinguish them from
discrimination, which is a property of behavior and a consequence of said primitives. An
evaluator with preference partiality against group F sets a higher threshold for hiring workers
from group F relative to workers from group M . This leads her to make different hiring
decisions even if she has the same belief about the productivity of a worker from each group.
Definition 2 (Preference Partiality). An evaluator has preference partiality if uF = uM
and preference neutrality if uF = uM .
An evaluator with belief partiality has different subjective posterior distributions of produc-
tivity for each group. This difference can stem from differential beliefs about average produc-
tivity, the concentration of productivity, the signal precision, or a combination thereof. Belief
partiality is inaccurate if the subjective beliefs differ from the true distribution parameters.
Definition 3 (Belief Partiality). An evaluator has belief partiality if (^          µF , ^F , ^F ) = (^
                                                                                                      µM , ^M , ^M )
and belief neutrality if (^    µF , ^F , ^F ) = (^
                                                 µM , ^M , ^M ). This belief partiality stems from (i) lower
expected productivity if µ     ^F < µ   ^M ; (ii) lower (higher) concentration if      ^F <    ^M ( ^F >  ^M );
and (iii) lower (higher) signal precision if          ^F <   ^M ( ^F >   ^M ). Belief partiality is accurate
if (^
    µg , ^g , ^g ) = (µg , g , g ) for g  {M, F } and otherwise is inaccurate.
Using this terminology, what the literature often refers to as taste-based discrimination
corresponds to differential treatment stemming from preference partiality, while what is
often referred to as statistical discrimination corresponds to differential treatment stemming
from belief partiality.

                                                      13
Markets. Adopting terminology from Bartos, Bauer, Chytilová, and Matjka (2016), we
define several types of markets relevant for our analysis. An evaluator believes the market
is lemon-dropping for a group if the hiring threshold is low relative to perceived average
productivity, ug < µ^g . In this case, the evaluator wants to hire a worker from group g in the
absence of a signal. The evaluator believes the market is cherry-picking for a group if the
hiring threshold is high relative to average productivity, µ^g < ug . In this case, the evaluator
does not want to hire a worker from group g in the absence of a signal. A market is mixed
if the evaluator believes it is cherry-picking for one group and lemon-dropping for the other
group.
Discussion of Model. We focus on binary evaluations for a population of workers with
normally distributed productivity and signals. These assumptions are for tractability: the
simple set-up allows us to illustrate how inaccurate beliefs impact discrimination in a clear,
focused way. Our main insights are conceptually robust, in that they will also arise for other
forms of evaluations ­ for example, when a worker receives a wage offer or a rating selected
from an interval ­ and for other distributions of population characteristics or signals.

3.2   Equivalent Discrimination and Isodiscrimination Curves
We first derive the sets of beliefs and preferences that give rise to equivalent discrimination.
Given signal s and group identity g , the evaluator's posterior belief about productivity is
normally distributed with mean µ    ^g (s, )  (^
                                               g µ
                                                 ^g + ^g s)/(^
                                                             g +   ^g ) and variance 1/(^
                                                                                        g + ^g ).
Since the posterior mean is monotonic with respect to s, the optimal hiring decision can be
represented as a cut-off rule with respect to the signal.

Lemma 1 (Hiring Signal Threshold). A type  evaluator hires a worker from group g ,
v (s, g, ) = 1, if and only if the worker generates a signal

                                              ^g +  ^g          ^g
                             s  s(, g )                  ug -      µ
                                                                   ^g .                      (1)
                                                 ^g             ^g

The signal required to hire a worker is increasing in the evaluator's group-specific hiring
threshold and decreasing in the prior belief about average productivity. In a cherry-picking
market, this signal is increasing in the concentration of productivity ­ intuitively, concen-
tration of productivity is undesirable when the evaluator is trying to select workers in the
top tail of the distribution. In contrast, it is decreasing in the signal precision ­ a precise
signal is beneficial to the worker when the evaluator would not hire a worker in the absence
of a signal. These comparative statics reverse in a lemon-dropping market: concentration of


                                               14
productivity is desirable ­ thereby lowering the bar ­ when the evaluator is trying to avoid
workers in the bottom tail of the distribution and a precise signal is detrimental to the worker
­ raising the bar ­ when the evaluator would hire a worker in the absence of a signal.
    From Lemma 1, an evaluator of type  exhibits discrimination against group F if she
sets a higher signal threshold for group F , s(, F ) > s(, M ). When this is the case, dis-
crimination occurs on the interval of signals that lie between the two hiring thresholds,
s  [s(, M ), s(, F )). Therefore, if two types discriminate, then they exhibit equivalent dis-
crimination when they have preferences and beliefs that lead to the same signal thresholds
for each group. We use this observation and Eq. (1) to characterize isodiscrimination curves
­ that is, the sets of preferences and beliefs that lead to equivalent discrimination.

Proposition 1 (Equivalent Discrimination). For any constants (sM , sF )  R2 with sM = sF ,
equivalent discrimination occurs for the set of types that have signal threshold sM for group
M and sF for group F ,
                                                                                             
                                                                 ^M +  ^M       ^M
                                                                          uM -      µ
                                                                                    ^ M = sM 
                                                                    ^M          ^M
                                                                                             
   Isodiscrimination Curve =       (ug , µ
                                         ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F }                                ,   (2)
                                                                   ^F +  ^F      ^F
                                                                            uF - µ  ^ F = sF 
                                                                                             
                                
                                                                      ^F         ^F

while the isodiscrimination curve corresponding to no discrimination is characterized by the
set of types that satisfy Eq. (2) for each sM = sF .

Similar to indifference curves in utility theory, there are a collection of isodiscrimination
curves, each one corresponding to a different level of discrimination.
    Fig. 1 illustrates isodiscrimination curves in two-dimensions. Each curve plots the set of
preferences and perceived average productivities for group F that lead to a given level of dis-
crimination, holding fixed the other parameters. As illustrated in the figure, there are a con-
tinuum of evaluator types that exhibit equivalent discrimination. For example, an evaluator
with mild preference partiality and extreme belief partiality will exhibit equivalent discrim-
ination to an evaluator with more extreme preference partiality and mild belief partiality.
The red line traces out the isodiscrimination curve of no discrimination. Isodiscrimination
curves above this line correspond to discrimination against group F , while isodiscrimination
curves below this line correspond to discrimination against group M . Moving northwest from
the line of no discrimination, i.e. increasing the hiring threshold and decreasing perceived
average productivity, results in discrimination on a larger set of signals. The blue dotted line
traces out preference neutrality (i.e. uF = uM ) and the green dotted line traces out belief

                                                  15
                             Figure 1. Isodiscrimination Curves
                      (uM , µ
                            ^M , ^M , ^M ) = (6, 5, .5, 2), (^
                                                             F , ^F ) = (.5, 2)


neutrality (i.e. µ
                 ^F = µ ^M ). The quadrant above and to the left of these lines corresponds to
the region in which there is preference and belief partiality against group F , the quadrant
below and to the left corresponds to the region in which there is belief partiality against
group F and preference partiality in favor of group F , while the opposite holds for the quad-
rant above and to the right. As can be seen in the figure, a given level of discrimination can
stem from both a higher hiring threshold and lower perceived average productivity for group
F , lower perceived average productivity that is somewhat offset by a more favorable hiring
threshold, or vice versa. Finally, the quadrant below and to the right of the neutrality lines
corresponds to the region in which there is preference and belief partiality against group M .
In this region, it is not possible for there to be discrimination against group F .

3.3   Identifying Discrimination.
We next explore which model primitives are identified in common empirical designs used
to study discrimination. To this end, a property of the model is identified if there exists


                                                 16
an injective relationship between the observed data and the property (Haavelmo, 1944).
Informally, this means that the property of interest can be backed out from available data.
Throughout this section, we assume that at the minimum, a researcher observes the group
identity g and hiring decision v for each worker.
Existence and Isodiscrimination Curves. Establishing the existence of discrimination
against group F corresponds to showing that there exists an s such that D(s, ) > 0. If the
researcher also observes the signal s for each worker, then it is straightforward to identify
existence by comparing the hiring decisions for each group across a sufficiently rich set
of workers to ensure that the data includes signals in the interval where discrimination
occurs. In practice, this direct method is generally not possible. An alternative method is a
correspondence study, which randomly assigns group identity and signals to a set of fictitious
workers, then elicits hiring decisions (for example, the classic resume study of Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2004)).7 This ensures that workers from each group in the fictitious
sample have the same distribution over signals, and therefore, any differences in hiring can
be causally attributed to group identity. Provided there is a sufficiently rich set of signals so
that there is at least one signal s  [s(, M ), s(, F )), this method identifies the existence of
discrimination.8 A correspondence study can also identify D(s, ) if it is possible to create
fictitious workers who are identical aside from assigned group identity. In this case, if hiring
decisions are observed for a sufficiently rich set of signals for each group, then the signal
thresholds, and therefore, the isodiscrimination curve, are identified.

Observation 1 (Identifying Isodiscrimination Curve). Observing v , g , and s for a contin-
uum of workers in each group with signals in an interval that includes the signal thresholds
identifies the isodiscrimination curve.

Otherwise, an upper and lower bound for the signal thresholds, and therefore, a set of
isodiscrimination curves, are identified.
Source of Discrimination. While the direct or correspondence study methods are ef-
fective for identifying the existence of discrimination and the isodiscrimination curve, re-
searchers are often interested in identifying the source of discrimination i.e. the form of
partiality that generates the observed discriminatory behavior. It is well known that cor-
   7
      An audit study uses a similar randomized procedure to identify discrimination. Here, experimental
confederates with different group identities interact with evaluators while following the same script. Different
treatment of the confederates based on group identity is classified as discrimination.
    8
      Note that failing to identify the existence of discrimination on a subset of the signal space does not
establish that there is no discrimination, i.e. D(s, ) = 0 for all s.

                                                      17
respondence studies cannot distinguish between discrimination stemming from preference
partiality and accurate belief partiality (see for example Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004) ­
and similarly, neither can the direct method. The same insight extends to inaccurate belief
partiality.
    To formalize this insight, we show that for any evaluator type, there exist evaluator types
with a single category of preference or belief partiality that exhibit equivalent discrimination.
This establishes that each form of partiality in isolation can generate a given pattern of
discrimination ­ in other words, each isodiscrimination curve intersects the lines of preference
neutrality and each form of belief neutrality. Therefore, identifying the isodiscrimination
curve does not identify the source of discrimination or even rule out any of the potential
sources.

Proposition 2 (Equivalent Sources). For any type  = (ug , µ     ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } that discrimi-
nates against group F , there are a continuum of types that exhibit equivalent discrimination,
including:
1. A type  with preference partiality against group F and belief neutrality, uF > uM and
    µF , 
   (^    ^F , ^F ) = (^µM , ^M , ^M );
2. A type  with preference neutrality and belief partiality due to lower expected productiv-
   ity, µ
        ^F < µ  ^M and (uF ,    ^F , ^F ) = (uM , ^M , ^M );
3. A type  that believes the market is cherry-picking (lemon-dropping) and has preference
   neutrality and belief partiality due to higher (lower) concentration of productivity,       ^F >
   ^M (  ^F <   ^M ) and (uF , µ ^F , ^F ) = (uM , µ
                                                   ^M , ^M );
4. A type  that believes the market is cherry-picking (lemon-dropping) and has preference
   neutrality and belief partiality due to lower (higher) signal precision,    ^F <   ^M (^F >  ^M )
   and (uF , µ ^F , ^F ) = (uM , µ^M , ^M ).

    Given a level of discrimination against group F , a higher preference parameter for group
F than group M or a lower perceived average productivity generates the observed discrimina-
tion. In the cases of perceived concentration of productivity or signal precision, the direction
of partiality that leads to discrimination against group F depends on the type of market:
a higher perceived concentration of productivity or lower signal precision generate discrim-
ination in a cherry-picking market, while the opposite holds in a lemon-dropping market.
This stems from the comparative static for the parameter of interest in Eq. (1): as discussed
following Lemma 1, how these parameters impact the signal thresholds, and therefore, the
level of discrimination, depends on the type of market.


                                                18
           (a) Preference + perceived average           (b) Preference + perceived concentration
           productivity pairs; (^
                                F , ^F ) = (.5, 2)         of productivity pairs; (^
                                                                                   µF , ^F ) = (5, 2)




                                    (c) Preference + perceived signal
                                     precision pairs; (^
                                                       µF , ^F ) = (5, .5)

                                   Figure 2. Equivalent Sources
            Isodiscrimination curve (sM , sF ) = (6.25, 6.75); (uM , µ
                                                                     ^M , ^M , ^M ) = (6, 5, .5, 2)


    Fig. 2 illustrates each evaluator type constructed in Proposition 2. Fixing an evaluator
type that results in signal cut-offs sM = 6.25 and sF = 6.75, the first panel illustrates the
continuum of preference parameters and perceived average productivity for group F that
exhibit equivalent discrimination. This includes the type with belief neutrality described in
part (i), denoted by the asterisk where the isodiscrimination curve intersects the dotted line
of belief neutrality, and the type with preference neutrality described in part (ii), denoted


                                                      19
by the asterisk where the isodiscrimination curve intersects the dotted line of preference
neutrality. The second panel repeats this exercise for the continuum of preference parameters
and perceived concentrations of productivity, illustrating the types described in parts (i) and
(iii), while the third panel does so for the continuum of preference parameters and perceived
signal precisions, illustrating the types described in parts (i) and (iv).
     Given Proposition 2, we see that even if it is possible to identify the isodiscrimination
curve, it is not possible to identify the source of discrimination, or even rule out some of the
potential sources.

Corollary 1. Identifying the isodiscrimination curve does not rule out preference partiality
or belief partiality due to differential perceived average productivity, concentration of produc-
tivity, or signal precisions.

Therefore, additional data is necessary in order to separate these sources.
    Outcomes-based Test. A common method to identify the source of discrimination is to
compare evaluations to the outcome distribution for each group. In the current framework,
this corresponds to comparing hiring decisions to the productivity and signal distributions.
We next show that this method crucially relies on the assumption of accurate beliefs: when
one allows for the possibility of inaccurate beliefs, the source can no longer be identified.
    When implementing an outcomes-based test, the literature typically assumes accurate
beliefs. Under this assumption, observing differential treatment and identical distributions
implies preference partiality, whereas observing different distributions suggests (accurate)
belief partiality (potentially coupled with preference partiality). In either case, the evaluator's
type is identified.

Observation 2 (Accurate Beliefs: Identification of Source). Assume an evaluator has ac-
curate beliefs and suppose a researcher can identify the isodiscrimination curve, i.e. from
observing v , g , and s. Observing (µg , g , g ) for g  {M, F } identifies the evaluator's type,
and therefore, the exact source(s) of discrimination.

Fig. 3 illustrates how the assumption of accurate beliefs identifies the evaluator's type ­
specifically, the unique preference parameter that is consistent with the observed isodiscrim-
ination curve. In this example, observing the productivity and signal distributions identifies
uF = 6.3 and uM = 6. Given µF = 4.5 and µM = 5, the evaluator has both preference
partiality and accurate belief partiality.
   Identification crucially depends on the assumption that beliefs are accurate. When beliefs
may be inaccurate, then observing the productivity and signal distributions does not allow

                                                20
                                     Figure 3. Outcomes-based Test
       Isodiscrimination curve (sM , sF ) = (6.25, 6.75); true distributions (µM , M , M ) = (5, .5, 2),
     (µF , F , F ) = (4.5, .5, 2); (uM , µ
                                         ^M , ^M , ^M ) = (6, 5, .5, 2); blue dotted line: preference neutrality
     (uF = uM ); green dotted line: belief neutrality (µ    ^F = µ  ^M ); black dotted line: no discrimination.


a researcher to separate preference partiality from inaccurate belief partiality. Specifically,
when the distributions are the same, differential treatment could be due to preferences,
inaccurate beliefs, or a combination of the two. Similarly, when the distributions differ,
differential treatment could stem from accurate beliefs or inaccurate beliefs coupled with
preference partiality.

Observation 3 (Inaccurate Beliefs: An Identification Failure). Suppose a researcher can
identify the isodiscrimination curve, i.e. from observing v , g , and s. Observing (µg , g , g )
for g  {M, F } does not identify the evaluator's type.

In Fig. 3, any combination of preferences and beliefs on the isodiscrimination curve generate
equivalent discrimination, regardless of the true average productivity.
    Taken together, Observations 2 and 3 establish an important insight: erroneously assum-
ing that an evaluator has accurate beliefs leads a researcher to mistakenly attribute the share
of discrimination arising from inaccurate beliefs to preferences. To formalize this insight, we
first define how to isolate the component of discrimination that is due to inaccurate beliefs.

Definition 4. Given a type  with inaccurate beliefs, inaccurate beliefs increase (decrease)
discrimination against group F if, relative to type  with the same preferences as  and

                                                         21
accurate beliefs, s(, F )  () s( , F ) and s(, M )  () s( , M ), with one inequality
strict.
In other words, when inaccurate beliefs increase discrimination, type  discriminates against
group F on a strictly larger set of signals than the type with the same preferences and
accurate beliefs, whereas when inaccurate beliefs decrease discrimination, type  discrimi-
nates against group F on a strictly smaller set of signals. Our next result establishes that
mistakenly assuming accurate beliefs leads to misidentified preferences. Further, depend-
ing on whether the inaccurate beliefs increase or decrease discrimination, the misidentified
parameters will over- or underestimate preference partiality.
Observation 4 (Misidentified Preferences). Suppose a researcher incorrectly assumes an
evaluator has accurate beliefs and uses the outcomes-based method to identify the evaluator's
type.
1. For a generic set of types and true distributions, the researcher misidentifies preferences.
2. If inaccurate beliefs increase discrimination against group F , then the researcher over-
   estimates the evaluator's preference partiality against group F , while if inaccurate beliefs
   decrease discrimination, then the researcher underestimates preference partiality.
In Fig. 3, if the evaluator believes that the average productivity for group F is µ^F = 3 when
in fact it is µF = 4.5, then incorrectly imposing accurate beliefs will attribute discrimination
stemming from this inaccurate belief to preference partiality, uF = 6.3 > uM = 6, when in
actuality, the evaluator has preference neutrality, uF = uM = 6. In contrast, if the evaluator
believes that the average productivity is the same for both groups, µ    ^F = µ^M = 5 when in
fact µF = 4.5, then imposing accurate beliefs will lead the researcher to underestimate the
evaluator's preference partiality against group F , concluding uF = 6.3 when in fact it is
equal to 6.4.
    Next, we establish one source of discrimination that the outcomes-based method can
potentially rule out. Accurate statistical discrimination ­ that is, discrimination stemming
from accurate belief partiality and preference neutrality ­ is of particular interest because it
is often viewed as efficient from an informational perspective. In other words, if an evaluator
is applying differential treatment to groups when underlying differences do exist, then this
evaluator is simply engaging in profit-maximizing behavior. The outcomes-based method
can rule out accurate statistical discrimination by showing that the observed pattern of dis-
crimination is not consistent with accurate beliefs and preference neutrality. Ruling this out
establishes that the discrimination either stems from animus towards a group or inaccurate
beliefs about them.

                                              22
Observation 5 (Rejecting Accurate Statistical Discrimination). Suppose a researcher iden-
tifies the isodiscrimination curve with thresholds (sM , sF ) and observes (µg , g , g ) for g 
{M, F }. If M µ  M +M sM
                M +M
                         = F µF +F sF
                             F +F
                                      , the evaluator is not an accurate statistical discrimina-
tor.

In Fig. 3, the preferences and beliefs of an accurate statistical discriminator do not lie on the
isodiscrimination curve, and therefore, are not consistent with the observed level of discrim-
ination. Of course, when the observed pattern of discrimination is consistent with accurate
statistical discrimination, this does not identify the evaluator as an accurate statistical dis-
criminator: there are many other types that could also generate the observed behavior.
    Importantly, even if a combination of preference partiality and inaccurate belief partial-
ity is observationally equivalent to accurate statistical discrimination for the current hiring
decision, inaccurate beliefs are not necessarily innocuous. These inaccurate beliefs may neg-
atively affect the worker in future performance evaluations and promotions. For example,
suppose an evaluator has beliefs that exaggerate the true differences in productivity between
groups and preferences that somewhat favor the disadvantaged group through setting a lower
hiring threshold (uF < uM ) for entry-level positions. And suppose this yields equivalent dis-
crimination to the accurate statistical discrimination type. Then if the evaluator only feels
compelled to favor the disadvantaged group for entry-level hiring, these inaccurate beliefs
will lead to persistently lower rates of promotion and advancement.

    Given the difficulty of using the outcomes-based method to identify the source of dis-
crimination, we now explore two other possible methods: eliciting beliefs and manipulating
information.
   Eliciting Beliefs. If it is possible to collect data on the evaluator's subjective beliefs, then
comparing hiring decisions to these beliefs can identify the source of discrimination.

Observation 6 (Identifying Preferences from Beliefs). Suppose a researcher can identify the
isodiscrimination curve, i.e. from observing v , g , and s. Observing (^
                                                                       µg , ^g , ^g ) identifies ug ,
and therefore, the evaluator's type.

Importantly, observing subjective beliefs does not identify whether they are accurate ­ ad-
ditional data, such as outcomes, is necessary to determine whether beliefs are accurate.
    Manipulating Information. Another potential method to identify the source of discrimina-
tion is manipulating the amount of information presented to evaluators. We now demonstrate


                                                 23
how this method can be used to partially identify the source of discrimination. For exam-
ple, one could compare discrimination in a treatment in which only one customer review is
revealed to a treatment in which five customer reviews are revealed. In the current set-up,
suppose we can vary the number of draws of the signal that the evaluator observes for a
worker. If an evaluator believes that a single draw of the signal has precision   ^g , then she
believes that observing x draws of this signal has precision x^g . The characterization of the
optimal hiring rule and the isodiscrimination curves for x draws are identical to the case of
a single draw, substituting x^g for ^g .
    Given an evaluator of type , the following result characterizes the set of types that
exhibit equivalent discrimination to  across multiple informational treatments.

Proposition 3 (Equivalent Discrimination Across Informational Treatments). Suppose an
evaluator of type  = (ug , µ
                           ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } observes either x1  1 or x2 = x1 signal draws
for each worker. Then the set of types

                                                                ^g /^g
                              ^g , 
                      = (ug , µ    ^g ,             ^g = ug -
                                        ^g )g{M,F } µ                  (ug - µ
                                                                             ^g )                      (3)
                                                                ^g /^g

exhibit equivalent discrimination to  across both informational treatments. This set of types
also exhibit equivalent discrimination for any number x  1 of signal draws.

This result establishes that there is a unique level of preference partiality that yields equiv-
alent discrimination across multiple informational treatments. Therefore, manipulating the
number of signal draws can identify the level of preference partiality. However, it is not pos-
sible to identify the form of belief partiality: given the identified preference parameter ug
for each group and a type with beliefs (^   µg , ^g ,                              µg , 
                                                      ^g ), any type with beliefs (^    ^g , ^g ) such that
           ^g /^g
µg = u g - ^g /^g
                  (ug - µ
                        ^g ) for each group will exhibit equivalent discrimination. The following
observation summarizes this insight.

Observation 7 (Identifying Preferences from Manipulating Information). Suppose a re-
searcher identifies the isodiscrimination curves for at least two informational treatments.
This identifies the evaluator's preferences ug , but does not identify the evaluator's beliefs
(^
 µg , ^g , ^g ).

   Fig. 4 shows how it is possible to identify a unique preference parameter by varying
the number of signal draws. Only a type with preference parameter uF = 6.2 exhibits the
observed discrimination for both informational treatments. The other types on the isodis-
crimination curve for one draw exhibit equivalent discrimination to the type with uF = 6.2

                                                    24
                              Figure 4. Information Manipulation
                      Isodiscrimination curves for (uF , µ
                                                         ^F , ^F , ^F ) = (6.2, 4, .5, 1)


when there is a single draw. But these types do not exhibit equivalent discrimination to the
type with uF = 6.2 when there are two signal draws -- as these types do not lie on the isodis-
crimination curve for two draws. While it may look like the perceived average productivity
µ
^F = 4 is also identified, this is just the belief for a type  with perceived concentration
^F = .5 and signal precision   ^F = 1. There are other types with different values of (^   F , ^F )
that exhibit equivalent discrimination across all informational treatments, and these types
will have different values of µ
                              ^F (but the same preference uF = 6.2, of course, since the pref-
erence parameter is identified). For example, from Proposition 3, a type  with uF = 6.2,
F = .4, F = 1 and µ   ^F = 6.2 - ..4
                                   5/1
                                     /1
                                        (6.2 - 4) = 3.45 will exhibit equivalent discrimination to
 for any number of signal draws.
    A crucial feature of this information manipulation is that the multiple signals are drawn
from the same distribution. In other words, for each group, the evaluator has the same model
of the precision for each draw of the signal. This contrasts with an information manipulation
in which additional signals from other domains are included ­ for example, comparing dis-
crimination in a treatment in which education is revealed to a treatment in which education
and SAT score are revealed. In this case, the evaluator may have a different group-specific
model of the signal distribution for each type of signal ­ for example, the evaluator believes


                                                     25
that education is more informative for group M , while SAT score is more informative for
group F . It is not possible to identify the evaluator's preference partiality ­ or any other
aspect of her type ­ from varying the set of observed signals across different domains.

    Taken together, either the belief elicitation or information manipulation method can sep-
arate preference partiality from belief partiality. If it is possible to elicit an evaluator's beliefs
for all parameters of the relevant distributions, then it is possible to fully identify the evalu-
ator's type. In practice, this will be difficult in certain settings ­ both due to the complexity
and reliability of methods for eliciting beliefs about higher moments and due to the feasi-
bility of collecting such information (for example, it may not be possible to collect beliefs
in certain settings such as on an online platform). Therefore, the information manipulation
method provides an alternative, simpler way to identify preferences and "aggregate" belief
partiality ­ although it comes at the cost of not being able to separate the different ways
that beliefs can be inaccurate.

4     Identifying the Source
In this section, we employ a stylized experimental setting to demonstrate the pitfalls of the
identification problem posed by inaccurate beliefs--in particular, how assuming accurate be-
liefs can lead to erroneous conclusions--and propose a potential methodology to solve it. The
experiment allows us to perform the accounting exercise employed in outcomes-based tests
and to also elicit beliefs about relevant characteristics. We show that average beliefs are in-
correct, violating the accurate beliefs assumption typically made when considering statistical
discrimination, and that ignoring these inaccurate beliefs leads to a false identification of the
source of discrimination. We also demonstrate how informational interventions can be used
both to separate inaccurate beliefs from underlying animus and to correct these inaccurate
beliefs. Specifically, we inform individuals of the true group-specific average productivities.
Participants adjust their behavior significantly in the direction of the information, suggesting
that at least some of the observed discrimination is driven by inaccurate beliefs rather than
animus.

4.1    Experimental Design
In this section, we provide a short summary of the pre-registered experimental design; we
outline the design in detail in Appendix B. We recruited two samples of subjects on Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk (participants) to complete either a work task (Survey 1) or a hiring
task (Survey 2). In the first survey, we recruited 589 participants to create a population of


                                                 26
"workers" (392 from the US and 197 from India). These participants answered a set of demo-
graphic questions, followed by 50 multiple-choice math questions. They were told that their
performance would not affect their payment. This design provided for relatively continuous
and precise measures of productivity, and allowed us to study discrimination without using
deception.
    In the second survey, we recruited 577 different participants to create a population of
"employers" (392 from the US, 185 from India). These participants were told about the task
assigned to "workers" (they were shown five examples of the questions), that the average
score was 36.95 out of 50, and that they would serve as an "employer" who could poten-
tially hire one of the workers. The hiring task involved multiple stages. In the first stage,
each employer was shown 20 profiles of potential workers, randomly selected from the bank,
and made a wage offer for each worker. The profiles included demographic variables which
could be informative for forming beliefs about productivity (age, gender, and nationality),
or over which employers may hold taste-based motives, as well as potentially irrelevant in-
formation (favorite high school subject, sport, color, movie, and coffee/tea preference); see
Fig. B1 for an example. One of these workers was selected and their wage offer was accepted
or rejected according to the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak mechanism to incentivize truthful
reporting. Specifically, if the wage offer was larger than a randomly generated number, then
it was `accepted'--the employer paid the random number as a bonus to the selected worker
and the employer received 1 cent for each question answered correctly (in addition to a
$2 participation payment); if the wage offer was smaller than the random number, it was
`rejected'--the employer paid nothing and the worker did not receive a bonus.9
    In the second stage, we elicited employers' beliefs about the average productivity of
different groups (men/women, residents from the US/India, people above/below the median
age of 33), randomizing whether or not this was incentivized.10 The third stage involved
the informational intervention, which provided employers with average productivity data for
each of the six groups. The fourth stage involved a second set of hiring decisions for 10 worker
profiles, which was conducted in the same way as the first stage.


   9
     Employers saw examples of the mechanism and passed comprehension checks before making wage offers.
   10
     We only elicited beliefs about the first moment of the performance distribution. While participants may
also have inaccurate beliefs about other statistics, demonstrating a difference in perceived versus actual means
is sufficient to falsify the assumption that beliefs are correct, which was the primary goal of the illustrative
experiment. Eliciting other moments of the distribution, e.g. variance, is more complex for participants
relative to eliciting the mean. Given the multiple stages in the study, we sought to keep the belief elicitation
task as simple as possible in order to curtail potential confusion and minimize noise.

                                                      27
4.2    Experimental Results
A necessary prerequisite to study the source of discrimination is to find a context and a
population in which discrimination occurs. Ex-ante, it was not obvious that our stylized
hiring experiment would satisfy this requirement. The employers knew that they were being
observed as part of a research study and the relevant group information was represented
abstractly (e.g. written text) rather than viscerally (e.g. a picture). All of these factors may
attenuate the influence of animus.11
    Despite these attenuating factors, we did find evidence of discrimination with respect to
two out of three group identities: gender and nationality. Panel A of Table 4 presents the
differences in average wages paid by employers to worker profiles from each group. With
respect to gender, male profiles were paid on average 31.90 cents, while female profiles were
paid 30.85 cents, a significant 3.4% difference (p < 0.01). With respect to nationality, profiles
from India were favored, earning an average of 32.85 cents, while profiles from the U.S. earned
30.71 cents, a significant 7.0% difference (p < 0.01). Finally, there was modest evidence of
age discrimination: subjects at or below age 33 were paid an average of 31.67 cents and
those above age 33 were paid 31.14 cents, a 1.7% difference that is significant at the 5%
level (p = 0.02). To put these differences into context, we show a "placebo" comparison
for a profile characteristic that was unlikely to be either a target of taste-based motives or
a proxy for math ability: the worker's preference for tea versus coffee. We find a similar
level of discrimination to the level that we found for age, with tea drinkers earning a 1.7%
higher average wage (31.74 vs. 31.22 cents), significant at the 5% level (p = 0.03). Table C3
demonstrates that these results are robust to demographic controls and employer fixed effects.
    To examine the possibility of in-group bias, we run similar regressions controlling for
the employer belonging to the group of interest (e.g. female) and the interaction of the
two indicators to measure in-group bias (see Table C4). We find that the interaction is
insignificant for gender and marginally significant for nationality, although in the direction of
favoring the out-group. For age, we find a significant interaction effect. This suggests that the
null effect in Table 4 masks in-group bias by both older and younger employers. Antonovics
and Knight (2009) use a similar set of regressions to test for taste-based discrimination. This
specification is motivated by the assumption that animus varies between groups (i.e. there is
less animus toward one's in-group than out-group), but that beliefs are similar across groups
(since they are taking a "standard model of statistical discrimination" as the benchmark and

  11
     For example, Bar and Zussman (2019) argue that a lack of interaction may attenuate the extent of
taste-based discrimination in driving test examinations.

                                                 28
       Table 4. Wages and "Productivities", by Employee Characteristics (Hiring Task 1)

                                           Group 1     Group 2    Diff.   p-val   #Obs. G1 #Obs. G2
                                             (1)         (2)       (3)     (4)      (5)      (6)
  Panel A: Employers' Wage WTP, by Employee Characteristics
  Gender (1=Male, 2=Female)                31.90   30.85   1.05           0.00      6,306        5,234
                                          (12.07) (12.23)
  Country (1=US, 2=India)                  30.71   32.85  -2.14           0.00      7,700        3,840
                                          (12.20) (11.95)
  Age (1=Under 33, 2=Over 33)              31.67   31.14   0.54           0.02      6,139        5,401
                                          (12.00) (12.33)
  Placebo (1=Prefer Coffee, 2=Prefer Tea)  31.22   31.74  -0.52           0.03      7,075        4,465
                                          (12.32) (11.89)

  Panel B: Employee Productivity, by Employee Characteristics
  Gender (1=Male, 2=Female)               38.30  34.98    3.32            0.00      6,306        5,234
                                          (8.55) (8.73)
  Country (1=US, 2=India)                 37.01  36.36    0.65            0.00      7,700        3,840
                                          (8.93) (8.49)
  Age (1=Under 33, 2=Over 33)             36.96  36.60    0.37            0.03      6,139        5,401
                                          (8.62) (8.98)
  Placebo (1=Prefer Coffee, 2=Prefer Tea) 36.64  37.03   -0.40            0.02      7,075        4,465
                                          (8.77) (8.82)
Notes : Standard deviations in parentheses. One observation per worker-employer combination. Column (4)
shows the p-value from two-sample t-tests for the equality of columns (1) and (2).


note that "these beliefs must be correct in equilibrium"). In Table C5, we test this assumption
in our experimental environment. We find that beliefs about the gender performance gap
are identical among both female and male employers. However, for nationality, we find a
significant difference in beliefs, namely, Indians hold beliefs that more strongly favor the
out-group (Americans).
    Having demonstrated moderate levels of discrimination in hiring, we now examine the
"ground truth" in actual productivity differences between groups. The typical outcomes-
based test of statistical discrimination requires mapping disparities between groups in the
evaluators' relevant decision (e.g. the wages offered to employees) to disparities in an outcome
in the evaluators' objective function (e.g. the employees' productivity).12 In our context, this
requires mapping disparities in the employers' to stated wages to disparities in group-specific
productivity differences, i.e. the number of questions answered correctly. The commonly used
outcome method compares disparities in wages to disparities in performance to measure the
relative role of (accurate) statistical versus taste-based discrimination (in the context of our
  12
     Translating the two measures may require strong modeling assumptions (e.g. whether there is hetero-
geneity in the search costs faced by evaluators). For discussions of these assumptions in the context of the
hit-rate tests, see Antonovics and Knight (2009); Dharmapala and Ross (2004); Anwar and Fang (2006).

                                                    29
framework, accurate belief-based versus preference-based partiality). For simplicity, we will
refer to both disparities as measured in "points."
     Panel B of Table 4 shows the average number of correct answers by each sub-group
(see Fig. C2 for probability density functions). As shown in Panel A of Table 4, the gap
in average wages for men and women was lower than the gap in average performance (1.05
points versus 3.32 points).13 Therefore, if we used the standard outcome method to sepa-
rate statistical and taste-based discrimination, we would conclude that the entire 1.05 point
disparity in wages is due to (accurate) statistical discrimination--the remaining 2.27 point
difference in performance would be attributed to taste-based prejudice against men. Turning
to nationality-based discrimination, there was a wage gap of -2.14 points in favor of Indians,
compared to a performance gap of 0.65 points in favor of Americans. Under the standard
approach, we would conclude that both the -2.14 point disparity in wages, when compared
to the +0.65 point difference in performance, suggests taste-based prejudice against Ameri-
cans.14
     We now proceed to examine whether inaccurate beliefs can explain the disparities in
compensation. As an initial check to see whether employers' decisions were guided by the
elicited beliefs, we correlate wages with their beliefs about group-specific productivities. We
find positive correlations for all six groups of workers (Female: 0.12, Male: 0.12, India: 0.15,
U.S.: 0.12, Over 33: 0.12, Under 33: 0.10). Given that we elicited beliefs after the hiring task,
it is possible that part of these correlations are due to rationalization (e.g. an individual first
discriminates against women when setting wages, then chooses beliefs to justify this decision),
or audience effects (e.g. an individual falsely reports beliefs that justify the discriminatory
decision to the experimenter). To test for this, we provided half of the employees with large
incentives for belief accuracy. In Table C2, we show that beliefs are nearly identical across
both incentive conditions, with none of the six comparisons being significantly different from
one another. Together these findings suggest that the employers' group-specific performance
   13
      We calculate productivity differences using the full sample of profiles observed in hiring task 1. This is a
weighted sample of the original population of 577 workers (since each of the 589 employers saw independent
random samples of 20 of the 577 workers). Due to the random variation in the profiles observed, the group-
level averages slightly differ from those found in Table B1. For example, the male-female performance gap is
3.04 points in Table B1 and 3.32 points in this weighted sample. Note that the averages in Table B1 are the
basis for the informational intervention.
   14
      While we document significant discrimination by gender (i.e. men are paid more than women), the
outcome method reveals that the performance gap exceeds the pay gap. This leads to the conclusion that
there is taste-based discrimination against men. While the literature often equates taste-based discrimination
with animus or prejudice, this link is inappropriate when discrimination manifests as an equalizing action.
For example, people may be equalizing wages between two groups despite differences in productivity due to
fairness concerns. We discuss the implications of this distinction further in the conclusion.

                                                       30
              Table 5. Beliefs about Productivity by Employee Characteristics

                                                 Group 1     Group 2     Diff.   p-val
                                                   (1)         (2)        (3)     (4)
               Gender (1=Male, 2=Female)           34.04      32.14      1.89    0.00
                                                   (8.26)     (8.41)
               Country (1=US, 2=India)             32.08      34.80      -2.72   0.00
                                                   (8.56)     (9.44)
               Age (1=Under 33, 2=Over 33)         33.41      31.57      1.84    0.00
                                                   (8.97)     (9.00)
Notes : Standard deviations in parentheses. One observation per employer combination. Column (4) shows
the p-value from one-sample t-tests for the equality of columns (1) and (2). # Observations = 577.


predictions provide meaningful information about their true beliefs.
    In Table 5, we present employer beliefs about the group-specific average performance,
which can be compared directly to the actual group-specific performance reported in Table 4,
Panel B. Predictions about performance are lower than actual performance for all six groups.
This overall underestimation is consistent with risk aversion (recall that employers face
the potential of a negative payment, taken from their $0.50 bonus, if they overestimate
performance). Consistent with this, gaps in beliefs about performance are larger than gaps
in wage payments. Using employers' actual beliefs to identify the source of discrimination
leads to substantially different conclusions than the outcomes-based method outlined above.
Looking at nationality, the wage gap is -2.14 points and the performance gap is +0.65 points;
the gap in beliefs is -2.72 points. Thus, the entire wage gap can be explained by inaccurate
beliefs. In contrast to the outcome method which infers taste-based discrimination in favor of
Indian workers, the remaining 0.58 point difference between the belief and wage gaps suggests
prejudice against them. Looking at gender, the wage gap is 1.05 points, the performance gap
is 3.32 points, and the belief gap is 1.89 points. The majority of the wage gap can be
explained by inaccurate beliefs: the residual attributed to preference-based sources shrinks
from 2.17 to 0.84 points. Finally, despite the minimal gap in wages and performance based
on age, employers believed that young workers will significantly outperform older ones. This
suggests some preference-based partiality against younger workers. Together these results
highlight that a failure to account for inaccurate statistical discrimination may lead to the
wrong conclusion on the source of treatment disparities.
    To identify whether the observed disparate treatment was driven by inaccurate statistical
discrimination or animus-driven beliefs, we examined how behavior would respond to an
informational intervention. Table 6 compares the differences between the two hiring rounds

                                                 31
             Table 6. Effect of Information: Difference-in-Differences by Hiring Task

                                                 (1)           (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)
                                                                                              
        Post-Info                              1.53           1.60     1.06     1.28     1.94        2.39
                                                (0.29)        (0.27)   (0.31)   (0.29)    (0.44)     (0.36)
        Female                                 -1.05                                     -0.67      -0.81
                                                (0.25)                                    (0.24)     (0.19)
        Female*Post-Info                        -0.64                                     -0.90     -1.00
                                                (0.37)                                    (0.37)     (0.29)
        Indian                                            2.14                           1.98        1.99
                                                           (0.29)                         (0.29)     (0.25)
        Indian*Post-Info                                  -1.07                          -1.20      -1.63
                                                           (0.40)                         (0.42)     (0.34)
        Over 33                                                        -0.54               0.07       0.30
                                                                       (0.26)             (0.26)     (0.22)
        Over 33*Post-Info                                               0.41               0.14       -0.21
                                                                       (0.40)             (0.42)     (0.30)
        Prefers Tea                                                             0.52       0.39      0.35
                                                                                (0.24)    (0.24)     (0.18)
        Prefers Tea*Post-Info                                                    -0.08     0.06       -0.18
                                                                                (0.38)    (0.38)     (0.27)
        # Observations                          17,310        17,310   17,310   17,310    17,310    17,310
        R2                                       0.01          0.01     0.00     0.00      0.01      0.48
        DepVarMean                              31.90         30.71    31.67    31.22     30.18     30.18
        Employer FE?                              No            No       No       No        No       Yes
        
         p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,   
                                   p < 0.01
Notes : Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by employer. "DepVarMean" is the mean of the dependent
variable (wage WTP) in the omitted group (e.g. Male Workers in Hiring Task 1 for column (1)). "Post-Info"
is an indicator for whether a profile came in the second hiring task (i.e. profiles 21-30 of the 30 total profiles
evaluated). The observed performance (trivia score) averages for the sample of profiles observed in Hiring
Task 2 are: 38.13 (Male), 35.13 (Female), 36.95 (US), 36.53 (India), 36.84 (Under 33), 36.77 (Over 33), 36.81
(Prefer Coffee), 36.79 (Prefer Tea).


("Post-Info"), the differences between wages assigned to profiles of each demographic group
(e.g. "Female"), and the difference-in-differences (e.g. "Female X Post-Info"). The coefficients
on "Post-Info" suggests substantial belief updating across all demographic groups, partially
correcting the large level differences in the first hiring task between wages and actual group-
specific productivity (a gap of roughly 5 points on average). The effect of the informational
intervention on hiring decisions suggests that the majority of initial discrimination was driven
by inaccurate beliefs rather than accurate statistical or preference-based sources.15
   15
     There are several caveats to note when interpreting these results. Beliefs were not measured a second
time. Additionally, experimenter demand may have played a role, though recent work suggests that this
factor is likely small (De Quidt, Haushofer, and Roth, 2018). Finally, the change in wages could reflect an

                                                         32
5   Conclusion
The study of discrimination and its motives has a rich history in economics. Separating out
statistical and taste-based drivers of discrimination is a useful exercise, but as our survey of
the literature illustrates, it has thus far relied heavily on the assumption of accurate beliefs.
There are many reasons to suspect that beliefs may not always be accurate. This paper
formally outlines the identification problem inherent in distinguishing between belief-based
and preference-based motives. A stylized experiment is used to highlight the pitfalls of not
accounting for inaccurate beliefs when attempting to identify the source of discrimination,
and illustrates a potential methodology for improved identification.
    The results of the information intervention suggest that identifying inaccurate beliefs
may have immediate policy implications for reducing discrimination. However, there are
some important caveats to keep in mind when considering how this type of intervention
would be implemented outside of the stylized exercise. First, such an intervention is likely
feasible only in contexts where the underlying target outcome (e.g. productivity) is reliably
measured and reflects the appropriate counterfactual outcome for all groups. To the first
point, the accuracy of the underlying outcomes may differ by group; for example, police
officers have been shown to be more likely to discount the recorded speed of a white driver
than a minority driver (Goncalves and Mello, 2019). To the latter point, there are contexts
in which discrimination at (often unobserved) intermediate stages renders final productivity
measures unreliable due to behavioral responses. For example, minority pitchers correctly
anticipate discrimination by umpires and modify their behavior, resulting in a downward
bias for performance measures (Parsons, Sulaeman, Yates, and Hamermesh, 2011). Studies
have also documented that bias at intermediate stages can skew final productivity measures
among grocery store workers (Glover, Pallais, and Pariente, 2017) and academic economists
(Hengel, 2019). It is important to also take into account the underlying psychology of how
people will respond to the information. Selection decisions such as hiring are rarely one-
dimensional. Drawing attention to a (smaller than expected) productivity gap could correct
beliefs, while nonetheless increasing discrimination if it increases the salience of the gap as
an input into the hiring decision. These concerns highlight the need for future tests that
operationalize and examine similar informational interventions in field contexts.
experience effect between assigning wages in the first and second hiring task. To investigate this channel,
we perform a test comparing the average wages assigned in the first 10 profiles and the second 10 profiles
during the initial task. We do not find evidence for an experience effect (36.86 vs. 36.72; p=.39). While we
cannot fully rule out all these possible confounds, we view the information intervention as a proof of concept
for the type of methodology that can be used as both an intervention for correcting beliefs and methodology
identifying belief-based discrimination from preference-based motives.

                                                     33
    Throughout the paper, we document discrimination in wages by gender (i.e. men paid
more than women). Carrying out the standard outcomes-based method reveals that the
gap in performance exceeds that of the gap in pay. This leads to the conclusion that there
is preference-based partiality against the group that received higher wages--male workers.
While taste-based discrimination is often used as a synonym for animus or prejudice against a
group, this link seems misplaced when discrimination manifests as an equalizing actions (e.g.
equalizing wage rates). For example, people may treat groups similarly regardless of actual
or believed productivity differences due to fairness concerns. Additionally, there is often an
equity-efficiency trade-off to discrimination, such that even in the absence of legal or social
sanctions, an employer may wish to equalize wages across groups (for a theoretical discussion
of these trade-offs in the context of racial profiling, see Durlauf (2005)). Such a concern may
be especially pronounced for wages, where even abstracting away from group-level attributes,
there is evidence that fairness norms may contribute to observed wage compression (e.g.
Breza, Kaur, and Shamdasani (2018))
    Just as decomposing the nature of belief-based discrimination has implications for policy,
the same may be true for preference-based partiality. For example, if the basis for preference-
based partiality is animus or prejudice, then a policy that increases contact between groups
may reduce disparities (Dobbie and Fryer, 2015; Paluck, Green, and Green, 2018). By con-
trast, if the behavior is instead sanction- or value-oriented, then such interventions will likely
have little impact. While it is difficult to imagine a simple elicitation that would allow for a
parsimonious quantitative decomposition of "tastes", survey measures may be able to make
some headway in this endeavor. Such a decomposition is outside of the scope of this paper,
but future work along these lines would enrich our understanding of discrimination, and help
in the development of tools used to identify it and design policy.
    Lastly, our findings speaks to the need for continued work such as Bordalo et al. (2016)
that may help to identify situations when inaccurate beliefs are especially likely to be preva-
lent. As research begins to identify situations where inaccurate beliefs are a driving factor
for discrimination, future work will hopefully also begin to develop policy interventions that
are able to effectively correct beliefs and reduce discrimination as a result.

References
Agan, A. and S. Starr (2017): "Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial Discrimina-
 tion: A Field Experiment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 191­235.

Aigner, D. J. and G. G. Cain (1977): "Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor

                                               34
  Markets," ILR Review, 30, 175­187.

Albrecht, K., E. Von Essen, J. Parys, and N. Szech (2013): "Updating, self-
 confidence, and discrimination," European Economic Review, 60, 144­169.

Antonovics, K. and B. G. Knight (2009): "A New Look at Racial Profiling: Evidence
 from the Boston Police Department," Review of Economics and Statistics, 91, 163­177.

Anwar, S. and H. Fang (2006): "An alternative test of racial prejudice in motor vehicle
 searches: Theory and evidence," American Economic Review, 96, 127­151.

Arnold, D., W. Dobbie, and C. Yang (2018): "Racial Bias in Bail Decisions," Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 1885­1932.

Arrow, K. J. (1973): "The Theory of Discrimination," in Discrimination in Labor Markets,
 ed. by O. Ashenfelter and A. Rees, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Ayres, I. (2002): "Outcome Tests of Racial Disparities in Police Practices," Justice Research
 and Policy, 4, 131­142.

Bar, R. and A. Zussman (2019): "Identity and Bias: Insights from Driving Tests," Working
 Paper, 1­45.

Bartos, V., M. Bauer, J. Chytilová, and F. Matjka (2016): "Attention Discrimina-
 tion: Theory and Field Experiments with Monitoring Information Acquisition," American
 Economic Review, 106, 1437­75.

Beaman, L., R. Chattopadhyay, E. Duflo, R. Pande, and P. Topalova (2009):
 "Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Bias?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 124, 1497­1540.

Becker, G. (1957): The Economics of Discrimination, Chicago: University of Chicago
 Press.

Bertrand, M. and E. Duflo (2017): "Field Experiments on Discrimination," Handbook
 of Field Experiments, 1, 110.

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2004): "Are Emily and Greg More Employable
 Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination," Ameri-
 can Economic Review, 94, 991­1013.

                                             35
Bohren, J. A., A. Imas, and M. Rosenberg (2019): "The Dynamics of Discrimination:
 Theory and Evidence," Working Paper.

Bordalo, P., K. Coffman, N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2016): "Stereotypes,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1753­1794.

Brehm, J. W. (1966): A Theory of Psychological Reactance, New York: Academic Press.

Breza, E., S. Kaur, and Y. Shamdasani (2018): "The morale effects of pay inequality,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 611­663.

Bursztyn, L., A. L. González, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2018): "Misperceived so-
 cial norms: Female labor force participation in Saudi Arabia," Tech. rep., National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (2001): "The Dynamics of Educational Attainment
 for Black, Hispanic, and White Males," Journal of Political Economy, 109, 455­499.

Charles, K. K. and J. Guryan (2011): "Studying Discrimination: Fundamental Chal-
 lenges and Recent Progress," Annual Review of Economics, 3, 479­511.

De Quidt, J., J. Haushofer, and C. Roth (2018): "Measuring and bounding experi-
 menter demand," American Economic Review, 108, 3266­3302.

Dharmapala, D. and S. L. Ross (2004): "Racial bias in motor vehicle searches: Additional
 theory and evidence," Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, 3, 89­111.

Dobbie, W. and R. G. Fryer (2015): "The Impact of Youth Service on Future Outcomes:
 Evidence from Teach for America," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy,
 15, 1031­1066.

Durlauf, S. N. (2005): "Racial Profiling as a Public Policy Question: Efficiency, Equity,
 and Ambiguity," American Economic Review, 95, 132­136.

Fang, H. and A. Moro (2011): "Theories of statistical discrimination and affirmative
  action: A survey," in Handbook of social economics, Elsevier, vol. 1, 133­200.

Fershtman, C. and U. Gneezy (2001): "Discrimination in a Segmented Society: An
  Experimental Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 351­377.



                                            36
Fiske, S. T. (1998): "Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination," The handbook of social
  psychology, 2, 357­411.

Gagnon-Bartsch, T., M. Rabin, and J. Schwartzstein (2018): Channeled attention
 and stable errors, Harvard Business School.

Glover, D., A. Pallais, and W. Pariente (2017): "Discrimination as a Self-Fulfilling
 Prophecy: Evidence from French Grocery Stores," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1219­
 1260.

Gneezy, U., M. Niederle, and A. Rustichini (2003): "Performance in competitive
 Environments: Gender differences," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1049­1074.

Goncalves, F. and S. Mello (2019): "A Few Bad Apples? Racial Bias in Policing,"
 Working Paper, 1­79.

Haavelmo, T. (1944): "The Probability Approach in Econometrics," Supplement to Econo-
 metrica, 12, 1­115.

Hedegaard, M. S. and J.-R. Tyran (2018): "The Price of Prejudice," American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 10, 40­63.

Hengel, E. (2019): "Publishing while female," Working Paper, 1­67.

Hilton, J. L. and W. V. Hippel (1996): "Stereotypes," Annual Review of Psychology, 47,
  237­271.

Hübert, R. and A. T. Little (2020): "A Behavioral Theory of Discrimination in Policing,"
 Working Paper.

Jensen, R. (2010): "The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 515­548.

Judd, C. M. and B. Park (1993): "Definition and assessment of accuracy in social stereo-
  types," Psychological Review, 100, 109­128.

Knowles, J., N. Persico, and P. Todd (2001): "Racial bias in motor vehicle searches:
 Theory and evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 109, 203­229.

Knox, D. E., W. Lowe, and J. Mummolo (2020): "Administrative Records Mask
 Racially Biased Policing," American Political Science Review, 1­19.

                                           37
Kravitz, D. A. and J. Platania (1993): "Attitudes and Beliefs About Affirmative Action:
 Effects of Target and of Respondent Sex and Ethnicity," Journal of Applied Psychology,
 78, 928­938.

Lepage, L.-P. (2020): "Endogenous Learning and the Persistence of Employer Biases in the
  Labor Market," Tech. rep., mimeo.

List, J. A. (2004): "The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence
  from the Field," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 49­89.

Mobius, M. and T. Rosenblat (2006): "Why Beauty Matters," American Economic
 Review, 96, 222­235.

Norton, M. I. and D. Ariely (2011): "Building a better America-one wealth quintile at
 a time," Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 9­12.

Paluck, E. L., S. Green, and D. P. Green (2018): "The Contact Hypothesis Reevalu-
  ated," Behvioural Public Policy, 1­30.

Parsons, C. A., J. Sulaeman, M. C. Yates, and D. S. Hamermesh (2011): "Strike
  Three: Discrimination, Incentives, and Evaluation," American Economic Review, 101,
  1410­1435.

Phelps, E. S. (1972): "The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism," American Economic
 Review, 62, 659­661.

Pope, D. G. and J. R. Sydnor (2011): "What's in a Picture? Evidence of Discrimination
 from Prosper.com," The Journal of Human Resources, 46, 53­92.

Schneider, D., A. Hastorf, and P. Ellsworth (1979): Person Perception, Reading,
  MA: Addison-Wesley.

Simoiu, C., S. Corbett-Davies, and S. Goel (2017): "The problem of infra-marginality
  in outcome tests for discrimination," Annals of Applied Statistics, 11, 1193­1216.

Zimmermann, F. (2019): "The Dynamics of Motivated Beliefs," Working Paper.




                                           38
Appendix A.         Proofs from Section 3
Proof of Lemma 1. The normal distribution is the conjugate prior for a normal like-
lihood function. Therefore, the evaluator's posterior belief about productivity is normally
distributed,
                                        ^g µ
                                           ^g + ^g s      1
                              a|s  N                 ,         .
                                          ^g + ^g      ^g + ^g
This implies the optimal decision rule is v (s, g, ) = 1 iff ^g µ
                                                                ^g +^
                                                               ^g +^
                                                               
                                                                    g s
                                                                    g
                                                                         ug . Rearranging terms
to represent this decision rule as a cut-off with respect to the signal results in Eq. (1).   2
Proof of Proposition 1. This follows from Eq. (1) and the discussion in the text. If
two types do not discriminate, which corresponds to setting the same thresholds for each
group, then trivially they exhibit equivalent discrimination, even when they set different
signal thresholds from each other.                                                      2
Proof of Observation 1. Consider an evaluator of type  = (ug , µ           ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } . Ob-
serving v (s, g, ), s and g for an interval of signals S such that there exists an s1 , s2  S
with v (s1 , g, ) = v (s2 , g, ) identifies s(, g ) for each g  {M, F }. From Eq. (2), each pair
of thresholds s(, M ) = s(, F ) map into a unique isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) with
sF = sM , while s(, M ) = s(, F ) map into the isodiscrimination curve corresponding to no
discrimination.                                                                                     2
Proof of Proposition 2. Consider an evaluator of type  = (ug , µ               ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } who
discriminates against group F . This evaluator generates discrimination that lies on isodis-
crimination curve (sF , sM ) = (s(, F ), s(, M )). Given that  discriminates against group
F , sF > sM . It is immediately apparent from Eq. (2) that there are a continuum of other
types that exhibit equivalent discrimination. We next construct types with a single form of
partiality.
    Part (1): Consider a type  with belief neutrality, (^       µF , ^F , ^F ) = (^  µM ,   ^M , ^M ). Let
(^
 µ , ^ ,^ ) denote the type's subjective beliefs for a worker from either group. Given preference
parameters (uF , uM ), this type hires members of group g with signals above

                                           ^ + ^            ^
                                                     ug -     µ
                                                              ^.                                      (4)
                                             ^              ^

This type exhibits equivalent discrimination to  if Eq. (4) is equal to sg for each g  {M, F }.




                                                   39
Rearranging terms, this corresponds to preference parameter

                                             ^                   ^
                                 ug =                   sg +         µ
                                                                     ^
                                           ^ + ^               ^ + ^

for group g . Note uF > uM since sF > sM , so there is preference partiality against group F .
    Part (2): Consider a type  with preference neutrality, uF = uM and belief neutrality
with respect to concentration and signal precision, (^
                                                     F , ^F ) = (^M , ^M ). Let (u , ^ ,^ ) denote
these common parameters. Given perceived means (^       µM , µ^F ), this type hires members of
group g with signals above
                                      ^ +  ^         ^
                                               u - µ   ^ .                                     (5)
                                         ^           ^ g
                                                     
This type exhibits equivalent discrimination to  if Eq. (5) is equal to sg for each g  {M, F }.
Rearranging terms, this corresponds to perceived mean

                                            ^ + ^                ^
                                    µ
                                    ^g =                  u -      sg
                                              ^                  ^

                   ^F < µ
for group g . Note µ     ^M since sF > sM , so there is belief partiality in the form of lower
expected productivity against group F .
    Part (3): Consider a type  with preference neutrality, uF = uM and belief neutrality
                                                            µF , 
with respect to average productivity and signal precision, (^            µM , 
                                                                 ^F ) = (^    ^M ). Let (u , µ
                                                                                             ^ ,^)
denote these common parameters. Given perceived concentration of productivity (^          M ,  ^F ),
this type hires members of group g with signals above

                                         ^g + ^                ^g
                                                    u -           µ
                                                                  ^.                            (6)
                                            ^                  ^

This type exhibits equivalent discrimination to  if Eq. (6) is equal to sg for each g  {M, F }.
Rearranging terms, this corresponds to perceived concentration

                                                    sg - u
                                        ^g = ^
                                                    u -µ ^

for group g . Given sF > sM , ^ (sF - u ) > ^ (sM - u ). Therefore, whether ^F is greater than
or less than  ^M depends on the sign of u - µ ^.
    If  believes the market is lemon-dropping, i.e. u - µ   ^ < 0, then  ^F <   ^M and a less
concentrated perceived productivity distribution generates the discrimination against group
F . The fatter low productivity tail for F relative to M means that a larger share of workers

                                                   40
from group F fall below the threshold ex-ante. We also need to check that         ^F > 0 for these
to both be a valid precisions. This will be the case for u > sF , so that the numerator is also
                                                                                  g -u
negative. In summary, any type with µ    ^ > sF , u  (sF , µ ^ ) and   ^g =  ^ s u -µ ^
                                                                                          has belief
partiality in the form of lower perceived concentration for group F and exhibits equivalent
discrimination to .
    If  believes the market is cherry-picking, i.e. u - µ  ^ > 0, then      ^F >   ^M and a more
concentrated perceived productivity distribution generates the discrimination against group
F . The thinner high productivity tail for F relative to M means that a smaller share of
workers from group F lie above the threshold ex-ante. We also need to check that         ^M > 0 for
these to both be valid precisions. This will be the case for sM > u , so that the numerator is
                                                                                   g -u
also positive. In summary, any type with µ ^ < sM , u  (^ µ , sM ) and  ^g =  ^ s u -µ ^
                                                                                          has belief
partiality in the form of higher perceived concentration for group F and exhibits equivalent
discrimination to .
    Part (4): Consider a type  with preference neutrality, uF = uM and belief neutrality
with respect to average productivity and concentration, (^   µF ,         µM , 
                                                                  ^F ) = (^    ^M ). Let (u , µ
                                                                                              ^ ,^)
denote these common parameters. Given perceived signal precision (^       M , ^F ), this type hires
members of group g with signals above

                                        ^ +  ^g          ^
                                                   u -      µ
                                                            ^.                                  (7)
                                          ^g             ^g

This type exhibits equivalent discrimination to  if Eq. (7) is equal to sg for each g  {M, F }.
Rearranging terms, this corresponds to perceived signal precision

                                                   u -µ ^
                                        ^g = ^
                                                   sg - u

for group g . Given sF > sM , sF - u > sM - u . We need     ^g > 0 for each g in order for these
to be valid precisions. This is the case when (i) u - µ   ^ < 0 and sF - u < 0, which also
implies sM - u < 0, or (ii) u - µ   ^ > 0 and sM - u > 0, which also implies sF - u > 0.
    First consider case (i). In this case,  believes the market is lemon-dropping since u < µ ^.
Further, 0 > sF - u > sM - u  1/(sM - u ) > 1/(sF - u )  (u - µ                ^ )/(sM - u ) <
(u - µ ^ )/(sF - u ). Therefore,   ^M <    ^F and a higher perceived signal precision generates
the discrimination against group F . In summary, any type with µ      ^ > sF , u  (sF , µ^ ) and
          u -µ
             ^
^g =  ^ sg -u has belief partiality in the form of higher perceived signal precision for group
F and exhibits equivalent discrimination to .


                                                  41
   Next consider case (ii). In this case,  believes the market is cherry-picking since u > µ ^.
Further, sF - u > sM - u > 0  1/(sM - u ) > 1/(sF - u )  (u - µ               ^ )/(sM - u ) >
(u - µ^ )/(sF - u ). Therefore,   ^M >   ^F and a lower perceived signal precision generates
the discrimination against group F . In summary, any type with µ    ^ < sF , u  (^ µ , sM ) and
         u -µ
            ^
^g = ^ sg -u has belief partiality in the form of lower perceived signal precision for group
F and exhibits equivalent discrimination to .                                                 2
Proof of Observation 2. Suppose the evaluator has type  = (ug , µ                ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } . This
evaluator exhibits discrimination that lies on isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) = (s(, F ), s(, M )).
Suppose the researcher identifies the isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) and the true produc-
tivity and signal distributions (µg , g , g ) for each group g . Under the assumption of accurate
beliefs, i.e. (^
               µg , ^g , ^g ) = (µg , g , g ), solving Eq. (2) for ug uniquely identifies the preference
parameters (uF , uM ) as
                                                g                g
                                    ug =               sg +             µg .                              (8)
                                              g + g           g + g
Therefore, the evaluator's type is identified.                                                        2
Proof of Observation 3. Suppose the evaluator has type  = (ug , µ           ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } . This
evaluator exhibits discrimination that lies on isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) = (s(, F ), s(, M )).
Suppose the researcher identifies the isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) and the true produc-
tivity and signal distributions (µg , g , g ) for each group g . From Eq. (2), it is clear that when
beliefs may be inaccurate, this provides no additional information about (ug , µ          ^g , ^g , ^g ) for
each group g ­ any type that satisfies Eq. (2) for the observed isodiscrimination curve can
exhibit the observed behavior.                                                                            2
Proof of Observation 4. Given true productivity and signal distributions (µg , g , g )g{M,F } ,
suppose the evaluator has type  = (ug , µ   ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } with inaccurate beliefs, (^
                                                                                            µg , ^g , ^g ) =
(µg , g , g ). This evaluator exhibits discrimination that lies on isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) =
(s(, F ), s(, M )). Suppose a researcher identifies the isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) and
the true productivity and signal distributions (µg , g , g ) for each group g . When the re-
searcher assumes belief are accurate, i.e. the evaluator is a type  with beliefs (^         µg , ^g , ^g ) =
(µg , g , g ), then from Observation 2, the researcher concludes that the evaluator has prefer-
ence parameter
                                           g                   g
                                ug =                 sg +              µg .                              (9)
                                        g + g               g + g




                                                   42
In contrast, the the true preference parameter satisfies

                                         ^g                   ^g
                              ug =                  sg +               µ
                                                                       ^g .                    (10)
                                      ^g +  ^g             ^g +  ^g

When beliefs are inaccurate, this identified preference parameter is equal to the true param-
eter, ug = ug , if and only if

                    g + g           ^g                  g                    ^g
            µg =                             sg -               sg +                 µ
                                                                                     ^g .      (11)
                      g          ^g +  ^g             g + g               ^g +  ^g

Therefore, the preference parameter is misidentified for a generic set of true beliefs (µg , g , g )
and evaluator types  = (ug , µ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } , ug = ug .
         
   Let  = (ug , µg , g , g )g{M,F } denote the type with accurate beliefs and the same prefer-
ences as . Suppose type 's inaccurate beliefs increase discrimination against group F , i.e.
s(, F )  s( , F ) and s( , M )  s(, M ) with at least one strict inequality. Then given the
observed isodiscrimination curve is consistent with the true type, i.e. sF = s(, F ), and from
the expression for s( , F ) in Eq. (1),

                                             F + F      F
                                     sF            u F - µF .                                  (12)
                                               F        F

Combining Eqs. (9) and (12)

                                     F                     F
                         uF =                 sF +                    µF  uF .                 (13)
                                   F + F                 F + F

Similarly, uM  uM , with a strict inequality for at least one of the expressions. Therefore,
the researcher overestimates the preference parameter for group F and/or underestimates
the preference parameter for group M , leading her to overestimate the preference partiality
against group F . The proof for the case of 's inaccurate beliefs decreasing discrimination is
analogous.                                                                                  2
Proof of Observation 5. Suppose the researcher identifies the isodiscrimination curve
(sF , sM ) and the true productivity and signal distributions (µg , g , g ) for each group g . From
Eq. (2), for any u  R, the corresponding accurate statistical discriminator with preferences




                                                    43
uM = uF = u lies on isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) with

                                              g + g             g
                                       sg =                u-     µg .                              (14)
                                                g               g

If M µ M +M sM
      M +M
                = F µ F +F sF
                      F +F
                              , then there is no u such that (sF , sM ) = (sF , sM ), i.e. an ac-
curate statistical discriminator exhibits discrimination that is consistent with the observed
isodiscrimination curve.                                                                       2
Proof of Observation 6. Suppose the evaluator has type  = (ug , µ             ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } . This
evaluator exhibits discrimination that lies on isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) = (s(, F ), s(, M )).
Suppose the researcher identifies the isodiscrimination curve (sF , sM ) and the perceived pro-
ductivity and signal distributions (^
                                    µg , ^g , ^g ) for each group g . Solving Eq. (2) for ug uniquely
identifies the preference parameters (uF , uM ) as

                                            ^g                 ^g
                                ug =                sg +                 µ
                                                                         ^g .                       (15)
                                         ^g +  ^g           ^g +  ^g

Therefore, the evaluator's type is identified.                                                        2
Proof of Proposition 3. Given a signal with precision  > 0, observing x  1 draws of
the signal is equivalent to observing a single signal that is normally distributed with precision
x . Suppose the evaluator has type  = (ug , µ       ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } . From the signal thresholds in
Eq. (1), if a type  = (ug , µ  ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } exhibits equivalent discrimination to  when
observing x  1 signal draws, then

                           ^g ug + x
                                    ^g ug -    ^g
                                            ^g µ    ^g ug + x
                                                             ^g ug - ^g µ
                                                                        ^g
                                                  =                                                 (16)
                                    x^g                      x^g

for g  {M, F }. Rearranging terms, this is equivalent to

                                      ^g ) 
                             ^g (ug - µ
                                            ^g (ug - µ
                                                     ^g )
                                          -               = x(ug - ug ).                            (17)
                                   ^g             ^g

Suppose  exhibits equivalent discrimination to  when observing x1  1 and x2 > x1 signal
draws. Then Eq. (17) must be simultaneously satisfied at x = x1 and x = x2 . Since the left
hand side of Eq. (17) is independent of x, this requires x1 (ug - ug ) = x2 (ug - ug ). Given
x1 = x2 , it must be that ug = ug . Therefore, all types that exhibit equivalent discrimination
to  in both informational treatments have the same preferences as , uF = uF and uM = uM .


                                                    44
The right hand side of Eq. (17) is equal to zero for these types. Therefore, all types that
exhibit equivalent discrimination to  in both informational treatments have beliefs and
preferences that satisfy

                                   ^g (ug - µ
                                            ^g )   ^g (ug - µ
                                                            ^g )
                                                 =               .
                                         ^g              ^g

Solving for µ
            ^g , the set of types that exhibit equivalent discrimination to  corresponds to

                                                                ^g /^g
                             ^g , 
                     = (ug , µ    ^g ,             ^g = ug -
                                       ^g )g{M,F } µ                   (ug - µ
                                                                             ^g )
                                                                ^g /^g

   ^g = µ
If µ     ^g , this corresponds to the set of types that preserve the ratio of the precisions. If
the perceived precisions are equal across groups, i.e.  ^g =  ^g and ^g =  ^g , then it must be
that µ^g = µ^g , which means  = . In this case,  is identified from observing discrimination
for two informational treatments.
    Suppose  exhibits equivalent discrimination to  for two informational treatments, de-
noted x1 and x2 . Then uF = uF and uM = uM , so Eq. (17) is satisfied for any other
informational treatment x  {x1 , x2 }, i.e.  also exhibits equivalent discrimination for in-
formational treatment x. Therefore, if type  exhibits equivalent discrimination to  for
two informational treatments,  also exhibits equivalent discrimination to  for all possible
informational treatments.                                                                     2
Proof of Observation 7. Suppose the evaluator has type  = (ug , µ             ^g , ^g , ^g )g{M,F } . Let
(x) = (ug , µ^g , ^g , x^g )g{M,F } denote a type with the same preferences and beliefs about the
productivity distribution as  and perceived signal precision x       ^g . When type  observes x
draws of the signal, it behaves as if it is type (x). Therefore, it exhibits discrimination that
lies on isodiscrimination curve (s((x), F ), s((x), M )). Suppose the researcher identifies the
isodiscrimination curves for  when it observes x1 and x2 = x1 signal draws, (sF,1 , sM,1 ) 
(s((x1 ), F ), s((x1 ), M )) and (sF,2 , sM,2 )  (s((x2 ), F ), s((x2 ), M )). Then from Eq. (2),
we know

                                    ^g + xi  ^g       ^g
                                                ug -       µ
                                                           ^g = sg,i .                              (18)
                                       xi ^g         xi ^g




                                                   45
for i = 1, 2. Rearranging terms,

                                       ^g                    ^g
                                          + xi ug = xi sg,i + µ ^g .                                    (19)
                                       ^g                    ^g

Subtracting Eq. (19) evaluated at x2 from Eq. (19) evaluated at x1 yields

                                    (x1 - x2 )ug = x1 sg,1 - x2 sg,2                                    (20)
                                                   x1 sg,1 - x2 sg,2
                                           ug =                      .                                  (21)
                                                       x1 - x2

This uniquely identifies the evaluator's preferences. However, as shown in Proposition 3,
multiple sets of beliefs (^
                          µg , ^g , ^g ) can satisfy Eq. (19) for x1 and x2 . Therefore, the evaluator's
beliefs are not identified.                                                                           2

Appendix B.         Experimental Design
Our experimental design includes two separate, pre-registered surveys: (1) a work task (math
quiz) performed by 589 Amazon Mechanical Turk subjects (MTurkers), who comprise the
prospective "workers" for the second survey, (2) a hiring task in which each of 577 different
MTurkers, who comprise the "employers," stated a wage (willingness to pay) for 20 prospec-
tive worker profiles.16 The second survey also contains a belief elicitation and an information
intervention followed by a second hiring task. The full surveys are in the Online Appendix.
We describe the experimental design and provide summary statistics below.
    Survey 1 (Work Task): We recruited 589 subjects from MTurk on February 23, 2018 for
the first survey.17 The survey was posted with the title "Math Questions and Demographics"
and the description "A 20-minute task of answering math questions." We paid $2 (i.e. a
projected $6/hour wage) and recruited a subject pool of 392 from the United States and
197 from India, all of whom had completed at least 500 prior tasks and had an 80% or
higher approval rate for these tasks.18 After starting the survey, subjects were informed that

  16
      We pre-registered the study on AsPredicted.org. There are two minor differences between the pre-
registration plan and the actual study. First, we pre-registered that we would recruit 400 employers in the
hiring task survey, but decided to recruit closer to 600. Second, we did not pre-register sample restrictions
due to completing the task too quickly or slowly. We dropped 12 subjects in the work task survey and 5 in
the hiring task survey due to these restrictions.
   17
      We received 604 responses in total, but dropped 12 responses that corresponded to the top 1% (< 227
seconds) and bottom 1% (> 3274 seconds) in terms of survey duration. Of the remaining 592 responses, we
dropped 3 whose Qualtrics survey responses could not be matched to their MTurk records, leaving 589 final
respondents.
   18
      This geographic restriction is based on the addresses MTurkers used to register on Amazon. The survey

                                                     46
they would first answer demographic questions and then answer 50 multiple choice math
questions. They were told that their performance would not affect their payment, and were
asked not to use a calculator or any outside help, but just to do their best. This was followed
by seven questions that provided the information used for their profiles in the second survey:
favorite color, favorite movie, coffee vs. tea preference, age, gender, favorite subject in high
school, and favorite sport. The math test included a mix of arithmetic (e.g. " 5  6  7 =?"),
algebra (e.g. "If (y + 9)  (y 2 - 121) = 0, then which of the following cannot be y?"), and
more conceptual questions (e.g. "Which of the following is not a prime number?"). Finally,
subjects were thanked for their participation and informed that they may receive a small
bonus based on a different experiment, for reasons unrelated to their performance on the
task. We describe the basis for such bonuses in the description of Survey 2.
    The purpose of the first survey was to create a bank of "workers" who could be hired by
the "employers" in the second survey. This novel design has several advantages over the ex-
isting paradigms for studying discrimination in the field. First, in contrast to correspondence
studies, we did not employ deception at any point--all profiles shown to employers corre-
sponded to actual workers who would in fact be paid as described in the following paragraph.
However, similar to a correspondence study, we were able to control the information seen
by an employer about a prospective worker by constructing worker profiles that included
information that is ostensibly relevant for animus and/or beliefs about productivity (e.g.
age, gender, and nationality), as well as other irrelevant information (e.g. tea preference).
The irrelevant information serves as a placebo test and ensures that the relevant informa-
tion is not the only salient information provided to the employer (this mimics the irrelevant
information contained on a CV). Finally, instead of the coarse measures of discrimination
used in many other studies (e.g. callback or stop rates), we elicit relatively continuous and
precise measures of productivity and discrimination that are tightly linked.
    Survey 2: We recruited 577 different MTurk subjects on February 26, 2018. We used
the same hiring criteria as the first survey (392 from U.S., 185 from India, >= 80% approval
rate).19 The survey was posted with the title "20-Minute Survey about Decision-Making"
and the description "20-Minute Survey about Decision-Making." We paid $2 (i.e. a projected
$6/hour wage). Subjects were first asked to report their gender, age, and education level.
Subjects were then presented with the first hiring task portion of the survey.

was posted as two tasks on MTurk, with one only eligible for Indian workers and one only eligible for U.S.
workers.
  19
     We recruited 587 subjects in total, but dropped 7 whose surveys were completed in under 300 seconds
and 3 whose stimuli (the profiles they evaluated) could not be matched to the first survey.

                                                   47
    First Hiring Task: We informed subjects that we had previously paid other subjects
("workers") to answer 50 math questions, showed them five examples of the math questions,
and told them that on average, participants answered 36.95 out of 50 questions correctly.
They were then told that they would act as an employer and hire one of these workers by
stating a wage (paid as a bonus to the worker). In return, they would receive a payment
based on how many questions their hired worker answered correctly. This was followed by
a more detailed description of the assignment. Each "employer" would view 20 profiles of
potential workers and state the highest wage (between 0 to 50 cents) they were willing to
pay to each worker. The employer would be paid 1 cent for each question answered correctly
by the hired worker. We next described the mechanism (Becker-Degroot-Marschak) used to
assign payment. We would randomly select a profile from the 20 potential workers. We would
then draw a random number from 0 to 50. If the wage the employer stated for the worker was
equal or greater than that number, then the worker would receive the random number as a
bonus and the employer would receive a "profit" equal to the worker's performance minus the
random number. If instead the employer stated a wage for the worker that was lower than
the random number, then neither the worker nor the employer would receive a payment.
    To ensure comprehension, we showed subjects an example profile (see Fig. B1) and stated
wage. We gave examples of actual performance and randomly generated numbers that would
produce positive profit, negative profit, and no hiring. Having highlighted the possibility of
negative profit, we then noted that all employers would automatically be paid a $0.50 bonus
in addition to any money made through the hiring task, so that no employers would owe
money. Finally, we ran a comprehension check with the same example profile, a specific wage
(43), a random number (18), and an actual performance (10). We required the employer
to correctly state how many cents they would have to pay the worker (18) and how many
cents the employer would be paid before subtracting off the amount they would pay the
worker (10).20 Finally, employers were presented with a second wage (15), and answered
the same questions. They were then presented with 20 profiles, each randomly selected with
replacement from the bank of 589 profiles produced by the first survey.




  20
    Entering an incorrect an answer would generate a pop-up with "Wrong Answer" and restrict the indi-
vidual from moving to the next page.

                                                 48
            Figure B1. Example Profile Used in First Hiring Task Description




    Belief Elicitation Task: Next, subjects were randomly assigned to one of two different
conditions: an incentivized or un-incentivized belief elicitation. Across both conditions, sub-
jects were reminded that the full sample answered 36.95 out of 50 questions correctly. They
were then asked to answer six questions of the form, "On average, how many math questions
out of 50 do you think X answered correctly?" where X corresponded to the groups "women",
"men", "people from the United States", "people from India", "people below or at the age of
33," and "people above the age of 33."
    In the incentivized condition, prior to the six questions, subjects were told that they
could earn a significant bonus for an accurate prediction. One of the six questions would
be randomly selected and they would be paid $5 minus their deviation from the question
(bounded below by $0). For example, if they answered 40 and the true average was 37, they
would receive a $2 bonus. Finally, they were asked to "please answer the questions as carefully
as possible so that you can potentially win a large bonus."
    Information Intervention & Second Hiring Task: After completing the belief elici-
tation, subjects were shown the correct answer for all six groups: women (35.28), men (38.32),
people from the U.S. (37.14), people from India (36.58), people below or at the age of 33
(37.10), and people above the age of 33 (36.79). Following this information, we stated, "Now
that you have learned those facts, we would like you to work on 10 more profiles." We noted
that, as in the first hiring task, we would randomly select one profile and a number, and
pay bonus and wages accordingly (with an additional $0.50 automatic bonus to ensure no
negative payments). After employers reviewed the 10 additional worker profiles, we thanked
them for their participation, noted that we would calculate bonuses and pay them within a


                                              49
week, and allowed subjects the option to leave comments.
    Summary Statistics: Table B1 provides summary statistics for the full sample of sub-
jects that completed surveys 1 and 2 (Column (1)), as well as these statistics for each of
the 6 demographic groups used in the second survey. On average, the work task (survey
1) took subjects 19 minutes to complete, while the hiring task took 23 minutes. There is
variation in this timing across groups. Subjects from the U.S. took an average of 19 minutes
to complete the hiring task, while subjects from India took 31.60 minutes; a difference also
reflected in their median times (15.8 vs. 25.6). Another large difference between the U.S. and
India samples is the average age of participants; the average Indian subject in the work task
is approximately 8 years younger than the average American subject. This gap shrinks to
4 years for the hiring task. The Indian sample also skews more male than the U.S. sample
(68.5% vs. 48.2% and 76.8% vs. 51.4% for survey 1 and 2, respectively) and is more likely
to have a college education or above (90.3% vs. 56% in survey 2; the question was not asked
in survey 1). While we primarily focus on simple comparisons between each demographic
group, these observed differences motivate our use of multivariate regressions as well.




                                             50
                                  Table B1. Summary Statistics

                                Total     Male      Female      US       India    Under 33     Over 33
                                 (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)

Panel A: Worker
Trivia Score                    36.95     38.32      35.28     37.14     36.58      37.10        36.79
                                (8.73)    (8.52)     (8.70)    (8.93)    (8.31)     (8.55)       (8.94)

Survey Duration (Minutes)        18.82     19.03     18.56     16.19     24.04       20.25       17.18
                                (10.39)   (10.52)   (10.25)    (8.12)   (12.31)     (11.82)      (8.20)

Prefer Tea (Yes=1)               0.39      0.38       0.41      0.37      0.44       0.42         0.36
                                (0.49)    (0.49)     (0.49)    (0.48)    (0.50)     (0.49)       (0.48)

Age (Worker)                     35.89     35.30     36.62     38.55     30.61      27.38        45.61
                                (11.57)   (11.27)   (11.91)   (12.16)    (8.01)     (3.50)       (9.76)

Female (Yes=1)                   0.45      0.00       1.00      0.52      0.32       0.43         0.48
                                (0.50)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.50)    (0.47)     (0.50)       (0.50)

From India (Yes=1)               0.33      0.42       0.23      0.00      1.00       0.47         0.18
                                (0.47)    (0.49)     (0.42)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.50)       (0.39)
# Observations                   589       324        265       392       197        314          275

Panel B: Employer
Survey Duration (Minutes)        23.09     23.59     22.37     19.08     31.60       22.53       23.87
                                (17.23)   (15.57)   (19.43)   (11.70)   (23.04)     (19.00)     (14.44)

College Education or Above       0.67      0.70       0.62      0.56      0.90       0.67         0.67
                                (0.47)    (0.46)     (0.49)    (0.50)    (0.30)     (0.47)       (0.47)

Age (Employer)                   34.36    32.66      36.88     35.73     31.46      27.09        44.36
                                (11.02)   (9.92)    (12.07)   (11.63)    (8.96)     (3.59)       (9.91)

Female (Yes=1)                   0.40      0.00       1.00      0.49      0.23       0.34         0.49
                                (0.49)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.50)    (0.42)     (0.47)       (0.50)

From India (Yes=1)               0.32      0.41       0.19      0.00      1.00       0.40         0.29
                                (0.47)    (0.49)     (0.39)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.49)       (0.41)
# Observations                   577       344        233       392       185        334          243

Notes : Standard deviations in parentheses. One observation per worker (survey 1) or employer (survey 2).


                                                    51
Appendix C.          Additional Tables and Figures

           Figure C2. Kernel Densities of Productivities (Trivia Scores) by Group




                Table C2. Effects of Large Incentives for Accurate Predictions

                                                           Incentivized?      Diff.   p-val
                                                            No      Yes
                                                            (1)     (2)        (3)     (4)

                   Prediction for Female Workers           32.36     31.93    0.44    0.53
                                                           (7.71)    (9.08)
                   Prediction for Male Workers             34.22     33.86    0.36    0.60
                                                           (7.37)    (9.08)
                   Prediction for Indian Workers           35.29     34.31    0.98    0.21
                                                           (8.49)   (10.30)
                   Prediction for US Workers               32.28     31.87    0.41    0.56
                                                           (8.21)    (8.90)
                   Prediction for Over 33 Workers          31.95     31.19    0.75    0.32
                                                           (8.39)    (9.58)
                   Prediction for Under 33 Workers         33.73     33.09    0.64    0.39
                                                           (8.58)    (9.35)
                   # Observations                           290       287
Notes : Standard deviations in parentheses. One observation per employer. The joint f-statistic from regression
of an indicator for the "Incentivized" treatment on set of employer observable characteristics in Table B1,
Panel B (duration, education, age, female, from India) is 1.25 (p=0.286).



                                                      52
     Table C3. Discrimination in Wages, by Employee Characteristics (Hiring Task 1)

                                                  (1)         (2)     (3)      (4)        (5)       (6)
                                                                                            
    Female                                      -1.05                                   -0.67     -0.80
                                                 (0.25)                                  (0.24)    (0.19)
    Indian                                                  2.14                        1.98       2.00
                                                            (0.29)                       (0.29)    (0.25)
    Over 33                                                          -0.54                0.07      0.32
                                                                     (0.26)              (0.26)    (0.22)
    Placebo: Prefers Tea                                                      0.52       0.39      0.37
                                                                              (0.24)     (0.24)    (0.18)
    # Observations                               11,540     11,540   11,540   11,540    11,540    11,540
    R2                                            0.00       0.01     0.00     0.00      0.01      0.49
    DepVarMean                                   31.90      30.71    31.67    31.22     30.18     30.18
    Employer FE?                                   No         No       No       No        No       Yes
    
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,       
                                    p < 0.01
Notes : Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by employer. "DepVarMean" is the mean of the dependent
variable (wage WTP) in the omitted group (e.g. Male Workers for column (1)).


                             Table C4. In-Group Bias Test (Hiring Task 1)

                                                             (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)

              Female Worker                                -1.42                        -1.20
                                                            (0.27)                       (0.27)
              Female Employer                               1.78                         1.91
                                                            (0.69)                       (0.72)
              Female Worker*Employer                         0.26                         0.41
                                                            (0.43)                       (0.42)
              Indian Worker                                          2.04                1.88
                                                                     (0.31)              (0.31)
              Indian Employer                                         0.99               1.70
                                                                     (0.70)              (0.74)
              Indian Worker*Employer                                 -0.79               -0.82
                                                                     (0.48)              (0.48)
              Over 33 Worker                                                  -0.86       -0.39
                                                                               (0.29)    (0.28)
              Over 33 Employer                                                  0.31       0.22
                                                                               (0.69)    (0.71)
              Over 33 Worker*Employer                                         1.10      1.19
                                                                               (0.42)    (0.41)

              # Observations                                17,310   17,310   17,310     17,310
              R2
                                                          53 0.01     0.01     0.00       0.02
              DepVarMean                                    31.90    30.71    31.67      31.67
                                            
                 p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by employer. "DepVarMean" is the mean of the dependent
variable (wage WTP) in the omitted group (e.g. Male Workers evaluated by Male Employers for column
(1)).
Table C5. In-Group vs. Out-Group Beliefs about Productivity by Employee Characteristics

                                            Out         In       Diff.   p-val   #Obs.    #Obs.
                                           Group       Group                      Out      In
                                            (1)         (2)       (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)

       Prediction for Female Workers         31.70      32.79    -1.09   0.13     344       233
                                             (8.78)     (7.81)
       Prediction for Male Workers           34.68      33.60    1.09    0.12     233       344
                                             (6.59)     (9.20)
       Prediction for Indian Workers         36.09      32.06    4.04    0.00     392       185
                                             (7.10)    (12.67)
       Prediction for US Workers             30.46      32.84    -2.38   0.00     185       392
                                            (12.04)     (6.15)
       Prediction for Over 33 Workers        30.92      32.47    -1.55   0.04     334       243
                                             (9.82)     (7.66)
       Prediction for Under 33 Workers       33.85      33.09    0.77    0.31     243       334
                                             (7.03)    (10.14)
Notes : Standard deviations in parentheses. "In-Group" refers to a match in the characteristic between the
employer and the group of workers over which they are making a prediction, e.g. column (1), row 1 is the
average prediction made by female employers about the average productivity of female workers.




                                                      54
