                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DO REPORT CARDS PREDICT FUTURE QUALITY?
                     THE CASE OF SKILLED NURSING FACILITIES

                                      Portia Y. Cornell
                                     David C. Grabowski
                                      Edward C. Norton
                                     Momotazur Rahman

                                      Working Paper 25940
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25940


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




This project was funded by a grant from the National Institute on Aging, # 5P01AG027296-09.
Portia Cornell's time was supported by an Advanced Fellowship from the Veterans Health
Administration. No conflicts of interest or financial disclosures are declared by any author.
Results from this paper were presented at the Midwest Health Economics Conference (2017),
Academy Health Annual Research Meeting (2017), RAND, University of Georgia, Georgia State
University, Harvard University, Cornell University, Tulane University, University of Queensland,
University of Melbourne. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Portia Y. Cornell, David C. Grabowski, Edward C. Norton, and Momotazur Rahman.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Report Cards Predict Future Quality? The Case of Skilled Nursing Facilities
Portia Y. Cornell, David C. Grabowski, Edward C. Norton, and Momotazur Rahman
NBER Working Paper No. 25940
June 2019
JEL No. I11,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

Report cards on provider performance are intended to improve consumer decision-making and
address information gaps in the market for quality. However, inadequate risk adjustment of
report-card measures often biases comparisons across providers. We test whether going to a
skilled nursing facility (SNF) with a higher star rating affects outcomes for a patient. We exploit
variation over time in the distance from a patient's residential ZIP code to SNFs with different
ratings to estimate the causal effect of admission to a higher-rated SNF on health care outcomes,
including mortality. We found that patients who go to higher-rated SNFs experience lower
mortality, fewer days in the nursing home, and fewer hospital readmissions.


Portia Y. Cornell                                Edward C. Norton
Brown University                                 Department of Health Management and Policy
121 S. Main St.                                  Department of Economics
Providence, RI 022902                            University of Michigan
portia_cornell@brown.edu                         School of Public Health
                                                 1415 Washington Heights, M3108 SPHII
David C. Grabowski                               Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029
Harvard University                               and NBER
Department of Health Care Policy                 ecnorton@umich.edu
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue                              Momotazur Rahman
Boston, MA 02115                                 Center for Gerontology and Health Care Research
grabowski@med.harvard.edu                        121 South Main Street, S-6
                                                 Providence, RI-02912
                                                 momotazur_rahman@brown.edu
       Although quality is an essential determinant of the demand for goods and

services, consumers often have incomplete information about quality prior to purchase.

As such, in many markets consumers rely on published firm ratings to help choose a

particular provider of goods or services. The quality of health care services is especially

difficult for consumers to evaluate. Therefore, it can be efficient for the government to

overcome this market failure by collecting information about quality and reporting it

publicly. In the case of health care, the government publishes report cards online for

hospitals, dialysis facilities, nursing homes, and home health agencies. Proponents of

public report cards believe that these ratings overcome the asymmetric information

problem, allow consumers to make informed decisions about quality of care, force health

care providers to compete on quality, and create incentives for providers to improve

quality of care.

       Critics of public report cards, however, are concerned about several practical

problems. Report cards publish ratings based on past measures, which may not predict

future outcomes well. In particular, past measures may not predict future quality of care if

those measures do not directly measure the aspects of quality that consumers care about,

if they are based on small samples, or if they are not adequately risk adjusted. Health care

providers may have an incentive to improve quality, but they also have an incentive to

cream skim and endogenously select patients who are expected to have better outcomes.

Risk adjustment is never perfect.

       Given the theoretical arguments both in favor of and against public report cards,

what matters is how they work in practice (Werner et al., 2012). Do public report card

ratings predict future quality of care? In the case of a Medicare patient seeking a high-
       2
quality nursing home following a hospital stay, if a patient chooses a skilled nursing

facility (SNF) with a higher star rating, will she less likely to have adverse outcomes? Or,

does a higher star rating simply reflect a more favorable mix of patients in the past or

good performance on measures that are not valued by that patient? This paper addresses

those empirical research questions.

       As way of background, a large literature documents the prevalence of low-quality

SNF care (Grabowski and Norton 2012). A parallel literature has observed wide

geographic variation in Medicare spending on post-acute services such as SNFs

(Newhouse and Garber 2013). In linking these two literatures, the general sentiment is

that a great deal of low-value SNF care is delivered (Medicare Payment Advisory

Commission 2016). To discourage low-value care, a number of market-based approaches

have been introduced to encourage a market for quality. These approaches include the use

of report cards (Konetzka, Grabowski et al. 2015), pay-for-performance (Grabowski,

Stevenson et al. 2016; Norton, 1992), and alternative payment models like bundled

payment (Sood, Huckfeldt et al. 2011) and accountable care organizations (McWilliams,

Gilstrap et al. 2017). If these market-based approaches are going to be successful, the

measures of SNF quality of care need to be reliable and valid.

       Researchers and stakeholders have expressed concerns over the different SNF

quality measures used for public reporting and payment (Mor 2006). The primary overall

quality measure for SNFs is the Nursing Home Compare star rating, which is collected by

the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and posted publicly on a website.

Nursing homes (including SNFs) are rated on a variety of measures. This information is

summarized in one overall rating, from one star (worst) to five stars (best). Given that
       3
Nursing Home Compare's overall star rating is intended to provide consumers accurate

information about quality of care, it is important to know if a patient's outcomes will

improve if she chooses a higher-rated nursing home.

       The greatest empirical challenge to evaluating the star ratings is overcoming the

endogeneity of choice of SNF by patients who are not randomly assigned to nursing

homes of varying star ratings. Prior studies have measured the correlation between star

ratings and outcomes (e.g., Kimball et al., 2018; Ogunneye et al., 2015; Unroe et al.,

2012, Ryskina at al., 2018), but they have not addressed the issue of patient selection

across high- and low-star facilities. As such, any differences observed in these earlier

studies may be an artifact of the different types of patients treated at high- and low-star

facilities. Although these studies have often included a broad set of controls, unmeasured

factors are likely correlated with both the selection of a high-quality SNF and patient

outcomes, which leads to biased estimates.

       The contribution of this paper is to address the potential bias introduced by patient

case mix by using instrumental variables. This approach exploits variation over time in

the distance from the patient's home address to the closest nursing home of each star

rating. We ask, if a patient who needs post-acute care goes to a SNF with a higher star

rating, then what effect does that choice have on their mortality, hospital readmission,

and length of stay? We condition our main analyses on the patient's neighborhood. Using

ZIP code fixed effects, the model compares patients from the same ZIP codes who are

discharged at different times but make different choices about which SNF to enter

because star ratings, and the relative distances to SNFs of different star ratings, change

over time. Unlike the earlier literature, our approach allows us to estimate the causal
       4
effect on outcomes of going to a higher-rated facility. The local average treatment effect

for compliers is the effect of choosing a higher-rated SNF because of the changes in

proximity between a person's home and SNFs in each star category.

       To preview our results, using data from nearly 1.3 million new SNF Medicare

patients in 2012-2013, we find that being admitted to a SNF with one additional star leads

to significantly lower mortality, fewer days in the nursing home, fewer hospital

readmissions, and more days at home or with home health care during the first six months

post SNF admission. These results are robust to different modeling choices, such as the

inclusion of SNF or hospital fixed effects; specification of star rating as linear or ordinal;

and different ways of measuring outcomes.


                                           I. Background

                                     A. Skilled nursing facilities

       Consumers in the nursing home market consist of both chronic (long-stay) and

post-acute SNF (short-stay) residents. Each year, nearly 4 million elderly persons are

admitted to SNFs for post-acute care, which is covered by Medicare. On any given day,

about 1 million people reside in these facilities and receive long-term care, which is

financed by Medicaid, private insurance, and by out-of-pocket payments. On a typical

day, about 58% of nursing home patients were financed by Medicaid, 16% were financed

by Medicare and 26% were financed privately through long-term care insurance or pay

out-of-pocket.

       SNFs offer skilled nursing care and rehabilitation services, such as physical and

occupational therapy and speech-language pathology services, to Medicare beneficiaries


       5
following an acute-care hospital stay. The supply of SNFs in the United States has

remained relatively constant over the past few years, composed of roughly 15,000

facilities that are two-thirds for-profit. Almost all SNFs are also Medicaid-certified

nursing homes that care for chronically ill or disabled residents for long-term stays.

       In 2015, Medicare spent $29.8 billion on 2.4 million covered SNF admissions for

1.7 million fee-for-service beneficiaries (MedPAC 2017). Between 2007 and 2009,

spending on post-acute care accounted for only 5% of the level of spending on Medicare

parts A and B, but 73% of the variation in spending, adjusted for input prices and case

mix (Institute of Medicine 2013, Table 2-10). The approximate median Medicare

payment per SNF stay was just under $18,361, with an average length of stay of 26.4

days (MedPAC 2017). Medicare's prospective payment system (PPS) for SNF services

was implemented based on the start of the facility fiscal year on or after July 1, 1998.

Under the Medicare SNF PPS, facilities are paid a predetermined daily rate, up to 100

days, but only after a qualifying hospital stay of at least three days. The per diem

prospective payment rate for SNFs covers routine, ancillary, and capital costs related to

the services provided under part A of the Medicare program. Adjustments to the SNF

Medicare payment rates are made according to a resident's case-mix and geographic

factors associated with wage variation (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission 2009).

Importantly, SNF payment is not adjusted based on their star rating.

                                    B. Nursing Home Compare

       In October 1998, CMS introduced a web-based nursing home report card

initiative called Nursing Home Compare (www.medicare.gov/NHCompare). Nursing

Home Compare was designed with the goal of harnessing "market forces to encourage
       6
poorly performing homes to improve quality or face the loss of revenue" (page 3) (U.S.

General Accounting Office 2002). In addition to information on facility characteristics

(e.g., size, ownership status) and location, Nursing Home Compare reports data on

various dimensions of quality. The initial report cards introduced in 1998 included only

reports of survey deficiencies, but CMS has expanded the quality information available

on the website. Information on professional and nurse aide staffing were introduced in

June 2000, and the Nursing Home Quality Initiative (NHQI) in 2002 added Minimum

Data Set (MDS)-based quality indicators to the website. These quality indicators

encompass both short- and long-stay measures of patient outcomes.

       Beginning in December 2008, the Nursing Home Compare website now reports

four new composite quality measures: an overall 5-star rating along with specific 5-star

ratings for inspections (deficiencies), staffing, and the MDS-based quality measures (e.g.

restraint rate, anti-psychotic use rate, etc.). In 2016, CMS introduced three claims-based

short-stay measures to the website and the 5-star rating: successful discharge to the

community, an emergency department visit, and readmission to the hospital. Our

analysis, which spans 2012­2013, does not include these updated measures.

       Star ratings are composed of three sub-domains: health inspections, staffing, and

quality measures (QM) (CMS 2017). The health inspection domain, which has the most

influence on the overall rating, is calculated from within-state rankings to control for

between-state differences but it is not risk-adjusted. The staffing domain is case-mix

adjusted using Resource Utilization Group (RUG)-III scores in the quarter closest to the

date of the most recent staffing survey. In the quality measures domain, ratings are risk-

adjusted using a logistic regression with covariates from claims and MDS assessments.
       7
The models include age, sex, length of stay, comorbidity indexes, previous

hospitalizations, and diagnoses. They do not include socioeconomic or race variables.

        Several factors make standard risk adjustment techniques challenging. First, a key

concern is that these measures do not adequately account for selection of patients across

facilities due to the weak explanatory power of the variables used in the risk adjustment

modeling. There may be unobserved measures excluded from the risk adjustment that

bias cross-facility comparisons. Second, the available measures may not accurately

reflect quality that is important to patients if the inputs to final star ratings are not are

clinically relevant. Finally, some of the reported measures may be susceptible to up-

coding and gaming by SNFs due to their use in public reporting or payment (Bowblis and

Brunt 2013, Ryskina at al., 2018).

        Several papers have questioned whether the Nursing Home Compare measures

are reliable and valid (Mor 2006). A number of studies have focused on improving the

risk adjustment variables or methodology employed on Nursing Home Compare. More

extensive risk adjustment of the measures was shown to change the rank ordering of the

facilities (Mukamel, Glance et al. 2008). Other research has argued that the Nursing

Home Compare measures can be improved by multilevel modeling (Arling, Lewis et al.

2007) or multivariate risk adjustment (Li, Cai et al. 2009).

        These studies all show ways in which the existing measures on Nursing Home

Compare might be made more consistent relative to other measures. An issue is that these

studies lack a comparison measure that is purged of selection. As Arling and colleagues

(2007) acknowledged, "we have no `gold standard' for validating our risk adjustment

methodology" (p. 1193). This lack of a gold standard raises two issues. The first is that,
        8
with inadequate risk adjustment, any measure of quality is contaminated because it partly

reflects selection. That is, high quality ratings based on patient outcomes may reflect a

healthier mix of patients in ways that cannot be adjusted through statistics. The other

related issue is that, if patients endogenously select into certain SNFs, it is hard to

measure the causal effect of quality rating on patient outcomes. Patient selection is

challenging to overcome.

       Our goal is not to examine whether we can improve the existing risk adjustment,

but rather to evaluate the validity of the existing measures. Our approach follows a new

literature that employs instrumental variables to validate quality measures. Doyle and

colleagues (2017) studied hospital quality measures by exploiting ambulance company

preferences as an instrument for patient assignment. They found that assignment to a

higher-scoring hospital resulted in better patient outcomes. In a study of SNF re-

hospitalization, Rahman and colleagues (2016) instrumented for selection to a nursing

home using empty beds in a patient's local market. The authors found that assignment to

a nursing home with a historically low re-hospitalization rate led to fewer readmissions.

We will use a similar approach to answer our research question with a causal estimate of

the effect of going to a facility with a higher star rating on patients' outcomes.


                                        II. Data and sample

                                           A. Data sources

       This study relies on several sources for individual-level characteristics including

the Medicare enrollment denominator file, Medicare claims and the Minimum Data Set

(MDS) for nursing home resident assessments, and SNF provider data, including Online


       9
Survey Certification and Reporting (OSCAR) and quality ratings from Nursing Home

Compare.

       The Medicare Standard Analytic File includes all claims related to inpatient,

skilled nursing facility care, home health, and hospice services for Medicare fee-for-

service enrollees. All Part A claims (inpatient, SNF) include dates of service and up to 25

diagnoses. The Medicare enrollment file identifies individuals enrolled in Medicare

within a given year and includes demographic data, survival status, residential ZIP code,

and program eligibility information for Parts A, B and D, Medicare Advantage (managed

care), and Medicaid.

       The MDS contains clinical assessments of all residents in Medicare- or Medicaid-

certified nursing homes (regardless of the payment source). They are given upon

admission to the facility and then periodically, at least quarterly, thereafter. The MDS

includes summary measures of cognitive and physical functioning, continence, pain,

mood state, diagnoses, health conditions, mortality risk, special treatments, and

medication use.

       The Online Survey Certification and Reporting (OSCAR) System is a compilation

of all the data elements collected by surveyors during the inspection survey conducted at

nursing facilities for the purpose of certification for participation in the Medicare and

Medicaid programs. The database includes organizational characteristics such as the

number of beds, ownership, and chain membership, staffing availability and aggregate

patient characteristics. SNF star rating data is obtained from CMS website (CMS 2017).

We also used American Hospital Association (AHA) data for year 2013 for several

hospital characteristics.
       10
                                          B. Study sample

       Applying the Residential History File methodology (Intrator, et al. 2011), which

concatenates MDS assessment and Medicare claims into individual beneficiary

trajectories, we identified all Medicare fee-for-service (FFS) beneficiaries who were

discharged directly from an acute general hospital to a SNF for post-acute care between

January of 2012 and June of 2013. We started with hospital and SNF claims data that

identifies 1,576,010 SNF admissions with valid hospital and SNF identification,

discharged from 4,706 hospitals with no SNF claims during the previous 12 months. We

excluded 28,740 (1.82%) who were not discharged from a general acute care hospital.

We then merged this data to MDS. We excluded 182,176 (11.77%) observations because

either we could not find matched assessment in MDS based on individual identification

and the admission date, or MDS indicated that the individual was in nursing home during

the previous one-year period. We excluded patients with any SNF residence history in the

one year prior to admission because they would be frailer than post-acute care patients

from the community. Finally, we dropped 86,638 (6.34%) of the individuals who did not

reside in the 48 contiguous states or did not have a valid residential ZIP code. Our final

sample consisted of 1,278,456 Medicare FFS beneficiaries discharged from 4,332 acute

care hospitals to 15,166 SNFs.

                                      C. Outcomes measures

       In order to assess the validity of star ratings, we measure their effect on outcomes

that are relevant to patient welfare and system costs. In this paper, we consider the time

spent in six mutually exclusive settings: at home without home health, at home with

home health, in skilled nursing care, in hospital inpatient care, hospice care, and
       11
deceased. These outcomes are key because hospitalization from SNF is not only viewed

as a signal of potential inefficiencies and cost-shifting by nursing homes, but also can

cause stress and disorientation for patients. Mortality is commonly used as a marker for

hospital quality of care and has implications for hospital reimbursement, although it is not

part of the Nursing Home Compare rating.

        Using the Residential History File (RHF) methodology (Intrator et al. 2011), we

follow patients for 180 days following their admission to a SNF by concatenating

Medicare enrollment, Medicare claims, and MDS. We assign the patient's location on

each day to one of the six settings: at home without home health, at home with home

health care, in the SNF, in hospital, in hospice, and deceased. Table 1 shows mean

statistics for the outcomes variables. Our main outcomes of interest are the following

dichotomous variables: any hospitalization within 30 and 180 days; death within 30 and

180 days; and becoming a long-stay nursing resident, defined as staying in a SNF or

nursing home for longer than 100 days. At the end of 180 days, 54% of patients had

hospitalized at least once; 21% were deceased; and 16% had spent more than 100 days in

the nursing home.

       We also construct six integer outcome variables, each quantifying the number of

days in the specified setting in the 180 days following discharge from the hospital, also

summarized in Table 1. The mean number of days in a nursing home is 48. Figure 1 plots

the share of patients in each setting on each of the 180 days following SNF admission.

On day 0 everyone was in a SNF, as determined by the inclusion criteria for the analysis.

On day 60, 35% of them were at home without any Medicare paid support, 24% of them



       12
were at home with home health care support, 12% were dead, 3% were in hospital, 2%

were in hospice, and the remaining 23% were in a nursing home.

                                 D. Nursing home quality measure

       Our main explanatory variable is the five-star rating from the admitting SNF's

Nursing Home Compare Report Card, coded as an integer between 1 and 5 where 1

indicates the lowest possible quality rating. For our preferred analysis, we enter star

rating as a continuous variable, assuming that an increase in star rating of the admitting

SNF by one star has linear effect on outcomes. In a sensitivity analysis, we treat each star

rating as a binary indicator (four dummies for star ratings 2-5 with rating 1 as the

benchmark).

       A facility may see a change in its overall rating whenever new data are available

in any of the three domains--inspections, staffing, and quality measures (QM). The

inspection and staffing domains are updated approximately yearly after an inspection; in

addition, the health-inspection score can also change with a new complaint, a revisit,

resolution of disputed deficiencies, or exclusion of old complaints after a set period of

time. Quality measures are updated quarterly for measures based on the MDS and every

six months for claims measures. Thus, a given SNF could get an updated rating

approximately every quarter. Because inspections are distributed throughout the year,

consumers may face changes each month in the SNF ratings of the SNFs near to them.

        Figure 2 plots the proportion of SNFs with each star rating during the 18 months

when individuals in our sample were admitted to SNFs (January of 2012 and June of

2013). During this time period, the share of SNFs with one star declined from 15% to

12% and the share of SNFs with five-star increased from 16% to 22%. These changes are
       13
due to updates of different components of star-ratings and not due change in cut-off

points or re-basing. Such change in cut-off points occurred in October 2010 (transitioning

from MDS 2.0 to MDS 3.0), in February 2015 when CMS changed weights for staffing

and QM components and later in March-July 2016. Therefore, our instrumental variable

has much variation over time within geographic area and these variations are due to

actual changes in measured quality of care, not arbitrary changes in thresholds.

       Figure 2 also plots the share of patients in our sample that were admitted in SNFs

with different rating. The share of post-acute patients going to one- and two-star SNFs

declined more steeply than the decline in proportion of facilities in these categories;

whereas the share of patients going to four- and five-star SNFs increased at a higher rate

than the share of facilities. Because nearly all facilities admit a mix of short- and long-

stay patients, the trends could be explained by 4- and 5-star SNFS may be increasing their

market share of more profitable post-acute patients while 1- and 2-star facilities are

increasing the proportion of their beds occupied by long-stay residents.

                                        E. Control variables

       We include a series of patient-level control variables. Demographic characteristics

include age, sex, and race from the enrollment file and language spoken and marital

status from the MDS. We also include dual-Medicaid eligibility on the month of SNF

admission from the Medicare enrollment file. We distinguish between partial- and full-

dual eligibility where partial-dual eligible beneficiaries have some cost-sharing that are

not paid by Medicaid.

        From the index hospitalization claims prior to SNF admission, we include

measures of health status. These measures included the Elixhauser (Elixhauser et al.,
       14
1998) and Deyo (Deyo et al., 1992) co-morbidity indexes, hospital length of stay, the

number of cardiac care unit (CCU) days, and the number of intensive care unit (ICU)

days during the hospitalization. Other clinical characteristics were obtained from the

MDS and include indicators for common diagnoses (e.g., diabetes, serious mental illness

etc.), and the Morris late loss activities of daily living (ADL) scale (Morris et al., 1999),

and the cognitive performance scale (CPS) (Morris et al., 1994). We summarize the

control variables for the full sample (see Table 2).




                                      III. Empirical Strategy

                                         A. Empirical model

       Our main regression of interest is the relationship between star rating and patient

outcomes, controlling for patient factors and residential ZIP code effects. This

relationship can be described by equation (1)

       (1)      = 0 + 1  +   +  +  + 

       where  refers to the outcome of person  residing in ZIP code z discharged

from hospital h to nursing home  in month t.  is the star rating (on a scale of 1-5) of

the admitting nursing facility on month t; later we will explain how we deal statistically

with the endogeneity of this variable. The vector  includes the patient's demographics

and clinical characteristics;  are month-of-admission fixed effects;  are patient's

residential ZIP code fixed effects; and  is the residual.

       This model does not include any SNF-level variables other than the SNF's star

rating. This is partly because the star rating is a composite measure that summarizes

       15
different quality aspects of a SNF. Additionally, our objective is to inform stakeholders

(patients, hospitals, accountable care organizations and Medicare advantage plans) about

whether this one-dimensional measure can be used to choose a SNF in an informed

manner. Of note, related prior research also has not accounted for other provider

characteristics when estimating similar models (Doyle et al., 2017; Rahman et al., 2016).

                              B. Inference problem: patient selection

       A key issue when estimating the effect of an increase in star rating on days in a

post-acute setting is that patients are not randomly selected into nursing homes of varying

quality, reflecting both demand- and supply-side differential selection. On the consumer

side, patients who select a SNF based on quality information may be more savvy

consumers of health care in other ways, such as the selection of doctors and hospitals.

Patients who are more strongly motivated to recover at home may select a SNF where

they think they have the best chance of a successful discharge. On the other hand,

readmissions-reduction and hospital value-based purchasing, which penalize high

readmission rates, give hospitals incentives to select particular patients for care in more

highly-rated SNFs (Norton et al., 2018). A hospital's discharge planner may

preferentially send patients that are at high risk of readmission, or who will have high

post-discharge expenses, toward high-star facilities to reduce costly re-hospitalizations.

These examples of selection bias would exert opposing biases, leading a naïve model to

either over- or under-state the influence of star rating on the outcome. Traditional

methods to control for this bias, such hospital or SNF fixed effects to estimate the effect

of within-facility changes in star rating, do not address patient sorting over time on

unobserved characteristics in response to quality ratings.
       16
           One way to provide suggestive evidence of this kind of selection is to compare

descriptive characteristics of patients admitted to a SNF above, equal to, and below the

median for their ZIP code (see last three columns of Table 2). Even within ZIP codes,

there are important differences between patients who go to SNFs with above-average

versus below-average star ratings, including greater than 20% differences in prevalence

of full-dual eligibility, Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, and bipolar disease. These

differences suggest potential bias from other unobserved differences. Therefore, our

main statistical concern is how to control for the endogeneity bias in star rating to

estimate causal effects. In the following section, we propose an instrumental variable

approach to address patient selection. The IV approach estimates the causal effect of star

rating for the patient whose choice of SNF of a particular star rating is influenced by

distance from home. The IV models also include ZIP code, SNF, and hospital fixed

effects.



                C. Proximity to SNF in each star category as the instrumental variable

           To address selection on unobserved health status, we leverage variation in the

quality rating of nursing homes near a patient's home ZIP code during the month of SNF

admission. Our IV is the distance from patient's residential ZIP code to the nearest SNF

with a particular star rating in the month of SNF admission. The intuition is

straightforward (Gowrisankaran and Town, 1999). While choosing a SNF, a patient faces

a choice of SNFs distinguished by distance and by star-ratings. Because star-ratings

change month-to-month, patients from same ZIP code face different choices depending

on the month of admission. For example, even when the choice of SNFs remains the
           17
same, the proximity to a 5-star SNF can vary month-to-month. Because proximity to a

SNF is one of the main determinant of SNF admission (Hirth et al. 2014; Rahman,

Norton, Grabowski 2016), we use the variation in proximities of SNFs with different star-

rating as IVs.

        To operationalize patient preferences based on distance, we created five

instrumental variables based on the log-distance from the patients' home to the nearest

SNF in each quality category (following a similar approach by Gowrisankaran and Town,
                         
1999). We denote this as  , which is the natural logarithm of the distance from the

patients' ZIP code z to the nearest k-star SNF (where k=1,2,3,4,5) from in month t. For

each patient in the dataset, we obtain geo-coordinates for the centroid of the ZIP code of

home residence reported in the Medicare denominator file, and for each SNF, we know

the coordinates of the exact address. For each patient we calculate the distance (using the

great-circle formula) from the centroid of the patient's home ZIP code to nearest facility
                            
of quality level k. Thus, a  can have really large value if the nearest k-star SNF is far

away from patient's ZIP code. We use the natural logarithm of distance because

preliminary analysis showed that the relationship was linear on a log scale. Because we

have the coordinates of the exact address of each nursing home, the distance from SNF to

centroid is greater than zero even when the patient and facility are in the same ZIP code.

Thus each ZIP code in our dataset has a 5-dimensional vector of instrumental variables,

where the first value is the log distance to the nearest 1-star facility in that month, the

second is the log distance to the nearest 2-star facility, etc.

        There are two ways that the instruments can change value over time. First, the

star rating of existing SNFs can change each month. Between 1 January 2012 and 30
        18
June 2013, out of the 15,166 SNFs used by our patient cohort, 12,080 of them changed

star rating at least once. Second, there can be entry or exit of a nearby SNF. However,

there were only 153 SNF entries into the market and 79 exits. Thus, the variation in IVs

over time is mostly driven by changes in star ratings of existing SNFs. It is important to

note that a change in star-rating of one SNF can change the value of more than one IV.

For example, an increase in a rating of a nearby SNF from 3 stars to 4 stars can change
                                                       3
the values of both distance to the nearest 3-star SNF (  ) and the distance to the nearest
            4
4-star SNF (  ). Alternatively, this SNF may no longer be one of the nearest SNFs

because there of another 4-star SNF that is nearer to that ZIP code; in this case only the
                                    3
distance to the nearest 3-star SNF (  ) changes.

       Our instruments exploit both cross-sectional and longitudinal variation in star

ratings, not just within-SNF changes in star ratings. For example, an alternative IV could

be defined as the star rating of the nearest SNF from patient's ZIP code in the month of

admission (in that case, there will be just one IV). In such case, after controlling for ZIP

code fixed effects, such an IV would rely only on the change in star rating of the nearest

SNF from a ZIP code. In contrast, our instruments incorporate variation in star ratings

over the entire distribution of stars, and as a result have much greater strength in

predicting the first-stage model of choice of number of stars.

       Another important aspect of this study design is that it controls for residential ZIP

code fixed effects. Prior studies using differential distances (Grabowski et al. 2013, Hirth

et al. 2014) assume that patients generally do not choose their home residence with

regard to the quality of nearby post-acute-care facilities  assignment to quality is

therefore effectively random. However, we suspect that any difference in average
        19
characteristics of patients between ZIP codes (for example, demand for quality) is

partially reflected in the star rating of the nearest SNF. Therefore, we control for such

differences using residential ZIP code fixed effects.

       The first-stage equation predicts the star rating of the SNF chosen by the patient

as a function of the log-distance to the closest SNF of each star rating and other

individual, time, and residential ZIP code fixed effects.

       (2)       = 0 + 5   
                       =1   +   +  +  + 

            
       Here  is the log-distance of the nearest k-star SNF from ZIP code z in month t.

We expect the coefficients on distance, representing the relationship between distance

and average quality, to be negative for high-star SNFs, positive for low-star SNFs, and

monotonically declining from low- to high-star. As the distance to a one-star or two-star

SNF increases, a patient is less likely to choose a low-star SNF and more likely to choose

a high-star SNF. As the distance to a four-star or five-star SNF increases, the predicted

star rating of the chosen SNF will decrease. To estimate the causal effect of star rating on

the outcome, the second stage regresses the outcome on predicted star rating  from

equation (2).

       (3)       = 0 +  +   +  +  + 


We estimate this system of equations as two-stage-least-squares using the xtivreg2

command in Stata with standard errors clustered by ZIP code.

                                       D. Robustness checks

       We also estimate these models substituting residential ZIP code fixed effects with

hospital fixed effects, including both residential ZIP code and hospital fixed effects, and

including both ZIP code and SNF fixed effects. A SNF-fixed-effects model measures
       20
differences in outcomes between two patients who go to the same provider at different

times, conditioning on time-invariant differences in quality between providers. Hospital

fixed effects control for differences in hospital quality associated with SNF star rating.

For the two-way (hospital and ZIP code, and SNF and ZIP code) fixed effect models, we

use the ivreg2hdfe command (Bahar 2014) because xtivreg2 command is

designed for one set of fixed effects. Test statistics are based on robust standard errors

clustered by residential zip code (with SNF FE models, clustered by SNF).

       In most of our analyses, we consider star rating as a continuous variable, which

assumes that an increase in star rating has a linear relationship with outcomes. As a

sensitivity analysis, to allow for a nonlinear relationship, we examine the effect of star

rating using separate binary variables for each star rating with one-star SNF as the

benchmark category. We also estimate our model including diagnosis related groups

(DRG) fixed effects.

       Several studies (Rahman, et al. 2013, Rahman, et al. 2016) found that admission

to hospital-based SNFs yields better health outcomes and that the better outcome is likely

due to better coordination between the hospital and the SNF. It is possible that effects of

such coordination are captured in the quality ratings. So we estimated separate models for

patients treated in hospitals with and without hospital-based SNFs.

       We also perform a robustness check to address concern over the competing risk of

death. We estimate the binary outcome models on the subset of patients who were alive

on day 30 and 180, respectively, for the 30-day rehospitalization and for the 180-day

rehospitalization and long-stay nursing variables. We also estimate the continuous-days



       21
models adjusted for exposure time. To create these variables, we calculate the mortality-

adjusted days as Ya = Y / days_alive *180.


                                             IV. Results

                       A. Descriptive results to assess the validity of the IVs

       We perform several analyses to assess the validity of our IVs in addition to

performing standard statistical tests. The main objective of these analyses is to assess the

within and between variation in SNF choice and patient characteristics across residential

ZIP codes. To demonstrate the variation over time within ZIP codes, we calculate the ZIP

code level median distance (logged) to the nearest 5-star rated SNF and compare patients

who experiences different values of the IV relative to their zip code level median. The

idea is that, for each ZIP code, we have 18 values (one per month) of an IV varying by

month and can calculate the median of these 18 values. Then we compare patients within

a ZIP code who were admitted in months when the IV is smaller, equal to and greater

than the ZIP code level median.

       The first step is to quantify the within-ZIP code variation of the instruments.

Because we have five different instruments that are similar in nature, we just focus on the

natural log of distance of the nearest 5-star SNF. About 20 percent of the patients

experienced longer distance to the nearest 5-star SNF relative to the median value this

distance in their ZIP code. These individuals experienced, on average, 2.44 times higher

value of the fifth IV relative to the individuals experiencing the median value. On the

other hand, 15 percent experienced a shorter distance to the nearest 5-star SNF relative to

the median value this distance in their ZIP code.


       22
       The first descriptive analysis provides visual evidence that our IVs strongly

predict the endogenous variable, quality rating. Figure 3 compares the share of patients

admitted to a 5-star SNF during months when the distance to the nearest 5-star rated SNF

is above the ZIP code level median to those admitted during months when the distance

was below the ZIP code level median. In addition to confirming that demand declines

with distance (the two lines slope downwards), it also shows that within-ZIP-code

variation over time is important. When the distance is below the median (upper line) then

the share of patients is larger. There is a significant difference between the two lines for a

wide range of distances. This implies that the first-stage relationship of the IV analysis is

likely to hold even with ZIP code fixed effects included.

       The second descriptive analysis assesses the validity of our exclusion-restriction

assumption. A common technique to assess the assumption of ignorable treatment

assignment is to stratify the sample by high and low values of the IV and evaluate

covariate balance. Characteristics of patients experiencing different values of the fifth IV

relative to the ZIP code level median are presented in Table 3. While Table 2 shows that

patients discharged to SNFs with different star-rating from same ZIP code look fairly

different, Table 3 shows that patients experiencing different level of the fifth IV look

almost identical.

       To facilitate an intuitive visual display, we aggregate the patient covariates listed

in Table 2 into one measure, the predicted likelihood of entering a 5-star SNF, which is

similar to a propensity score. To create the measure, we estimate a multinomial logit

model with star rating of chosen SNF as the outcome and predicted the likelihood of

entering a 5-star SNF for each patient in the sample. This prediction score can be
       23
interpreted as the demand for a 5-star-rated SNF. Figure 4 plots the predicted likelihood

of admission to a 5-star SNF for two groups of patients: those who were admitted to a

SNF during months when the distance to the nearest 5-star rated SNF is above the ZIP

code median, and those below the ZIP code median. If the exclusion restriction

assumption is correct, then the groups stratified by distance within ZIP code will be

balanced on their covariates and the predicted admission will be the same for the two

groups. As expected, these lines are overlapping, implying that patients within a ZIP code

experiencing lower and higher value of IV are observably the same. Thus, conditional

upon ZIP code fixed effects, patients with different values of the IV are similar. Of note,

both of the lines in Figures 3 and 4 are slightly downward sloping, implying that patients

in ZIP codes with different values of the IVs are somewhat different. This justifies the

inclusion of ZIP code fixed effects.

       Besides comparing observable characteristics between patients with different

values of the IVs, we also use two falsification checks as additional evidence that the

instrument satisfies the exclusion-restriction assumptions. First, we assess whether

changes in star rating of SNFs in the vicinity attracts more patients to receive post-acute

care in SNFs instead of going to other settings such as home, home health care, or a

hospital-based rehabilitation facility. A change in the balance of patients discharged to a

SNF could suggest that patient selection associated with the IVs might be driving our

results. We analyze all hospital discharges during our study period to assess whether the

likelihood of a discharge to a SNF is associated with the IVs conditional upon residential

ZIP code fixed effects. We find no such statistical association (see Appendix Table A5).



       24
       Second, using a sample of patients who had no previous SNF stay and were

discharged from an inpatient hospital stay directly to home in 2012-13, we estimate the

reduced-form effect of the IVs on the 90-day mortality and 30-day hospital readmissions,

conditional on ZIP code fixed effects (see Appendix Table A4). An association of post-

discharge outcomes with variation in proximity to SNFs with different star rating would

implicate some violation of the instrument's exclusion restriction, perhaps related to

hospital quality or post-discharge practices. The association of the IVs with these

outcomes was both statistically insignificant and negligibly small (see Appendix Table

A4). The null finding in this non-SNF sample is consistent with our assumptions about

the instrument's exogeneity.

                                       B. Regression results

       Before describing the main results, we discuss the results from the first-stage

models to show how strong our instrumental variables are (see Table 4). The outcome in

the first-stage model is star rating, an integer from 1 to 5. We run five versions of the

model, differing in whether we included fixed effects or not for ZIP code, SNF and

hospital. The first column has no fixed effects. The second and third columns have either

hospital fixed effects or patient ZIP code fixed effects. The fourth column has both

hospital and patient ZIP code fixed effects. The fifth column has patient ZIP code and

SNF fixed effects. The results are broadly similar across all five columns, although not

surprisingly, when adding fixed effects the R-squared increases and the F-statistics for

the instruments decrease. Our preferred model is the third column, with patient ZIP code

fixed effects, because this appears to provide the most control for unobserved patient-



       25
level characteristics; adding hospital or SNF fixed effects has little additional predictive

power, while using up many degrees of freedom.

        The five instrumental variables individually and collectively strongly predict the

endogenous variable of star rating. Each instrument is the natural logarithm of the

distance from the patient's ZIP code centroid to the nearest SNF of a particular star rating

(1 through 5, for five instruments). The t-statistics in the model with patient ZIP code

fixed effects range from -46 to 35. Therefore, each instrument is highly statistically

significant. Collectively for the five instruments, the F-statistic is greater than 365 in all

models with and without fixed effects (Table 4), far exceeding the minimum

recommended number (Staiger and Stock, 1997). The pattern of coefficient magnitudes is

also revealing and plausible. The coefficients on the distance to a one-star SNF is

positive, and the magnitudes decline monotonically with the coefficient on the distance to

a five-star SNF being negative.

        Table 5 shows the first-stage regression results where admission to SNFs with

different star ratings are modeled as separate outcomes. The four columns of this table

represent regressions for admission to SNF with k = 2, 3, 4 and 5 star rating, with 1-star

SNF as the benchmark. These models include ZIP code fixed effects. The likelihood of

admission to a SNF with star rating k is negatively associated with the distance to the

nearest SNF with star rating k and positively associated with the distances to the SNFs

with star rating other than k. For example, an increase in the distance of the nearest 2 star-

SNF by one mile decreases the likelihood of admission to a 2 star SNF by 1.5 percentage

points. On the other hand, an increase in the distance of the nearest 3 star-SNF by one


        26
mile increases the likelihood of admission to a 2 star SNF by 0.5 percentage points (see

Appendix Table A1).

       The main results show that patients discharged from a hospital who go to a higher

rated SNF have significantly lower rates of death, rehospitalization, and long-term

nursing stay (see Table 6). Each coefficient in Table 6 is from a different regression

model. After discussing the results from our preferred specification  2SLS with patient

ZIP code fixed effects  we describe how the results are similar or different across

different model specifications.

       The outcomes are any acute hospitalizations in 30 and 180 days, death within 30

and 100 days, and becoming a long-stay (>100 days) nursing-home resident. The results

from the 2SLS model with ZIP code fixed effects and patient characteristics show that

going to a SNF with one additional star leads to statistically significant decreases in the

probability of 30-day and 180-day hospitalizations of 0.005 and 0.004, although our

estimates are not statistically different from zero. The probability of death within 30 and

180 days decreases by 0.005 and 0.01. The probability of a nursing-home stay over 100

days decreases by 0.008. These results for mortality and long-term nursing-home stay are

statistically significant and clinically striking. To put the magnitudes in context,

compared to the sample means reported in Table 1, these effects represent 6% and 5%

decreases from the average 30-day and 180-day levels of mortality of 0.07 and 0.21,

respectively; and 5% decrease from average incidence of long-term nursing stay, which

was 0.16. A change of two stars would have twice the predicted effect.

       Table 6 also supports the assumption that our instruments are exogenous to

patient characteristics, conditional on patient residential ZIP code. Coefficients change
       27
notably with the addition of ZIP code fixed effects, but adding patient characteristics in

the third set of models, estimates are similar, suggesting that the IV estimates are not

conditional on patient characteristics. (Reduced-form estimates in Appendix Table A2 are

consistent with this result.) After adjusting for ZIP code fixed effects, the OLS and IV

results are similar. The Hausman test statistics also do not reject the null hypothesis of

exogenous regressors, suggesting that with ZIP fixed effects OLS gives similar estimates

to our IV estimator. The final set of models adds SNF fixed effects. Addition of SNF

fixed effects to the OLS models does substantially change the effect finding, resulting

effects of star-rating to be statistically insignificant. However, in the 2SLS models,

estimates do not change with the addition of SNF fixed effects. Similarly, the Hausman

test statistics reject the null hypothesis of exogenous regressor. We proceed with the

robustness checks based on the (more parsimonious) instrumental variable model with

patient characteristics and ZIP code fixed effects.

       Table 7 shows the main 2SLS regression results (zip code fixed effect model)

with star rating as categorical variables, where 1-star SNF is the reference category. An

admission to a 5-star SNF instead of a 1-star SNF, reduced 30-day mortality by 2

percentage points, 180-day mortality by 4.5 percentage points, and long-term nursing stay

by 4 percentage points. These results are generally consistent with a fourfold increases of

the effects with ZIP code fixed effects in Table 6, suggesting that specifying a linear

effect of star rating is a reasonable approximation. The addition of SNF fixed effects

(Appendix Table A3) gives similar results.

       Table 8 shows an alternative specification with the dependent variables defined as

the number of days in one of six mutually exclusive and exhaustive states (death, hospice,
       28
inpatient, nursing home, home health, and home). Because the total number of days is

180, the coefficients in each column corresponding to the same set of models (either OLS

or 2SLS) sum approximately to zero. The magnitudes of the coefficients are directly

interpretable as days. For example, the causal effect of an increase in star rating by one

star is to spend 1.44 fewer days deceased in the first six months post discharge. Given

that on average patients spend 25 days in death, a 1.44 day change is a 5.8% change. The

percentage changes from the mean for the other outcomes are 3.3% increase in inpatient

hospital days, 2.4% decrease in SNF days, 4.0% increase in days at home with home

health, and 2.5% increase in days at home. We also examined the mortality-adjusted

days. These results, presented in Appendix Table A7, are consistent in magnitude and

direction with our main results.



       It is instructive to see how the results are a function of time since discharge. We

re-ran all the models 180 times, by day, and graphed the results (see Figure 5). The x-axis

for each of the six graphs are time in days, and the y-axis is the increase in probability of

being in that state given a one-star increase in rating. The 2SLS coefficients are roughly

equal to the integral of the effects shown in the graphs. The effect of an increase in star

rating increases the chance of being at home, and that effect gets gradually stronger.

Higher rated SNFs also increase the use of home health, lower the use of SNFs, and

lower the probability of death. These results are not short run; they get larger in

magnitude and stronger in statistical significance over time.

       Table 9 presents specification checks. The first two rows show binary outcomes

with hospital fixed effects; these are similar to our main results. We report 2SLS results
       29
with separately for patients in hospitals with and without hospital based SNF. The

direction of the effects are the same for both samples. However, the size of the effect

varies. Finally, inclusion of diagnoses related group (DRG) fixed effects does not change

the results substantially.




                                           V. Discussion

        We find that discharge to a higher star SNF led to significantly lower mortality,

fewer days in the nursing home, fewer hospital readmissions, and more days at home or

with home health care during the first six months post SNF admission. SNF star ratings

matter for patient outcomes. This is intuitive, given that star ratings are based in part on

quality of care measures, and consistent with previous estimates of the association of star

rating with hospitalization and mortality, some of which we summarize in Appendix

Table A7. But prior studies have not been able to control for the clear endogeneity of

choice of SNF, leaving uncertain whether simple correlations are due to patient selection

or actual causal effects. Our results show a strong causal effect in the expected direction.

Our instrument identifies variation in star rating both from within-provider change in star

rating and from patients who go to a different facility because of changes in relative

distances of each quality rating. The IV results are robust to the inclusion of SNF fixed

effects, suggesting that within-SNF changes in star rating do reflect differences in patient

outcomes.

        Some limitations in the interpretation of these results are important to note. We

estimate a local average treatment effect among patients whose choice of SNF quality is


        30
influenced by variation in distance to the SNF in each quality category. Thus our results

may be driven by patients (or their discharge planners) with stronger preferences for

quality.

       Star ratings are not based on patient mortality, and yet we find that higher ratings

are nonetheless powerful predictors of survival. In 2016, CMS introduced new quality

measures into the star rating, including short-stay, unplanned hospital readmission and

successful discharge to the community. We do not find strong effects of star rating on

hospital admissions, but these new measures may improve the performance of star rating

to predict hospitalization.

       These findings give rise to two important questions. First, given that higher star

ratings lead to lower rates of death and hospital readmission,, are patients and their

advocates using this measure effectively when selecting SNFs? And if not, what policy

measures could increase the use of the star ratings?

       A large literature has suggested that the use of the star ratings on the Nursing

Home Compare website is relatively low (e.g., Konetzka and Perraillon, 2016;

Shugarman and Brown, 2007). Consumers lack awareness of the ratings but also have

some mistrust of the rankings. Patients also choose SNFs based on more than just quality

of care. As Shugarman and Brown (2007) suggest, "patients and their families are likely

to rely upon lists of facilities (when available), more obvious physical and sensory

characteristics of the facilities, and word of mouth, and be more concerned with the

location of the facility than with the technical aspects of the clinical quality of care

provided" (p.23). Thus, many SNF patients do not select the highest quality SNF in their

choice set (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission 2018).
       31
       Given our results, which suggest that star ratings predict important outcomes, and

the fact that few patients use these ratings to select a nursing home, what would be the

consequence if Medicare were to adopt new policies to more actively encourage use of

star ratings? Such policies might include providing assistance to patients who are referred

to SNFs for post-acute care in identifying those higher-star providers. Fee-for-service

beneficiaries have a "basic freedom of choice" to select any SNF participating in

Medicare, although this choice may be constrained by out-of-pocket costs for patients

who stay in a SNF beyond 90-day Medicare benefit (Rahman et al. 2014). Our study does

not observe those costs and whether they correlate with star rating. However, Medicare

could expand the authority of hospital discharge planners to recommend higher quality

SNFs by mandating that they provide star ratings to patients at the time of discharge

(Medicare Payment Advisory Commission 2018). Most hospital discharge planners are

currently fairly hands off in directing patients to particular SNFs (Tyler et al., 2017). This

nudge would ensure that every hospitalized Medicare beneficiary would be made aware

of the quality ratings at the time of discharge, while patients would retain the freedom to

select their preferred SNF.

       In addition to reforming the hospital discharge process, new alternative payment

models are another potential mechanism to encourage increased use of star ratings. ACOs

and bundled payment models put hospitals at risk for post-discharge spending and

outcomes. As such, these models create an incentive for hospitals to develop relationships

with SNFs that can reasonably shorten the length of SNF stay while also reducing the

likelihood of re-hospitalization during the episode (Mechanic 2016). Many hospital

systems are forming preferred networks to partner with higher quality SNFs (MedPAC
       32
2018). As these payment models expand and shift from voluntary to mandatory

participation, our results suggest that star ratings can be a meaningful source of

information for hospitals looking to identify SNF partners whose patients are less likely

to be readmitted to the hospital.

       In summary, a large literature has suggested that SNF star ratings and patient

outcomes are correlated. Our paper is the first to find that admission to a higher star

SNFleads to lower mortality, decreased hospitalization, and shorter SNF and nursing

home stays. . Promoting the use of star ratings by patients and discharge planners is a

strategy that Medicare might pursue as it considers ways to achieve these outcomes in

post-acute care.




       33
                                             References

       Arling, G., T. Lewis, R. L. Kane, C. Mueller and S. Flood (2007). "Improving

quality assessment through multilevel modeling: the case of nursing home compare."

Health services research 42(3 Pt 1): 1177-1199.

       Bahar, Dany, (2014), IVREG2HDFE: Stata module to estimate an Instrumental

Variable Linear Regression Model with two High Dimensional Fixed Effects,

https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:boc:bocode:s457841

       Bowblis, J. R. and C. S. Brunt. (2013). "Medicare Skilled Nursing Facility

Reimbursement and Upcoding." Health Economics 23(7), 821-840.

       Brooks, J.M., Irwin, C.P., Hunsicker, L.G., Flanigan, M.J., Chrischilles, E.A.,

Pendergast, J.F. (2006). Effect of dialysis center profit-status on patient survival: a

comparison of risk-adjustment and instrumental variable approaches. Health Services

Research 41 (6), 2267­2289.

       Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2017). "Design for Nursing

Home Compare Five-Star Rating System: Technical Users' Guide."

       Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). "Five-star quality rating

system." (Internet). Access date 1 Feb 2017. https://www.cms.gov/medicare/provider-

enrollment-and-certification/certificationandcomplianc/fsqrs.html

       Deyo, R.A., Cherkin, D.C., Ciol, M.A. (1992). "Adapting a clinical comorbidity

index for use with ICD-9-CM administrative databases." Journal of Clinical

Epidemiology 45 (6), 613­619.

       Doyle, J. J., J. A. Graves and J. Gruber (2017). "Evaluating Measures of Hospital

Quality." National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, Working Paper No. 23166.
       34
       Elixhauser, A., Steiner, C., Harris, D.R., Coffey, R.M. (1998). "Comorbidity

measures for use with administrative data." Medical Care 36 (1), 8­27.

       Gowrisankaran, G. and Town, R.J. (1999). "Estimating the quality of care in

hospitals using instrumental variables." Journal of Health Economics, 18 (6):747-767.

       Grabowski, D. C. and E. C. Norton (2012). Nursing Home Quality of Care. The

Elgar Companion to Health Economics, Second Edition, edited by A. M. Jones.

Cheltenham, UK, Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc: 307-317.

       Grabowski, D. C., D. G. Stevenson, D. J. Caudry, A. J. O'Malley, L. H. Green, J.

A. Doherty and R. G. Frank (2017). "The Impact of Nursing Home Pay-for-Performance

on Quality and Medicare Spending: Results from the Nursing Home Value-Based

Purchasing Demonstration." Health Services Research 52(4):1387-1408.

       Grabowski, D. C., Z. Feng, R. Hirth, M. Rahman and V. Mor (2013). "Effect of

nursing home ownership on the quality of post-acute care: An instrumental variables

approach." Journal of Health Economics 32(1): 12-21.

       Hirth, R. A., D. C. Grabowski, Z. Feng, M. Rahman and V. Mor (2014). "Effect

of nursing home ownership on hospitalization of long-stay residents: an instrumental

variables approach." International journal of health care finance and economics 14(1): 1-

18.

       Institute of Medicine (2013). J.P. Newhouse, A.M. Garber, R.P. Graham, M.A.

McCoy, M.Mancher, & A. Kibria (Eds.). Variation in Health Care Spending: Target

Decision Making, Not Geography. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

https://doi.org/10.17226/18393.



       35
       Intrator, O., J. Hiris, K. Berg, S. C. Miller and V. Mor (2011). "The residential

history file: studying nursing home residents' long-term care histories(*)." Health Serv

Res 46(1 Pt 1): 120-137.

       Kimball, C.C., C.I. Nichols, R.M. Nunley, J.G. Vose, J.B. Stambough (2018).

"Skilled Nursing Facility Star Rating, Patient Outcomes, and Readmission Risk After

Total Joint Arthroplasty." Journal of Arthroplasty 33(10):3130-3137.

       Konetzka, R.T., M.C. Perraillon (2016). "Use Of Nursing Home Compare

Website Appears Limited By Lack Of Awareness And Initial Mistrust Of The Data."

Health Affairs 35(4):706-713.

       Konetzka, R. T., D. C. Grabowski, M. C. Perraillon and R. M. Werner (2015).

"Nursing home 5-star rating system exacerbates disparities in quality, by payer source."

Health affairs 34(5): 819-827.

       Li, Y., X. Cai, L. G. Glance, W. D. Spector and D. B. Mukamel (2009). "National

release of the nursing home quality report cards: implications of statistical methodology

for risk adjustment." Health services research 44(1): 79-102.

       McClellan, M., McNeil, B.J., Newhouse, J.P. (1994). "Does more intensive

treatment of acute myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality? Analysis using

instrumental variables." JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association 272

(11), 859­866.

       McWilliams, J. M., L. G. Gilstrap, D. G. Stevenson, M. E. Chernew, H. A.

Huskamp and D. C. Grabowski (2017). "Changes in Postacute Care in the Medicare

Shared Savings Program." JAMA internal medicine 177(4): 518-526.



       36
       Mechanic, R. (2016). Medicare's Bundled Payment Initiatives: Considerations for

Providers. Issue Brief. Washington, D.C., American Hospital Association.

       Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2009). Payment Basics: Skilled

Nursing Facility Services Payment System. Washington, DC.

       Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2016). Report to the Congress:

Medicare Payment Policy. Washington, DC.

       Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2017). Report to the Congress:

Medicare payment policy. Washington, DC.

       Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2018). "Encouraging Medicare

beneficiaries to use higher quality post-acute care providers (Chapter 5)." Report to the

Congress: Medicare payment policy. Washington, DC. Available at:

http://www.medpac.gov/docs/default-

source/reports/jun18_ch5_medpacreport_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0

       Mor, V. (2006). "Defining and measuring quality outcomes in long-term care." J

Am Med Dir Assoc 7(8): 532-538; discussion 538-540.

       Morris, J.N., Fries, B.E., Morris, S.A. (1999). "Scaling ADLs within the MDS."

The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 54

(11), M546­M553.

       Mukamel, D. B., L. G. Glance, Y. Li, D. L. Weimer, W. D. Spector, J. S. Zinn

and L. Mosqueda (2008). "Does risk adjustment of the CMS quality measures for nursing

homes matter?" Med Care 46(5): 532-541.

       Newhouse, J. P. and A. M. Garber (2013). "Geographic variation in Medicare

services." The New England Journal of Medicine 368(16): 1465-1468.
       37
       Norton, E.C. (1992). "Incentive Regulation of Nursing Homes." Journal of

Health Economics 11(2):105­128.

       Norton, E.C., J. Li, A. Das, and L.M. Chen (2018). "Moneyball in Medicare."

Journal of Health Economics 61:259­273.

       Ogunneye, O., M.B. Rothberg, J. Friderici, M.T. Slawsky, V.T. Gadiraju, M.S.

Stefan (2015). "The association between skilled nursing facility care quality and 30-day

readmission rates after hospitalization for heart failure." American Journal of Medical

Quality 30(3):205-13.

       Rahman, M., Gozalo, P., Tyler, D., Grabowski, D. C., Trivedi, A., & Mor, V.

(2014). Dual eligibility, selection of skilled nursing facility, and length of Medicare paid

postacute stay. Medical Care Research and Review, 71(4), 384-401.

       Rahman, M., D. C. Grabowski, V. Mor and E. C. Norton (2016). "Is a Skilled

Nursing Facility's Rehospitalization Rate a Valid Quality Measure?" Health Services

Research 51(6): 2158-2175.

       Rahman, M., E. C. Norton and D. C. Grabowski (2016). "Do hospital-owned

skilled nursing facilities provide better post-acute care quality?" Journal of Health

Economics 50: 36-46.

       Rahman, M., Foster, A.D., 2015. "Racial segregation and quality of care disparity

in US nursing homes." Journal of Health Economics 39, 1­16.

       Rahman, M., J. S. Zinn and V. Mor (2013). "The Impact of HospitalBased

Skilled Nursing Facility Closures on Rehospitalizations." Health services research

48(2pt1): 499-518.


       38
       Ryskina, K.L., R.T. Konetzka, R.M. Werner (2018). "Association between 5-star

Nursing Home Report Card Ratings and Potentially Preventable Hospitalizations."

Inquiry 55:1-14.

       Shugarman, L.R., and J.A. Brown (2007). "Nursing Home Selection: How Do

Consumers Choose? Volume I: Findings from Focus Groups of Consumers and

Information Intermediaries." Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

       Sood, N., P. J. Huckfeldt, J. J. Escarce, D. C. Grabowski and J. P. Newhouse

(2011). "Medicare's bundled payment pilot for acute and postacute care: analysis and

recommendations on where to begin." Health Affairs 30(9): 1708-1717.

       Staiger, D. and J.H. Stock. 1997. "Instrumental variables regression with weak

instruments." Econometrica 65(3): 557-586.

       Tan, H.J., Norton, E.C., Ye, Z., Hafez, K.S., Gore, J.L., Miller., D.C., 2012.

"Long-term survival following partial vs radical nephrectomy among older patients with

early-stage kidney cancer." JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association 307

(15), 1629­1635.

       Tyler, D.A., E.A. Gadbois, J.P. McHugh, R.R. Shield, U. Winblad, V. Mor

(2017). "Patients Are Not Given Quality-Of-Care Data About Skilled Nursing Facilities

When Discharged From Hospitals." Health Affairs 36(8):1385-1391.

       Unroe, K.T., M.A. Greiner, C. Colón-Emeric, E.D. Peterson, L.H. Curtis (2012).

"Associations between published quality ratings of skilled nursing facilities and outcomes

of Medicare beneficiaries with heart failure." Journal of the American Medical Directors

Association 13(2):188.e1.


       39
       U.S. General Accounting Office (2002). Nursing Homes: Public Reporting of

Quality Indicators Has Merit, but National Implementation Is Premature. Washington,

DC: U.S. General Accounting Office.


       Werner, R.M., E.C. Norton, R.T. Konetzka, D. Polsky. (2012). "Do consumers

respond to publicly reported quality information? Evidence from nursing homes." Journal

of Health Economics 31(1):50­61




       40
List of Exhibits


Table 1: Outcomes (N=1,278,456)                                                                    43
Table 2: Descriptive characteristics (N=1,278,456)                                                 44
Table 3: Characteristics of patients with different values of IV (logged distance of the nearest 5
       star SNF) compared to their respective zip code level median                                45
Table 4: First stage: Regression of star rating of admitting SNF onto patient characteristics and
       distances of different star rating SNFs                                                     46
Table 5: First stage regression with star rating as categorical variable with ZIP code fixed effect
       model                                                                                       47
Table 6: Effect of SNF star rating (assumed continuous) on patient outcomes (binary)               48
Table 7: Effects of star rating measured as categorical variable (1-star as baseline category) on
       outcomes (number of days in different settings) using 2SLS model with ZIP code fixed
       effects                                                                                     49
Table 8: Regression of alternative outcomes (days in settings) on SNF star rating (assumed
       continuous; ZIP code fixed effect models)                                                   50
Table 9: Regression of outcomes on star rating (assumed continuous) with different model or
       sample specifications                                                                       51
Figure 1: Distribution of patients in different settings in 180 days following SNF admission 52
Figure 2: Distribution of patients and skilled nursing facilities by overall star-rating and month of
       admission                                                                                   53
Figure 3: Test of the first stage                                                                  54
Figure 4: Comparison of patient characteristics (measured in terms of predicted likelihood of
       admission to a 5-star SNF) between patients with lower and higher values of IV within a
       ZIP code                                                                                    55
Figure 5: Effect of increase in overall star rating on probability of being in a location, by day. 56




       41
APPENDIX                                                                                         57
Figure A1: Number of SNFs faced by patients within different mile radius from residential zip
       codes                                                                                     57
Table A1: Marginal effects of change in IV by one mile on likelihood of entering a SNF with
       different star-rating (in percentage point: based on regressions presented in Table 5) 58
Table A2: Reduced-form regression of outcomes onto instrument                                    59
Table A3: Effects of star rating measured as categorical variable (1-star as baseline category) on
       outcomes (number of days in different settings) using 2SLS model with ZIP code fixed
       effects and SNF fixed effects                                                             60
Table A4: Placebo test. Reduced-form regression of outcomes (30-day rehospitalization, and 30-
       day mortality, and 180-day mortality) on values of the instrument among patients
       discharged from hospital directly to home.                                                61
Table A5: Falsification check: Reduced-form (OLS) effect of instrument on probability of
       discharge to skilled nursing facility (N=10,873,882)                                      62
Table A6: Association between within SNF change in star-rating and patient characteristics 63
Table A7: Robustness Check: 2SLS Models Using Mortality-Adjusted Outcome Measures                64
Table A8. Previous estimates of the association of SNF star rating with patient outcomes         65




       42
Table 1: Outcomes (N=1,278,456)
 Variable                                           Mean     Std. Dev.     Min     Max
 Binary outcomes
 Any rehospitalization within 30 days               0.177    0.382         0       1
 Any hospitalization within 180 days                0.536    0.499         0       1
 Death within 30 days                               0.071    0.256         0       1
 Death within 180 days                              0.214    0.410         0       1
 Becoming long-stay nursing resident                0.155    0.362         0       1
 Number of days in different settings
 Number of days at home                             70.21    64.14         0       180
 Number of days at home with home health            28.33    38.08         0       180
 Number of days in skilled nursing facility         48.24    49.22         1       181
 Number of days in hospital                         5.48     10.96         0       180
 Number of days in hospice                          3.69     17.26         0       180
 Number of days deceased                            25.04    52.88         0       179
Note: We started counting the day from day 0 when everyone was in nursing home. Summation
of the mean number of days is 181




      43
Table 2: Descriptive characteristics (N=1,278,456)
                                                                  Patients      Patients      Patients
                                                                 with rating   with rating   with rating
                                                                 < ZIP code    = ZIP code    > ZIP code
 Variable                            Mean            Std. Dev.
                                                                    level         level         level
                                                                   median        median        median
                                                                 N=404,402     N=503,535     N=372,741
 Demographic characteristics
 Age                                   81.34         8.20      81.224      81.494              81.359
 Language Spanish                      0.01          0.11       0.013       0.011               0.011
 Other language                        0.01          0.12       0.016       0.011               0.014
 Black                                 0.08          0.26       0.089       0.065               0.074
 Hispanic                              0.04          0.19       0.040       0.034               0.035
 Other race                            0.02          0.15       0.026       0.020               0.024
 Female                                0.65          0.48       0.637       0.652               0.665
 Full dual-eligible                    0.14          0.35       0.170       0.135               0.125
 Partial dual-eligible                 0.04          0.20       0.043       0.042               0.036
 Married                               0.36          0.48       0.348       0.368               0.362
 Clinical characteristics from index hospital claims
 Deyo-Charlson comorbidity score 2.17                2.14       2.267       2.139              2.099
 Elixhauser comorbidity score          3.39          1.83       3.461       3.365              3.336
 Total ICU days                        1.59          3.84       1.690       1.539              1.523
 Total CCU days                        0.62          2.30       0.642       0.592              0.630
 Hospital length of stay               6.82          6.06       7.136       6.655              6.688
 Clinical characteristics from MDS assessments
 Shortness of breath                   0.21          0.41       0.209       0.215               0.205
 ADL score (0-28, higher = worse) 17.11              4.68      17.427      16.977              16.951
 CPS scale                             1.34          1.44       1.454       1.310               1.266
 Stroke                                0.10          0.30       0.106       0.096               0.092
 Lung disease                          0.22          0.42       0.226       0.223               0.213
 Alzheimer's disease                   0.04          0.20       0.049       0.042               0.040
 Non-Alzheimer's dementia              0.17          0.37       0.187       0.161               0.156
 Hip fracture                          0.08          0.28       0.079       0.085               0.085
 Multiple sclerosis                    0.00          0.05       0.003       0.003               0.002
 Heart failure                         0.20          0.40       0.204       0.203               0.195
 Diabetes                              0.30          0.46       0.311       0.295               0.289
 Schizophrenia                         0.01          0.08       0.008       0.005               0.005
 Bipolar disease                       0.01          0.10       0.012       0.009               0.009
 Aphasia                               0.01          0.12       0.015       0.013               0.013
Notes: ICU= intensive care unit, CCU=coronary care unity, MDS=minimum data set, ADL =
activities of daily living

       44
Table 3: Characteristics of patients with different values of IV (logged distance of the nearest 5
star SNF) compared to their respective zip code level median
                                     Patients with IV <    Patients with IV =   Patients with IV >
                                     ZIP code level        ZIP code level       ZIP code level
                                     median                median               median
                                     190,767               857,869              254,848
 Age                                 81.233                81.366               81.320
 Language Spanish                    0.012                 0.012                0.012
 Other language                      0.013                 0.013                0.014
 Black                               0.074                 0.076                0.074
 Hispanic                            0.037                 0.036                0.037
 Other race                          0.024                 0.023                0.024
 Female                              0.651                 0.650                0.649
 Full dual-eligible                  0.145                 0.141                0.146
 Partial dual-eligible               0.042                 0.040                0.043
 Married                             0.360                 0.362                0.361
 Deyo-Charlson score                 2.177                 2.170                2.182
 Elixhauser score                    3.389                 3.389                3.388
 Total ICU days                      1.640                 1.563                1.621
 Total CCU days                      0.591                 0.628                0.613
 Hospital length of stay             6.759                 6.826                6.856
 Shortness of breath                 0.212                 0.210                0.212
 ADL score (0-28, higher =
                                     17.000                17.130               17.143
 worse)
 CPS scale                           1.345                 1.336                1.357
 Stroke                              0.098                 0.097                0.100
 Lung disease                        0.222                 0.220                0.223
 Alzheimer's disease                 0.043                 0.043                0.045
 Non-Alzheimer's dementia            0.165                 0.167                0.169
 Hip fracture                        0.085                 0.082                0.082
 Multiple sclerosis                  0.003                 0.003                0.003
 Heart failure                       0.202                 0.200                0.203
 Diabetes                            0.302                 0.297                0.299
 Schizophrenia                       0.006                 0.006                0.006
 Bipolar disease                     0.010                 0.010                0.009
 Aphasia                             0.013                 0.014                0.014




       45
Table 4: First stage: Regression of star rating of admitting SNF onto patient characteristics and distances of different star rating SNFs
                                 (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)
 Log of          Median
                                                                                  Hospital and     SNF and ZIP
 distance to     distance (in    No fixed         Hospital        ZIP code
                                                                                  ZIP code         code fixed
 nearest SNF     miles) to       effects          fixed effects   fixed effects
                                                                                  fixed effects    effects
 rating          nearest SNF
                                0.129***        0.0804***       0.0683***       0.0684***       0.0698***
 1-star          6.8
                                [0.00221]       [0.00150]       [0.00195]       [0.00194]       [0.00290]
                                0.129***        0.0855***       0.0633***       0.0628***       0.0629***
 2-star          5.0
                                [0.00256]       [0.00173]       [0.00239]       [0.00238]       [0.00320]
                                0.0227***       0.0198***       0.0101***       0.0103***       0.0123***
 3-star          4.9
                                [0.00258]       [0.00172]       [0.00246]       [0.00244]       [0.00319]
                                -0.155***       -0.0866***      -0.0804***      -0.0809***      -0.0778***
 4-star          4.1
                                [0.00308]       [0.00214]       [0.00330]       [0.00329]       [0.00418]
                                -0.226***       -0.130***       -0.121***       -0.120***       -0.118***
 5-star          5.5
                                [0.00250]       [0.00183]       [0.00261]       [0.00260]       [0.00357]
 Observations                   1,278,456       1,278,456       1,278,456       1,278,456       1,277,815
 R-squared                      0.134           0.249           0.262           0.2993          0.836
 F-statistic                    3126.72         1122.40         771.17          364.99          388.97
Note: Robust standard errors are in square brackets. Clustering units were ZIP code in column 1, 3-4, hospital in column 2 and SNF
in column 5. Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions include patient characteristics listed in table 2 and month
of SNF admission dummies.
        *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.




          46
Table 5: First stage regression with star rating as categorical variable with ZIP code fixed effect model
 Log of distance to          (1)                          (2)                       (3)                      (4)
 nearest SNF rating          Admission to 2 star SNF Admission to 3 star SNF Admission to 4 star SNF Admission to 5 star SNF
                             0.0141***                    0.00749***                0.00595***               0.00532***
 1-star
                             (0.000699)                   (0.000707)                (0.000780)               (0.000643)
                             -0.0753***                   0.0234***                 0.0166***                0.0104***
 2-star
                             (0.00113)                    (0.000948)                (0.000993)               (0.000821)
                             0.0250***                    -0.0884***                0.0293***                0.0186***
 3-star
                             (0.000919)                   (0.00117)                 (0.00113)                (0.000845)
                             0.0203***                    0.0402***                 -0.115***                0.0408***
 4-star
                             (0.00108)                    (0.00133)                 (0.00171)                (0.00129)
                             0.00857***                   0.0184***                 0.0352***                -0.0679***
 5-star
                             (0.000833)                   (0.000938)                (0.00126)                (0.00120)
 Observations                1,278,456                    1,278,456                 1,278,456                1,278,456
 R-squared                   0.164                        0.156                     0.170                    0.211
Note: Robust standard errors clustering error by ZIP codes are in parentheses. Each column represent a separate regression. All
regressions include patient characteristics listed in table 2, month of SNF admission dummies and patient's residential ZIP code fixed
effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




       47
Table 6: Effect of SNF star rating (assumed continuous) on patient outcomes (binary)
                                                                   Any
                                                Any acute                                                               Became long-
                                                                   hospitalization Death within       Death within
                                                hospitalization                                                         stay nursing-
                                                                   within 180       30 days           180 days
                                                within 30 days                                                          home resident
                                                                   days
 OLS         Without patient characteristics      -0.00774***      -0.0119***       -0.00577***       -0.0152***        -0.0188***
             or any FE                            (0.000299)       (0.000404)       (0.000196)        (0.000326)        (0.000368)
             Without patient characteristics      -0.00689***      -0.0107***       -0.00543***       -0.0145***        -0.0181***
             but with ZIP FE                      (0.000319)       (0.000423)       (0.000217)        (0.000360)        (0.000367)
             With patient characteristics and -0.00291***          -0.00593***      -0.00179***       -0.00606***       -0.00957***
             ZIP code FE                          (0.00031)        (0.00041)        (0.00021)         (0.00031)         (0.00032)
             With patient characteristics,        -0.00083         -0.00093         -6.81E-05         -0.00073          -0.00109*
             SNF FE and ZIP code FE               (0.000650)       (0.000819)       (0.000430)        (0.000644)        (0.000585)
 2SLS                                             -0.0123***       -0.0182***       -0.00761***       -0.0190***        -0.0166***
             Without patient characteristics
                                                  (0.000946)       (0.00129)        (0.000581)        (0.000976)        (0.00120)
             or any FE
                                                  [40.47]***       [30.35]***       [9.14]**          [12.06]***        [6.06]*
                                                  -0.00850***      -0.0106***       -0.00376**        -0.0124***        -0.0112***
             Without patient characteristics
                                                  (0.00276)        (0.00364)        (0.00191)         (0.00302)         (0.00275)
             but with ZIP FE
                                                  [0.168]          [0.929]          [0.485]           [0.250]           [7.85]**
                                                  -0.00500         -0.00441         -0.00479**        -0.0120***        -0.00782***
             With patient characteristics and
                                                  (0.00306)        (0.00404)        (0.00205)         (0.00311)         (0.00296)
             ZIP code FE
                                                  [0.27]           [0.18]           [2.52]            [2.28]            [0.626]
             With patient characteristics,        -0.00604**       -0.00578         -0.00497**        -0.0120***        -0.00706**
             SNF FE and ZIP code FE               (0.00305)        (0.00405)        (0.00207)         (0.00312)         (0.00286)
                                                  [3.68]*          [1.91]           [5.25]**          [8.94]***         [5.71]**
Note: Robust standard errors clustering error are in parentheses. Each coefficient and associated standard errors is derived from a
separate regression. Hausman test statistics are reported in square brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




       48
Table 7: Effects of star rating measured as categorical variable (1-star as baseline category) on outcomes (number of days in different
settings) using 2SLS model with ZIP code fixed effects
                                                                                       Became
                                        Any
                      Any acute                                                        long-stay
 Star rating of                         hospitalization Death within Death within
                      hospitalization                                                  nursing-
 admitted SNF                           within 180         30 days        180 days
                      within 30 days                                                   home
                                        days
                                                                                       resident
                      -0.002            -0.00786           -0.00603       -0.00426     -0.0253***
 2-star
                      (0.00889)         (0.0118)           (0.00603)      (0.00914)    (0.00868)
                      -0.0132           -0.0199            -0.0144**      -0.0281***   -0.0321***
 3-star
                      (0.0107)          (0.0142)           (0.00724)      (0.0109)     (0.0104)
                      -0.0163           -0.0211            -0.0205***     -0.0380***   -0.0380***
 4-star
                      (0.0118           (0.0157)           (0.00795)      (0.012)      (0.0115)
                      -0.0191           -0.0215            -0.0195**      -0.0445***   -0.0430***
 5-star
                      (0.0135)          (0.0178)           (0.00904)      (0.0137)     (0.0132)
 Note: Robust standard errors clustering error by ZIP codes are in parentheses. Each column represent a separate regression. All
regressions include patient characteristics listed in table 2, month of SNF admission dummies and patient's residential ZIP code fixed
effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




       49
Table 8: Regression of alternative outcomes (days in settings) on SNF star rating (assumed continuous; ZIP code fixed effect models)
                                                               B: Home       C: Nursing
                                              A: Home                                        D: Hospital E: Hospice        F: Death
                                                               health        home
                                                  2.728***     0.0119        -1.790***       -0.127***      0.0157         -0.838***
                                         OLS
                                                  (-0.0616)    (-0.0469)     (-0.046)        (-0.00883)     (-0.0133)      (-0.0373)
 No fixed effect
                                                  4.898***     -1.262***     -1.661***       -0.262***      -0.00812       -1.704***
                                         2SLS
                                                  (-0.113)     (-0.0785)     (-0.0995)       (-0.0215)      (-0.0347)      (-0.0989)
                                                  2.112***     0.0784        -1.417***       -0.114***      0.00487        -0.663***
                                         OLS
                                                  (0.0781)     (0.0488)      (0.0653)        (0.00951)      (0.0146)       (0.0467)
 Hospital fixed effects
                                                  1.273***     -0.621***     0.617***        -0.229***      0.0216         -1.060***
                                         2SLS
                                                  (0.271)      (0.190)       (0.223)         (0.0488)       (0.0745)       (0.213)
                                                  2.330***     0.191***      -1.714***       -0.112***      0.00676        -0.702***
                                         OLS
                                                  (0.0513)     (0.0348)      (0.0453)        (0.00895)      (0.0138)       (0.0397)
 ZIP code fixed effects
                                                  1.732***     1.124***      -1.139***       -0.182**       -0.0951        -1.440***
                                         2SLS
                                                  (0.450)      (0.315)       (0.401)         (0.0843)       (0.141)        (0.401)
                                                  2.149***     0.162***      -1.534***       -0.109***      0.00403        -0.672***
                                         OLS
                                                  (0.698)      (0.0459)      (0.0543)        (0.00894)      (0.0176)       (0.0392)
 ZIP code and hospital fixed effects
                                                  1.672***     1.143***      -1.070***       -0.189**       -0.0811        -1.476***
                                         2SLS
                                                  (0.568)      (0.459)       (0.513)         (0.0836)       (0.196)        (0.390)
Note: Robust standard errors clustering error (by ZIP codes in all models except hospital fixed effect models where clustering unit is
hospital) are in parentheses. Each coefficient and associated standard errors is derived from a separate regression. All regressions
include patient characteristics listed in table 2 and month of SNF admission dummies. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




       50
Table 9: Regression of outcomes on star rating (assumed continuous) with different model or sample specifications
                                                       Any
                                   Any acute                                                                  Became long-
                                                       hospitalization Death within          Death within
                                   hospitalization                                                            stay nursing-
                                                       within 180           30 days          180 days
                                   within 30 days                                                             home resident
                                                       days
 Hospital fixed effects             -0.00707***        -0.0113***           -0.00309***      -0.00909***      0.00340**
 N=1,276,307                        (0.00166)          (0.00224)            (0.00108)        (0.00170)        (0.00160)
 Hospital & ZIP code fixed          -0.00520*          -0.00480             -0.00470**       -0.0122***       -0.00725**
 effects N=1,276,307                (0.00311)          (0.00409)            (0.00208)        (0.00315)        (0.00299)
 Hospitals without SNF              -0.00811**         -0.00495             -0.00424*        -0.00939**       -0.00794**
 N=901,340                          (0.00372)          (0.00487)            (0.00247)        (0.00377)        (0.00351)
 Hospitals with SNF                 -0.0166            -0.00318             -0.00364         -0.0262          -0.0114
 N=369,706                          (0.0168)           (0.0226)             (0.0113)         (0.0168)         (0.0163)
 Including DRG fixed effects        -0.00558*          -0.00524             -0.00534***      -0.0130***       -0.00749**
 N=1,276,307                        (0.00305)          (0.00399)            (0.00203)        (0.00304)        (0.00293)
 Urban beneficiaries                -0.00766**         -0.00706             -0.00725***      -0.0191***       -0.00793**
 N=1,050,252                        (0.00369)          (0.00479)            (0.0024)         (0.00368)        (0.00348)
 Rural beneficiaries                0.000665           -0.00113             0.000742         0.0022           -0.00773
 N=226,198                          (0.0055)           (0.00748)            (0.00388)        (0.00584)        (0.00558)
Note: Robust standard errors clustering error are in parentheses. Each coefficient and associated standard errors is derived from a
separate regression. All regressions include patient characteristics listed in table 2 and month of SNF admission dummies. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1




       51
Figure 1: Distribution of patients in different settings in 180 days following SNF admission




       52
Figure 2: Distribution of patients and skilled nursing facilities by overall star-rating and month of admission




       53
Figure 3: Test of the first stage




Note: figure excludes upper and lower 5% of the sample.




        54
Figure 4: Comparison of patient characteristics (measured in terms of predicted likelihood of admission to a 5-star SNF) between
patients with lower and higher values of IV within a ZIP code




Note: figure excludes upper and lower 5% of the sample.




       55
Figure 5: Effect of increase in overall star rating on probability of being in a location, by day.

                                                                  A: Home            B: Home Health         C: Nursing Home       D: In-patient        E: Hospice         F: Death




                                                        .02
            Effect of going to SNF of 1 additional star
                 on probability of being in setting
                -.01           0           .01
                                            -.02




                                                              0   60   120 180   0     60   120 180     0      60   120 180   0    60    120 180   0   60   120 180   0   60   120 180
                                                                                                      Days after hospital discharge
                                                                                                       Point estimate                        95% CI




       56
APPENDIX


Figure A1: Number of SNFs faced by patients within different mile radius from residential zip codes




       57
Table A1: Marginal effects of change in IV by one mile on likelihood of entering a SNF with
different star-rating (in percentage point: based on regressions presented in Table 5)
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)
                                          Admission   Admission    Admission      Admission
                                          to 2 star   to 3 star    to 4 star      to 5 star
                                          SNF         SNF          SNF            SNF
 Increase in distance of the nearest 1-
                                          0.21        0.12         0.09           0.07
 star SNF by one mile
 Increase in distance of the nearest 2-
                                          -1.50       0.46         0.34           0.20
 star SNF by one mile
 Increase in distance of the nearest 3-
                                          0.51        -1.80        0.59           0.39
 star SNF by one mile
 Increase in distance of the nearest 4-
                                          0.49        0.98         -2.80          1.00
 star SNF by one mile
 Increase in distance of the nearest 5-
                                          0.16        0.33         0.64           -1.24
 star SNF by one mile




       58
Table A2: Reduced-form regression of outcomes onto instrument
Variable: log of Any acute          Any acute                                          Became long-
distance to nearest hospitalization hospitalization Death within 30 Death within stay nursing
SNF of star rating within 30 days within 180 days days                180 days         home resident
          1 star    -0.00325***     -0.00484***      -0.000128        -0.00177***      -0.00172***
                    (0.000246)      (0.000356)       (0.000163)       (0.000272)       (0.000310)
   characteristics or FE




          2 star    -0.00215***     -0.00206***      0.000626*** -0.000126             0.000456
                    (0.000323)      (0.000460)       (0.000222)       (0.000368)       (0.000433)
   Without patient




          3 star    -0.000675**     -0.000856*       0.00136***       0.00205***       -0.000185
                    (0.000343)      (0.000477)       (0.000230)       (0.000383)       (0.000417)
          4 star    0.00205***      0.00259***       0.00221***       0.00404***       0.000723
                    (0.000380)      (0.000527)       (0.000249)       (0.000413)       (0.000499)
          5 star    0.00194***      0.00303***       0.00209***       0.00474***       0.00573***
                    (0.000291)      (0.000411)       (0.000193)       (0.000318)       (0.000379)
          1 star    0.000591        0.000130         0.000600**       0.00280***       0.000660*
                    (0.000401)      (0.000534)       (0.000281)       (0.000438)       (0.000395)
          2 star    0.000658        0.000843         0.00104***       0.00369***       0.00229***
characteristics, ZIP




                    (0.000523)      (0.000691)       (0.000366)       (0.000577)       (0.000516)
          3 star    0.00194***      0.00220***       0.00183***       0.00611***       0.00276***
                    (0.000519)      (0.000687)       (0.000373)       (0.000583)       (0.000516)
No patient




          4 star    0.00296***      0.00305***       0.00268***       0.00821***       0.00421***
code FE




                    (0.000658)      (0.000853)       (0.000441)       (0.000701)       (0.000634)
          5 star    0.00261***      0.00280***       0.00154***       0.00613***       0.00386***
                    (0.000534)      (0.000691)       (0.000364)       (0.000591)       (0.000527)
          1 star    0.000744*       0.000706         0.000289         0.00253***       0.000611
                    (0.000398)      (0.000529)       (0.000271)       (0.000401)       (0.000383)
   Patient characteristics




          2 star    0.000514        0.00109          0.000477         0.00275***       0.00220***
                    (0.000513)      (0.000676)       (0.000349)       (0.000526)       (0.000490)
   and ZIP code FE




          3 star    0.00162***      0.00215***       0.00110***       0.00479***       0.00252***
                    (0.000508)      (0.000677)       (0.000351)       (0.000527)       (0.000492)
          4 star    0.00249***      0.00250***       0.00199***       0.00653***       0.00345***
                    (0.000643)      (0.000832)       (0.000420)       (0.000636)       (0.000603)
          5 star    0.00176***      0.00163**        0.00108***       0.00478***       0.00263***
                    (0.000527)      (0.000684)       (0.000344)       (0.000541)       (0.000499)
          1 star    0.000764*       0.000621         0.000261         0.00249***       0.000589
   Patient characteristics,




                    [0.000393]      [0.000524]       [0.000272]       [0.000401]       [0.000363]
   SNF and ZIP code FE




          2 star    0.000774        0.000957         0.000428         0.00269***       0.00219***
                    [0.000491]      [0.000668]       [0.000341]       [0.000507]       [0.000468]
          3 star    0.00168***      0.00199***       0.00117***       0.00503***       0.00229***
                    [0.000505]      [0.000680]       [0.000348]       [0.000515]       [0.000480]
          4 star    0.00246***      0.00254***       0.00203***       0.00660***       0.00325***
                    [0.000627]      [0.000812]       [0.000415]       [0.000633]       [0.000576]
          5 star    0.00192***      0.00184***       0.00110***       0.00491***       0.00253***
                    [0.000504]      [0.000678]       [0.000340]       [0.000533]       [0.000485]
Robust standard errors, clustering error by ZIP codes, in parentheses. Each coefficient and
associated standard errors is derived from a separate regression. All regressions include month of
SNF admission indicators. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                          59
Table A3: Effects of star rating measured as categorical variable (1-star as baseline category) on
outcomes (number of days in different settings) using 2SLS model with ZIP code fixed effects
and SNF fixed effects
                                                                                        Became
                                    Any
                    Any acute                       Death              Death            long-stay
 Star rating of                     hospitalization
                    hospitalization                 within             within 180       nursing-
 admitted SNF                       within 180
                    within 30 days                  30 days            days             home
                                    days
                                                                                        resident
                    -0.00182          -0.00733         -0.00577       -0.00308          -0.0236***
 2-star
                    (0.00870)         (0.0116)         (0.00603)      (0.00896)         (0.00825)
                    -0.013            -0.0199          -0.0154**      -0.0299*** -0.0280***
 3-star
                    (0.0106)          (0.0141)         (0.00734)      (0.0108)          (0.01000)
                    -0.0181           -0.0229          -0.0212*** -0.0379*** -0.0338***
 4-star
                    (0.0117)          (0.0155)         (0.00803)      (0.0119)          (0.0110)
                    -0.0223*          -0.0255          -0.0201**      -0.0448*** -0.0386***
 5-star
                    (0.0134)          (0.0178)         (0.00915)      (0.0137)          (0.0126)
 Note: Robust standard errors clustering error by ZIP codes are in parentheses. Each column
represent a separate regression. All regressions include patient characteristics listed in table 2,
month of SNF admission dummies and patient's residential ZIP code fixed effects. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1




       60
Table A4: Placebo test. Reduced-form regression of outcomes (30-day rehospitalization, and 30-
day mortality, and 180-day mortality) on values of the instrument among patients discharged
from hospital directly to home.


                          Variable: Log of distance to
                                                        Coefficient St. Err.       P-value
                          nearest SNF rating
                          1 star                        0.00015     0.00016        0.35
                          2 star                        -0.00018    0.00021        0.38
180-day mortality
                          3 star                        0.00006     0.00021        0.76
N=3558538
                          4 star                        0.00001     0.00024        0.97
                          5 star                        0.00012     0.00020        0.55
                          1 star                        0.00004     0.00007        0.57
                          2 star                        -0.00004    0.00009        0.63
30-day mortality
                          3 star                        -0.00013    0.00009        0.15
N=3558538
                          4 star                        -0.00009    0.00011        0.39
                          5 star                        0.00004     0.00009        0.69
                          1 star                        -0.00024    0.00021        0.25
30-day                    2 star                        0.00011     0.00027        0.68
rehospitalization         3 star                        0.00016     0.00027        0.54
N=3558538                 4 star                        0.00071     0.00033        0.03
                          5 star                        0.00032     0.00027        0.24
Note: Sample includes Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries discharged from an inpatient
hospital stay directly to home in 2012-2013. We excluded patients with hospital or SNF stay or
hospice use 90 days prior to the index hospital admission. Model covariates include sex, race,
age, diagnosis categories, and year-month effects.




       61
Table A5: Falsification check: Reduced-form (OLS) effect of instrument on probability of
discharge to skilled nursing facility (N=10,873,882)
Variable: log of distance to
                                               Discharge to SNF versus other setting
nearest SNF of star rating
                                                  (1)                              (2)
1 star                                        0.00432***                        9.86e-05
                                              (0.000297)                      (0.000190)
2 star                                       -0.00115***                       -3.98e-05
                                              (0.000368)                      (0.000246)
3 star                                       -0.00365***                       -0.000339
                                              (0.000390)                      (0.000248)
4 star                                       -0.00876***                       0.000101
                                              (0.000439)                      (0.000288)
5 star                                       -0.00435***                        3.70e-06
                                              (0.000345)                      (0.000237)
ZIP code fixed effects included                   NO                              YES
Note: Sample includes Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries discharged from an inpatient
hospital in 2012-2013. Patients were discharged to home, to a SNF, intensive rehabilitation
facility, to another hospital, or died. We excluded patients with hospital, SNF stay or hospice use
90 days prior to the index hospital admission. Robust standard errors accounting for ZIP clusters
shown in parentheses. All models include month fixed effects.




       62
Table A6: Association between within SNF change in star-rating and patient characteristics
VARIABLES                 coef           se               tstat          pval
Language Spanish          0.000292       (0.00571)        0.0510         0.959
Other language            -0.00335       (0.00492)        -0.680         0.496
Black                     0.00220        (0.00214)        1.026          0.305
Hispanic                  -0.00584*      (0.00333)        -1.753         0.0796
Other race                0.00487        (0.00372)        1.309          0.191
Female                    0.000829       (0.00108)        0.764          0.445
Full dual-eligible        -0.00504***    (0.00158)        -3.197         0.00139
Partial dual-eligible     -0.00382       (0.00252)        -1.515         0.130
Married                   -0.000548      (0.00110)        -0.500         0.617
Deyo-Charlson score       -0.000238      (0.000278)       -0.853         0.394
Elixhauser score          6.43e-05       (0.000328)       0.196          0.845
Total ICU days            0.000160       (0.000161)       0.998          0.318
Total CCU days            7.33e-05       (0.000234)       0.314          0.754
Hospital length of stay   8.61e-05       (0.000107)       0.806          0.420
Shortness of breath       -0.00273**     (0.00133)        -2.043         0.0411
ADL score (0-28, higher
= worse)                  -0.000218*     (0.000128)       -1.706         0.0880
CPS scale                 0.000264       (0.000430)       0.612          0.540
Stroke                    -0.000369      (0.00170)        -0.217         0.829
Lung disease              -0.000542      (0.00127)        -0.429         0.668
Alzheimer's disease       0.00157        (0.00247)        0.636          0.525
Non-Alzheimer's
dementia                  -0.000442      (0.00144)        -0.307         0.759
Hip fracture              0.00231        (0.00179)        1.293          0.196
Multiple sclerosis        0.00316        (0.00931)        0.340          0.734
Heart failure             9.11e-05       (0.00129)        0.0708         0.944
Diabetes                  0.00210*       (0.00115)        1.831          0.0671
Schizophrenia             0.0182***      (0.00638)        2.848          0.00440
Bipolar disease           -0.00297       (0.00494)        -0.602         0.547
Aphasia                   0.00402        (0.00430)        0.935          0.350
Constant                  3.264***       (0.00613)        532.9          0

Observations            1,280,318
R-squared               0.826
Includes month-year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




       63
Table A7: Robustness Check: 2SLS Models Using Mortality-Adjusted Outcome Measures

                                                  Long-Stay                                          Days at
                                   180-Day        nursing                                            Home
                                   Rehosp,        patient,                                           with
                                   conditional    conditional    Days at     Days in     Days in     Home
                30-Day Rehosp,     on being       on being       Home,       Hospital,   SNF,        Health,
                conditinal on      alive on day   alive on       mortality   mortality   mortality   mortality
                alive on day 30    180            day 180        adjusted    adjusted    adjusted    adjusted
                                                                                         -           -
 No FE          -0.0110***         -0.0161***     -0.0229***     6.503***    -0.865***   4.431***    1.235***
                (0.000882)         (0.00144)      (0.00147)      (0.272)     (0.0582)    (0.227)     (0.201)
                                                                                         -
 ZIP FE         -0.00482           -0.00272       -0.0152***     2.880***    -0.572***   2.939***    1.123***
                (0.00308)          (0.00465)      (0.00370)      (0.528)     (0.163)     (0.524)     (0.326)
 ZIP FE and
 patient                                                                                 -
 covariates     -0.00379            -0.000613       -0.0109***   1.797***    -0.448***   2.029*** 1.063***
                (0.00305)           (0.00458)       (0.00343)    (0.450)     (0.158)     (0.461)   (0.324)
 Observations 1,102,958             1,004,307       1,004,307    1,278,174   1,278,174   1,278,174 1,278,174
 Robust standard errors clustered by ZIP code in parentheses.
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




      64
Table A8. Previous estimates of the association of SNF star rating with patient outcomes

                                                                            Estimate of relative
 Study            Cohort            Outcome             Effect              reduction
                  Knee and hip
 Kimball et al.   arthroplasty      30-day
 2018             patients          readmission         5 star vs. 1 star   -30%
                                    90-day
                                    readmission         5 star vs. 1 star   -27%
                                    30-day mortality    5 star vs. 1 star   -50%
                                    90-day mortality    5 star vs. 1 star   -25%
                  Patients with
                  acute
                  decompensated
 Ogunneye et      heart failure     30-day all-cause    high (3-5 star)
 al. 2015         (ADHF)            readmission         vs low (1-2)        -20%
                                    30-day ADHF         high (3-5 star)
                                    readmission         vs low (1-2)        -20%
 Unroe et al.     Patients with     90-day all cause
 2012             heart failure     hospitalization     5 star vs. 1 star   -8%




         65
