                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                INTERMEDIATION VARIETY

                                   Jason Roderick Donaldson
                                       Giorgia Piacentino
                                         Anjan Thakor

                                       Working Paper 25946
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25946


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Philp Bond (editor), two anonymous referees,
Mike Burkart, Francesca Cornelli, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, Philip Dybvig, Daniel Ferreira, Radha
Gopalan, Vincent Glode, Denis Gromb, Ohad Kadan, Nataliya Klimenko, Mina Lee, Adrien
Matray, Asaf Manela, Alan Morrison, Balazs Szentes, Basil Williams, Andy Winton, Vijay
Yerramilli, Kostas Zachariadis, Jean-Pierre Zigrand and seminar participants at the 2015 EFA
Summer Meetings, the 2015 FIRS Conference, the 2017 Five Star Conference, the London
School of Economics, the 2018 SFS Cavalcade, and Washington University in St. Louis. Xiabo
Yu provided outstanding research assistance. We alone are responsible for any remaining errors.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jason Roderick Donaldson, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan Thakor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intermediation Variety
Jason Roderick Donaldson, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan Thakor
NBER Working Paper No. 25946
June 2019
JEL No. G21,G23,G24

                                          ABSTRACT

We explain the emergence of a variety of intermediaries in a model based only on differences in
their funding costs. Banks have a low cost of capital due to, say, safety nets or money-like
liabilities. We show, however, that this can be a disadvantage, because it exacerbates soft-budget-
constraint problems, making it costly to finance innovative projects. Non-banks emerge to
finance them. Their high cost of capital is an advantage, because it works as a commitment
device to withhold capital, solving soft-budget-constraint problems. Still, non-banks never take
over the entire market, but coexist with banks in equilibrium.

Jason Roderick Donaldson                         Anjan Thakor
Olin Business School                             Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis               Thakor@wustl.edu
Simon Hall
1 Olympian Way
St Louis, MO 63130
j.r.donaldson@wustl.edu

Giorgia Piacentino
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 813
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gp2547@columbia.edu
      1     Introduction
      Depository financial institutions--"banks"--have a low cost of capital,1 most likely be-
      cause their liabilities benefit from a moneyness premium and government safety nets.
      Perhaps due to this funding-cost advantage, banks provided the bulk of finance un-
      til the 1970s. But as competition among banks increased, non-depository financial
      institutions--"non-banks"--proliferated. As Remolona and Wulfekuhler (1992) put it,

            During the 1980s, U.S. commercial banks faced increased competition in
            their lending activities from other financial intermediaries...[which] enjoyed
            their success despite carrying apparently heavier capital burdens and lacking
            the advantage of deposit insurance (p. 25).

      It seemed like non-banks could even replace banks. Indeed, in 1994, Boyd and Gertler
      wrote a paper called "Are Banks Dead?" which begins

            It is widely believed that in the United States, commercial banking is a
            declining industry [because] nonbank credit alternatives have grown rapidly
            over the last 15 years (p. 2).

      But banks remain alive and well today, with over $12.5 trillion in deposits in the US.2
      They still provide much of the finance for traditional projects--commercial and indus-
      trial loans to firms in established industries. However, non-banks, such as finance com-
      panies and venture capitalists, play an important role in financing innovative projects.
      Although these projects are often highly profitable, non-banks still provide only a mi-
      nority of funding in the economy. Why do non-banks coexist with banks, even though
      they have a funding cost disadvantage? And why do they remain relatively scarce, even
      though they finance profitable projects?
          Model preview. To address these questions, we develop a model in which fi-
      nanciers' choices to specialize in banking or non-banking and entrepreneurs' choices to
      do traditional or innovative projects are jointly determined in general equilibrium, and
      nd we characterize how these choices depend on competition among financiers.
          In the model, ex ante identical entrepreneurs seek financing for two-stage projects
      from financiers. When each financier enters, it chooses whether to specialize in bank-
      ing or non-banking. When each entrepreneur meets a financier, he chooses whether to
      seek financing for a traditional project or an innovative one. Both are plagued by the
      soft-budget-constraint problem inherent in staged financing (Dewatripont and Maskin
      (1995); Kornai (1979, 1980)). Namely, entrepreneurs can avoid the costs of failure by
   1
     For example, Startz (1979) and Nagel (2016) (online Appendix B) estimate that deposit rates are one-
third to one-half of the competitive rate. See, e.g., Diamond (2019), Donaldson and Piacentino (2019), and
Merton and Thakor (2018) for theoretical foundations.
   2
     See the FDIC Quarterly Banking Profile at https://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/stats/2018dec/industry.pdf.


                                                    1
refinancing their projects. Anticipating refinancing at the second stage, they are reluc-
tant to work at the first stage. To incentivize them, financiers can threaten termination
following initial failure, but the threat is not credible if either the incumbent financier
or a competing rival is willing to provide new capital. It is especially hard for the in-
cumbent to commit not to finance continuation, since preventing termination can help
it to recoup its initial investment--it can be ex post optimal for the financier to throw
good money after bad, even if it is ex ante optimal to commit not to.
   The model is based on two key assumptions. (i) We assume that the innovative
project is associated with high agency costs. This makes entrepreneurs prefer the
innovative project, because they can get agency rents. But, given the soft-budget-
constraint problem, these rents can make it prohibitively costly to finance innovative
entrepreneurs. (ii) We assume that banks have a lower cost of capital than non-banks
(and are otherwise identical). This high cost of capital could seem like a strict disad-
vantage of being a non-bank, but we find that it is not.
   Results preview. In fact, our first main result is that non-banks' high cost of
capital can be an advantage. Because it can make refinancing entrepreneurs unprof-
itable, it can work as a commitment device to not provide additional finance after
the first stage, and thereby harden entrepreneurs' budget constraints. And, with a
hard budget constraint, entrepreneurs face a credible termination threat, making them
cheap to incentivize. As a result, financing innovative projects becomes viable. Banks'
low cost of capital, on the other hand, makes refinancing entrepreneurs attractive, and
thereby keeps entrepreneurs' budget constraints soft. As a result, financing innovative
entrepreneurs, with their high agency costs, is not viable. However, financing tra-
ditional entrepreneurs, with lower agency costs, can be attractive, despite their soft
budget constraints, since banks are subsidized by their own low cost of capital.
   Our second main result is that non-banks' hard budget constraints allow them not
only to incentivize entrepreneurs cheaply, but also to keep them captive. Indeed, a non-
bank-financed entrepreneur is unable to get any financing from rivals at all. The reason
is that, with no soft-budget-constraint problem, his incumbent non-bank can extract
a high repayment at the first stage. As a result, rivals are unwilling to finance him at
the second stage, given he already owes a high repayment to someone else. Conversely,
a bank-financed entrepreneur preserves access to financing from rivals. The reason is
that, given the soft-budget-constraint problem, his incumbent bank cannot extract a
high repayment at the first stage. As a result, rivals are still willing to finance him at
the second stage. Thus, when a bank finances a traditional entrepreneur, it has to leave
rents to the entrepreneur both at the first stage, to incentivize him, and at the second
stage, to prevent him from seeking finance from rivals. The more competition there is
among rivals, the more rents the incumbent bank has to leave to an entrepreneur to



                                            2
      keep him from seeking finance from them.
          Our third main result is that entrepreneurs choose their projects based on the kind
      of finance they have access to. Entrepreneurs know that non-banks are willing to
      finance innovative projects (given they impose hard budget constraints) but banks
      are not (given they cannot). Thus, when entrepreneurs meet non-banks, they choose
      innovative projects which generate high agency rents. But, when they meet banks,
      they choose traditional projects which give them access to finance. Thus, unlike in the
      existing literature,3 the mix of financiers in the market determines the mix of projects,
      not the other way around.
          Our fourth main result is a characterization of this mix of financiers as a function
      of the level of competition among them. We find a closed-form expression for the
      equilibrium proportion of non-banks in the market. It reveals that non-banks become
      more important as competition increases: they enter only competitive markets and
      provide an increasing proportion of financing as competition increases. However, they
      do not take over the whole market, but co-exist with banks for all levels of competition.
          To understand the result, first observe how increasing competition can exacerbate
      the soft-budget-constraint problem. Competition makes it easy for entrepreneurs to
      refinance and avoid the cost of failure, which makes them reluctant to work in the
      initial stage. But only bank-financed entrepreneurs are affected by this competition for
      continuation financing; non-bank financed entrepreneurs are captive to their incumbents
      no matter what. Thus, as competition increases, so does the relative benefit of being
      a non-bank, i.e. the relative benefit of keeping entrepreneurs captive. If competition is
      low, this benefit is not enough to outweigh the cost of non-banks' high cost of capital.
      In this case, all financiers specialize in traditional banking. If competition is higher,
      non-banking becomes attractive. In this case, some financiers specialize in non-banking
      to mitigate the effects of the soft-budget-constraint problem. Not all financiers do,
      however. Some still specialize in banking. The reason is that if everyone were to
      specialize in non-banking, then few banks would operate, as for low competition, and
      banking would become attractive again. Hence, banks co-exist with non-banks, even
      for very high competition.
          Our fifth main result is that entrepreneurs may choose the traditional project not
      only when they cannot access finance for the innovative one, as per our third main result,
      but also in some circumstances when they can. To show this, we relax the assumption
      that financing innovation is prohibitively costly for banks. In this case, if competition
      is low, banks finance innovation and there is no room for non-banks to enter, given
      they finance the same projects with a higher cost of capital. We find, however, that if
      competition among financiers is high, entrepreneurs who meet banks may choose the
3
    See, e.g., Bhattacharya and Chiesa (1995), von Thadden (1995), and Yosha (1995).


                                                   3
       traditional project despite having access to finance for the innovative one. The reason
       is that, by choosing the traditional project, they avoid being captive, and thus can use
       the threat of getting financing from rivals at the continuation stage to extract more
       rents from incumbents at the initial stage. This threat is valuable, however, only if
       competition among financiers is high enough to make it relatively easy to get financing
       from a rival--entrepreneurs still prefer the innovative project if competition is low,
       since they are always effectively captive in this case. This result is reminiscent of the
       hold-up problem (e.g., Grossman and Hart (1986)) in that the entrepreneur chooses one
       thing (the traditional project) at the initial stage to ensure it can extract more rent at
       the continuation stage, even if choosing something else (the innovative project) could
       generate higher total surplus.
           In summary, for low competition, there are only banks, and entrepreneurs choose
       traditional projects (unless banks are willing to finance innovative projects, as in the
       last result). For higher competition, banks finance only traditional projects, even if
       innovative projects are efficient. Non-banks emerge to fund innovation, providing an
       increasing share of finance as competition increases, but possibly remaining scarce, even
       in the perfect competition limit. (See Figure 1.)


        Figure 1: Financing Regimes as a Function of Competition among Financiers

       For low competition            For higher competition              As competition increases

       All financiers specialize      Most financiers specialize         Some financiers continue
       in banking                     in banking                         to specialize in banking

       None specialize                But a few specialize               More and more, but never all,
       in non-banking                 in non-banking                     specialize in non-banking

       All entrepreneurs are          Bank-financed                      Bank-financed entrepreneurs
       bank-financed and choose       entrepreneurs choose               still choose traditional projects
       traditional projects4          traditional projects

       There are no non-bank-         Non-bank-financed                  Non-banked financed
       financed entrepreneurs         entrepreneurs choose               entrepreneurs still choose
                                      innovative projects                innovative projects


   4
     This holds in our baseline set-up. Recall, however, that, in general, whether entrepreneurs choose
traditional or innovative projects can depend on parameters. Under our baseline assumptions, banks are
unwilling to finance innovation and entrepreneurs choose the traditional project, as per our third main result.
When we relax this assumption, so banks are willing to finance innovation, entrepreneurs still choose the
traditional project for high competition, as per our fifth main result, but may choose the innovative project
for low competition.



                                                      4
   Our model and results resonate with practice. Our assumption that banks have a
lower cost of capital than non-banks (see footnote 1 and Section 4.2) generates realistic,
first-order differences between how non-banks and banks behave. Non-banks' ability
to harden soft-budget constraints is arguably their main disciplining tool. As Sahlman
(1990) stresses for VCs,

     The credible threat to abandon a venture, even when the firm is economically
     viable, is the key to the relationship between the entrepreneur and the VC
     (p. 507).

And banks' inability to harden soft-budget constraints was a first-order concern for
economists worried about the decline of banking. As Jensen (1989) put it, "banks' chief
disciplinary tool, their power to withhold capital from...companies, has been vastly
reduced." And, as we spell out in Section 4.1, our results correspond to empirical
predictions, consistent with existing findings. (i) With increased banking competition,
non-banks are now likely to finance innovative projects. Indeed, (ii) access to non-bank
finance is an important driver of entrepreneurs' choice to innovate. But banks are alive
and well, and (iii) provide the bulk of finance for traditional projects, although (iv)
they charge lower interest rates than non-banks. Moreover, (v) the effect of banking
competition on real-sector innovation is ambiguous. Our results also give new perspec-
tives on some policies. For example, policies that could lower banks' cost of capital,
such as deposit insurance, bailout guarantees, and subsidized access to central bank
liquidity facilities, can have an unintended consequence. By making them unable to
harden entrepreneurs' budget constraints, these policies prevent banks from funding
innovation, which could lead entrepreneurs to choose traditional projects inefficiently
(Section 5).
   Further results. In our baseline specification, we define competitiveness among
financiers as the ratio of financiers to entrepreneurs, which determines the probability
of a bilateral meeting between an entrepreneur and a financier. This way of modeling
competition has a number of advantages, the primary one being that, by restricting
attention to bilateral meetings, we can embed the soft-budget-constraint problem in a
market economy and still keep the analysis tractable. But it is important to ask whether
our results are specific to this notion of competition. We analyze two extensions to show
that the answer is no. We model competition, first, in the quantity of credit provided
à la Cournot and, second, as the probability of getting a simultaneous competing offer
à la Bertrand. In both cases, we show that our results on how intermediation variety
depends on competition are robust; in equilibrium, the basic functional forms are even
the same as in the baseline specification. However, we have to capture the outcome of
the soft-budget-constraint problem in reduced form in the Cournot case and to rely on
a linear approximation in the Bertrand case. Hence, neither alternative is a complete

                                            5
       substitute for our baseline.
          In our baseline model, the equilibrating force that leads to the coexistence of banks
       and non-banks--to intermediation variety--is the negative spillover of one bank's entry
       on others' profits. By increasing the number of rival banks, a bank's entry allows
       entrepreneurs to extract more rents from their incumbents. But we also augment the
       model to explore two other ways in which a financier's entry can spill over on others'
       profits. First, we suppose that there is a limited supply of truly innovative ideas. In
       this case, the more non-banks enter and fund innovative projects, the fewer innovative
       projects are left for other non-banks to fund. This makes non-banking less attractive;
       hence it decreases the proportion of non-banks that operate in equilibrium. However, it
       does not qualitatively change our results. Second, we suppose that there is congestion
       among similar financiers, e.g., because they look for similar entrepreneurs. In this case,
       the more non-banks enter, the harder it is for other non-banks to find entrepreneurs
       to finance, and likewise for banks.5 Whether this makes non-banking or banking more
       attractive depends on which financiers are most affected by the congestion; hence it
       can either increase or decrease the proportion of non-banks that operate in equilibrium.
       Either way, however, it does not qualitatively change our results.
          Related literature. Our paper contributes to the literature on how borrowers
       choose between competing sources of finance, most of which focuses on the the trade-off
       between bank and market finance.6 In this literature, borrowers are typically endowed
       with heterogenous projects which determine whether it is advantageous for them to
       seek bank or market finance. Perhaps most often, banks have an informational advan-
       tage over markets by assumption, as in e.g., Diamond (1991), Holmström and Tirole
       (1997), or Rajan (1992). Information-sensitive borrowers thus choose banks to benefit
       from bank monitoring or flexibility, whereas borrowers less in need of monitoring choose
       markets to avoid compensating banks for monitoring or giving them information rents.
       In Boot and Thakor (1997), the trade-off is between the market's ability to aggregate
       information and banks' ability to resolve moral hazard. Thus, again, borrowers' exoge-
       nous characteristics determine their choice of financing source. Unlike this literature,
       we assume that borrowers are ex ante identical. Differences among them arise ex post
   5
     Such congestion externalities can also be present in our baseline set-up (although they need not be).
However, unlike in this extension, they affect all financiers the same way; i.e. when a non-bank enters, it
imposes the same externalities on banks as on other non-banks.
   6
     See Allen and Gale (2004), Besanko and Kanatas (1993), Bolton and Freixas (2000), Chemmanur
and Fulghieri (1994), Gersbach and Uhlig (2007), Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1993), Rajan
(1992), Repullo and Suarez (2000), Song and Thakor (2010), and von Thadden (1999). Many papers
study competition among banks, rather than between banks and other sources of finance; see, e.g.,
Boot and Thakor (2000), Boyd and De Nicolò (2005), Cao and Shi (2000), Cetorelli (2004), Dell'Ariccia
(2000), Dell'Ariccia and Marquez (2004), Guzman (2000), Hellmann, Murdock, and Stiglitz (2000), Keeley
(1990), Marquez (2002), Martinez-Miera and Repullo (2017), Matutes and Vives (2000), Petersen and Rajan
(1995), Repullo (2004), Sharpe (1990), and Wagner (2009).


                                                    6
       based on their source of finance. And, also unlike this literature, we focus on the trade-
       off between bank and non-bank finance, rather than between bank and market finance.
       This is likely to be the most relevant trade-off for the kinds of innovative/entrepreneurial
       borrowers we model.
          There are a few other papers in which banks coexist with other types of financiers.
       In Bond (2004), they coexist with less-diversified financiers, such as conglomerates,
       which can economize on the costs of information sharing in some circumstances. In
       Ueda (2004), they coexist with VCs, which can screen entrepreneurs' projects better,
       but cannot commit not to expropriate them.7 In Begenau and Landvoigt (2017) and
       Chrétien and Lyonnet (2019), they coexist with shadow banks, which are less regu-
       lated, but do not benefit from cheap funding due to moneyness or deposit insurance.
       In Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny (2015), they also coexist with shadow banks,
       which, in line with the other papers cited, are less regulated. However, in contrast with
       the other papers, these shadow banks also enjoy a low cost of capital from creating
       money-like liabilities. Thus, they do not resemble the non-banks in our model, but
       are closer to our banks, whose defining feature is their low cost of capital. Indeed,
       their non-banks are closest to money market mutual funds, which invest in marketable
       securities, whereas ours are closest to venture capitalists or finance companies, which
       finance early-stage entrepreneurs.
          Our model is also related to models of the market for venture capital, which also
       stress staged financing. Like us, Inderst and Mueller (2004), Jovanovic and Szentes
       (2013), Khanna and Mathews (2017), and Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) use mod-
       els of bilateral meetings to embed dynamic VC-entrepreneur relationships in a wider
       market.8 Many of these papers include search-and-matching frictions, which are likely
       to be first order for early-stage entrepreneurs with hard-to-assess projects.9 We can
       too, but we do not have to for our results. What matters is that we can capture
       scarcity, not search frictions. Namely, some entrepreneurs can go unfunded just be-
       cause capital is scarce, even if matching is frictionless. This is certainly first order
       for potential entrepreneurs, who report that raising capital is their principal problem
       (Blanchflower and Oswald (1998)).
          Layout. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we set up the
       model. In Section 3, we solve the model and present the main analysis. In Section
       4, we comment on our model's empirical implications, we discuss some of our key
       assumptions, and we explore some alternative ones. In Section 5, we conclude and
   7
     See also Chan, Siegel, and Thakor (1990). In that paper, banks, VCs, and markets all coexist and a
borrower's financing choice depends on his experience and reputation.
   8
     Some other papers, e.g., Boualam (2018), Payne (2018), Donaldson, Piacentino, and Thakor (2019),
Herkenhoff (2019), and Wasmer and Weil (2004), use related models to study the market for bank credit.
   9
     Indeed, in one survey, 20% of aspiring entrepreneurs say that where to get finance is their biggest concern
(Blanchflower and Oswald (1998)).


                                                       7
       comment on policy. The Appendix contains all proofs.


       2     Model
       Time is discrete and the horizon is infinite. Overlapping generations of entrepreneurs
       seek financiers to provide capital to two-stage projects. The projects suffer from a soft-
       budget-constraint problem, requiring additional capital if they do not pay off at the
       initial stage. Incumbent financiers have a monitoring advantage, but still compete with
       the next generation of financiers to provide continuation capital. This competition is
       the only link between generations. (We omit time indices since we focus on stationary
       equilibria.)


       2.1     Entrepreneurs and Projects
       At each date, a unit continuum of identical, penniless risk-neutral entrepreneurs is born.
       Each has access to two projects   {I, T }, where I stands for "innovative," and T for
       "traditional." Each entrepreneur meets a financier with probability Q. In this case, he
       may raise capital to invest in one of the two projects. Otherwise, he gets a reservation
       payoff normalized to zero.
           The projects resemble those in Crémer (1995): each lasts two stages with moral
       hazard at each stage and a soft budget constraint. Specifically, each project requires
                                                                                 at the interim
       first-stage financing K0 at the initial date and continuation financing K1
       date if it does not succeed in the first stage. If the project succeeds (at either stage),
       it pays off y  . Otherwise, it pays off nothing. The probability of success at each stage
       depends on the entrepreneur's effort: if he works, the project succeeds with probability
       p; if he shirks, it succeeds only with probability p - , which we assume is small enough
       that projects are viable only if the entrepreneur works in both stages.10 Although
       working increases the expected payoff of the project, it is costly for the entrepreneur,
       because it entails forgoing (non-pecuniary) private benefits at each stage. These equal
       B  unless the financier monitors the project, in which case they are reduced to b in the
       second stage, as discussed below. A project   {I, T } is thus characterized by seven
                         , y  , p, , B  , and b . Observe, however, that only the output,
       parameters K0 , K1
       second stage financing cost, and private benefits depend on its type  (although below
       we often omit the superscript  even from these parameters). Limiting the parameters
       that vary across the projects imposes discipline, limiting our free parameters, and also
       simplifies the equations. It also means we abstract from some important aspects of
  10
    A sufficient condition to ensure that working always dominates shirking in equilibrium is  (1 - p)y +
K1 > p (B/ - max {Qb B, b}) , where B and b are the entrepreneur's private benefits from shirking and
Qb is the probability he meets a bank, as defined below.


                                                   8
innovation, such as risk. But, as we discuss in Section 4.2, the model can easily be
adapted to include many of them.
   We assume that both projects are associated with potential soft-budget-constraint
problems.

Assumption 1. For both projects, the cost of continuation financing is not too high:
for   {I, T },
                                                  b
                                  K1 < p y -           .                               (1)
                                                  
   We also make two assumptions on parameters to distinguish the projects from each
other, reflecting two key real-world characteristics of innovation (as discussed further
in Section 4.2).

Assumption 2. The private benefits of the innovative project are large:

                                       B I > 2B T .                                    (2)

This says that the innovative project is associated with large agency frictions.

Assumption 3. The initial investment cost is neither too small nor too large:

                               B I + bI                                     BT
                        I
  (2 - p)py I - (1 - p)K1 -p            < K0 < (2 - p)py T - (1 - p)K1
                                                                     T
                                                                       - 2p    .       (3)
                                                                            

This assumption says that the soft-budget-constraint problem is more costly for the
innovative project than the traditional one, in that it can make first-stage financing
unattractive for the innovative project but not for the traditional one. Basically, it says
      I is high relative to K T . This is an important driver of our results, and, as we
that K1                      1
argue in Section 4.2, a realistic distinction between innovative and traditional projects.
There, we also give a numerical example of "reasonable" parameters satisfying all of our
assumptions.


2.2     Financiers
At each date, a continuum of mass F of identical risk-neutral financiers is born. Each
chooses to become either a bank or a non-bank and meets an entrepreneur with prob-
ability q . We let  denote the proportion of non-banks, so there are (1 - )F banks
and F non-banks in the market at each date.
   The only difference between a bank and a non-bank is that banks have a low cost of
capital, which we normalize to zero, relative to non-banks, which have a cost of capital
r > 0, assumed to be sufficiently large (but not too large):



                                            9
       Assumption 4. Non-banks' cost of capital is neither too small nor too large:11

                        p y I - B I /                      p y I - bI / p2 B T
                                I
                                      > 1 + r > max                I
                                                                        ,    T
                                                                                      .            (4)
                              K0                                 K1       K1

          Both types of financiers want to invest in entrepreneurs' projects. If a financier
       meets an entrepreneur, it can make the entrepreneur a (take-it-or-leave-it) offer of
       initial financing K0 in exchange for the repayment R1 in the event that the project
       succeeds in the first stage. If the entrepreneur does not succeed in the first stage, the
       financier can make a (take-it-or-leave-it) offer of continuation financing K1 in exchange
       for the additional repayment R2 in the event that the project succeeds in the second
       stage.12 If the entrepreneur rejects this offer, he can try to find continuation financing
       from another financier in the market at the interim date. This market is populated by
       the next generation of financiers. If he does not get financing, the project is scrapped,
       paying off zero.
          We assume that incumbent financiers have an advantage in monitoring entrepreneurs,
       due to, say, proprietary information they acquire about the entrepreneur, as in Rajan
       (1992).13 Following Holmström and Tirole (1997), we assume that if an entrepreneur
       gets continuation financing from his incumbent financier, his second-stage private ben-
       efits are reduced from B to b, but if he gets it from a rival his private benefits are still
       B . Formally, this can modeled by assuming incumbent financiers have a lower cost of
       monitoring than rivals. Indeed, it is equivalent to the extreme assumption in Crémer
       (1995), that the monitoring cost is zero if the incumbent finances the second stage, but
       infinite if a new financier does. Realistically, both incumbents and rivals are likely to
       monitor entrepreneurs. This is just a simple way to capture the idea that incumbents
       can monitor more cheaply, and hence are likely to monitor more. (See Section 4.2 for
       a discussion.)
          Finally, financiers that do not meet entrepreneurs exit, getting a reservation payoff
       normalized to zero.
  11
     The condition on the left ensures that non-banks are willing to finance the innovative entrepreneurs at
the initial stage. The first condition on the right ensures that they do not provide continuation financing to
innovative entrepreneurs whom they financed in the first stage, and the second condition on the right ensures
that they do not provide continuation financing to traditional entrepreneurs whom someone else financed in
the first stage.
  12
     Note whether R1 or R2 is prioritized does not matter for the results. The reason is that repayments are
determined by the entrepreneur's IC, which depends on only the total stock of debt. See equation (5) below.
  13
     Botsch and Vanasco (2019) find empirical evidence of "learning by lending," by which incumbent fi-
nanciers obtain such an informational advantage over competitors.




                                                     10
       2.3     Timeline
       At each date, each financier chooses to be a bank or a non-bank and meets an en-
       trepreneur with probability q , where q is a decreasing function of the number of fi-
       nanciers F . Symmetrically, each entrepreneur meets a financier with probability Q(F ),
       where Q is a function of the number of financiers F , continuously increasing from
       Q(0) = 0 to Q() = 1. He meets a bank or a non-bank with probabilities proportional
       to their numbers, i.e. with Qb = (1 - )Q and Qnb = Q, respectively. After meeting
       a financier, he chooses a project to seek financing for. Then, the financier offers the
       entrepreneur financing terms. After this, the entrepreneur works or shirks, and the
       project either succeeds, in which case the entrepreneur makes the agreed repayment, or
       does not, in which case the sequence repeats: the financier makes an offer to fund the
       continuation of the project; the entrepreneur works or shirks; and the project succeeds
       or fails. If it succeeds, the entrepreneur makes the agreed repayment; otherwise, he
       repays nothing. Entrepreneurs and financiers that do not meet anyone exit.14
           Importantly, if the financier offers continuation financing, it takes into account that
       if the entrepreneur rejects it he can try to find financing elsewhere, receiving an offer
       from a next-generation financier with probability Q. Recall that private benefits are
       lower with the incumbent financier, given its monitoring advantage.


       3     Results
       In this section, we solve for the stationary subgame perfect equilibrium of the model.
       We first study the two-stage agency problem between financiers and entrepreneurs,
       showing how it depends on whether the entrepreneur has a hard or a soft budget
       constraint and on whether he is captive to his incumbent financier. Next, we show how
       an entrepreneur's project choice depends on the type of financier he has access to and
       on how the types of financiers in the market depend on the level of competition among
       them. Finally, we explore equilibrium project choices for some different parameters.


       3.1     Entrepreneurs' Incentive Constraints
       The model is built around the soft-budget-constraint problem inherent in staged fi-
       nancing. It must be incentive compatible for an entrepreneur to work at each stage.
  14
    This assumption that everyone gets only one chance to match keeps the model stationary, so that
competition is the same at each period. We intentionally abstract from dynamics, using the OLG set-up
just to capture the effect of competition on multi-stage financing in a simple way. (See Biais and Landier
(2015) for a model in which a similar link between overlapping generations of entrepreneurs does matter for
aggregate dynamics.)




                                                    11
However, he has little incentive to work at the first stage if he knows that if he fails he
can still get refinanced and continue at the second stage.
       We begin with the first stage, and show how the entrepreneur's continuation value,
denoted by u, affects his IC:

                p y - R1 + (1 - p)u  (p - ) y - R1 + (1 - p + )u + B,                     (5)

where the LHS is his expected payoff if he works (his success probability is p), and the
RHS is his expected payoff if he shirks (his success probability is only p - , but he
gets private benefits B ). The IC can be rewritten as an upper bound on his repayment
R1 :
                                                      B
                                       R1  y - u -      .                                 (6)
                                                      
The higher is the continuation value u, the lower is the repayment the financier can
extract because it must leave the entrepreneur a lot of rent to incentivize him to work.
       Following failure, the entrepreneur's project is terminated unless he gets refinanced.
He could get refinancing from his incumbent or from a rival. In the case that he gets it
from his incumbent, he is monitored, and his private benefits are reduced from B to b.
His second-stage IC is

                        p y - R1 - R2  (p - ) y - R1 - R2 + b.                            (7)

This IC is the analog of the first-stage IC (equation (5)). But the additional repayment
R2 the entrepreneur can commit to repay is limited because he already has R1 to
repay from his first stage financing. This gives a lower bound on the entrepreneur's
continuation value, which is his expected payoff net of repayments:

                                                              b
                                  u = p ( y - R 1 - R2 )  p     .                         (8)
                                                              

       But he might also be able to get financing from a rival. In this case, he is not
monitored, his private benefits remain B , and he can get more agency rent. Hence, if
he can get outside finance--i.e. if he is not captive to his incumbent--his continuation
value could be even higher. We explore whether an entrepreneur can get continuation
financing from either his incumbent or a rival in the next section.


3.2        Soft vs. Hard Budget Constraints and Captivity
Here we ask whether entrepreneurs can access finance from rivals or are captive to
incumbents. We solve backwards, showing that access to continuation financing cre-
ates a soft-budget-constraint problem which can undermine access to initial financing.


                                              12
       We consider entrepreneurs with each of the two types of projects separately, starting
       with the innovative project, which is costly to refinance, and then moving on to the
       traditional project, which is cheaper to refinance.
          Innovative entrepreneurs. It is hard for an incumbent financier, which has
       provided initial capital to an entrepreneur, to commit not to finance his continuation,
       since doing so makes it more likely to recoup its initial investment. This can make
       financing innovative entrepreneurs, for whom refinancing is expensive, especially costly
       (cf. Assumption 3). But a non-bank's high cost of capital works as a commitment device
       not to refinance an innovative entrepreneur. In contrast, with its low cost of capital,
       a bank has no way to make such a commitment.15 In other words, if an innovative
       entrepreneur gets non-bank financing, his budget constraint is hard, whereas if he gets
       bank financing, it is soft:

       Lemma 1. (Innovative entrepreneurs' budget constraints.) An incumbent bank
       provides continuation financing to an innovative entrepreneur; an incumbent non-bank
       does not.

          A non-bank not only imposes a hard budget constraint on the innovative entrepreneur,
       it also keeps him captive:

       Lemma 2. (Innovative entrepreneurs are captive to non-banks.) An innovative
       entrepreneur is captive to an incumbent non-bank.

       This result says that an innovative entrepreneur is endogenously captive to an incum-
       bent non-bank. To see why, the first step is to observe that if the incumbent financier
       can credibly require a high initial repayment, then he can keep the entrepreneur cap-
       tive. The reason is that if he owes a lot to his incumbent from the first stage, then he
       can promise little to a rival at the second stage. Hence, the rival is unwilling to finance
       him. The second step is to observe that, given a non-bank imposes a hard budget
       constraint, it can credibly require a high initial repayment. The reason is that then
       the entrepreneur faces a credible termination threat, since he cannot get continuation
       from his incumbent (given its high cost of capital) or from a rival (given he already
       owes too much to the incumbent). Thus, the entrepreneur has incentive to work even
       if a lot of his output goes to his financier when his project succeeds--he wants to avoid
       termination when it does not. Hence, the non-bank can extract enough rent to make
       financing an innovative entrepreneur at the first stage profitable:
  15
    This result complements the intuition that financiers use their own leverage as a commitment device
to prevent borrower opportunism. E.g., in Diamond and Rajan (2001) the risk of runs by bank creditors
prevents renegotiation by their borrowers, and in Axelson, Strömberg, and Weisbach (2009) intermediary
leverage mitigates the conflict of interest between a private equity fund and its investors.



                                                   13
       Corollary 1. (Non-banks finance innovation.) A non-bank will finance an inno-
       vative entrepreneur.

           Unlike non-banks, banks cannot commit not to refinance the entrepreneur (Lemma
       1). Given he will always be able to refinance his project, the entrepreneur has a high
       continuation value u. This tightens his first-stage IC (equation (5)), making him costly
       to incentivize, especially if he has an innovative project, which comes with high agency
       costs by definition (Assumption 2). Indeed, this can be so costly that a bank will not
       fund an innovative entrepreneur at all (even if he is captive):

       Corollary 2. (Banks do not finance innovation.) A bank does not fund an inno-
       vative project.

           In summary, banks' funding-cost advantage becomes a disadvantage in that it pre-
       vents them from committing to take (or not to take) certain actions: with bank fi-
       nancing, innovative entrepreneurs' budget constraints remain soft. This prevents banks
       from financing them profitably.
           Traditional entrepreneurs. We now turn to an entrepreneur with a traditional
       project, focusing on the case in which he gets financing from a bank (which turns out to
       be the the relevant case (Proposition 2)). Given its low cost of capital, the incumbent
       bank is always willing to refinance a traditional entrepreneur:

       Lemma 3. (Traditional entrepreneurs' budget constraints.) An incumbent bank
       provides continuation financing to a traditional entrepreneur.

           A bank not only cannot impose a hard budget constraint on the traditional en-
       trepreneur, it also cannot keep him captive:

       Lemma 4. (Traditional entrepreneurs are not captive to banks.) Suppose that

                                                             BT
                                                T
                                               K1  p 2 Qb       .                                     (9)
                                                             

       A traditional entrepreneur is not captive to an incumbent bank: he has access to finance
       from rival banks (but not from rival non-banks).

           The reason a bank cannot keep a traditional entrepreneur captive is that it cannot
       harden his budget constraint. This means it must leave the entrepreneur substantial
       agency rent in the first stage to satisfy his IC (cf. equation (6)). This can make rival
       banks16 willing to finance him, given that he owes little to his incumbent.
           When an incumbent bank makes an offer for continuation financing, it takes into
       account that the entrepreneur can reject it and try to find finance from a rival. This is
16
     We show in the proof that, given its high cost of capital, a rival non-bank is never willing to finance him.

                                                       14
attractive for the entrepreneur, who gets higher private benefits B > b when financed
by a non-monitoring rival. In this case, his agency rent is pB/ (cf. equation (8)). But
he meets a rival bank only with probability Qb . Hence, he stays with his incumbent
only if
                                                        B
                                p(y - R1 - R2 )  Qb p     ,                            (10)
                                                        
where the LHS is just his expected payoff from the incumbent, and the RHS is the
probability Qb he meets a rival bank times the expected payoff from the rival, as just
described. Hence, with a soft budget constraint, the incumbent financier sets R2 to
make the tighter of the constraints in equations (7) and (10) bind:

                         not captive                   b      B
                        R2           = y - R1 - max      , Qb      .                   (11)
                                                              

      However, given Assumption 3, the soft-budget-constraint problem is not so severe
that a traditional project is no longer viable. Indeed, the bank is still willing to finance
it:

Corollary 3. (Banks finance traditional.) A bank will finance a traditional en-
trepreneur.

      The results above stress that a hard budget constraint not only makes it easier to
incentivize an entrepreneur, but also makes it easier to keep him captive. The reason is
that the financier can demand a high initial repayment, so that if the entrepreneur does
not succeed, he already owes so much to the incumbent financier that no one else will
finance him. In contrast, a financier with a soft budget constraint has to leave surplus
on the table in the initial stage, and thus must compete with other financiers for any
remaining surplus at the continuation stage. In this sense, a financier suffers from the
soft budget constraint twice, once when it must incentivize the entrepreneur, and again
when it must compete with new financiers. High competition Qb makes this second
effect worse, because, roughly, the entrepreneur can easily pit a rival financier against
his incumbent. In contrast, high competition has no effect on a financier with a hard
budget constraint, given it has monopoly power over its captive entrepreneur no matter
what. This fact that competition matters more with soft budget constraints will drive
our comparative statics results below (Section 3.4), which we derive after describing
the equilibrium project choices in the next section.


3.3       Access to Finance and Entrepreneurs' Project Choice
We now turn to entrepreneurs' project choices. Entrepreneurs are all identical, but
could meet different types of financiers, banks and non-banks, which are themselves


                                            15
identical except for their different costs of capital. We have shown, however, that this
matters for financiers, since a high cost of capital allows non-banks to solve the soft-
budget-constraint problem. Now we show that it matters for entrepreneurs too. Because
innovative projects are associated with costly soft budget constraints, entrepreneurs do
not undertake them unless they have access to non-banks that can resolve the problem.
The next result says that entrepreneurs who meet banks choose traditional projects.
The reason is that they do not have access to finance for innovative ones.

Proposition 1. (No innovation with banks.) Suppose that the condition in equa-
tion (9) holds. Entrepreneurs who meet banks choose traditional projects.

   Whereas banks are not willing to finance innovative projects, non-banks are. The
reason is that non-banks' hard budget constraints discipline entrepreneurs, forcing them
to work in the first stage. Entrepreneurs welcome this discipline, because it allows them
to get innovative projects financed, which yield them higher payoffs. This is not due
to a high payoff y I associated with the innovative project itself--that would benefit
the financier, given it offers the contract. Rather, it is due to the high private benefits
B I associated with it--this benefits the entrepreneur, given he gets agency rent. This
leads to the next result:

Proposition 2. (Non-banks discipline.) Entrepreneurs who meet non-banks choose
innovative projects.

   These results stress that the kind of finance entrepreneurs have access to can deter-
mine their project choices--entrepreneurs choose traditional projects unless they have
access to non-bank finance, in which case they choose innovative projects. In this sense,
real innovation follows financial innovation.
   In the next section, we turn to how entrepreneurs' access to finance is endogenously
determined by financiers' choices to become banks or non-banks. First, though, we
summarize how these different projects look in equilibrium.

Corollary 4. (Non-bank vs. bank finance.) Suppose that the condition in equation
(9) holds and y I is sufficiently large relative to y T ; specifically,

                                      1-p             B I - B T - bT
                  y I > y T + max         py T - K1
                                                  T
                                                    ,                     .           (12)
                                       p                    

In equilibrium, non-banks finance high-return (innovative) projects, and banks finance
low-return (traditional) projects. Moreover, non-banks charge higher repayments (R1 )
than banks do.

This result could shed light on why some non-banks, like PEs, seem to earn high
returns relative to the market (Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2014)). The results in

                                               16
the next section can explain why PE financing remains relatively scarce despite these
high returns.


3.4      Intermediation Variety
We have established that entrepreneurs with access to non-banks choose innovative
projects and that those with access to banks choose traditional ones. But will there
be a mix of banks and non-bank financiers in equilibrium? Or will financiers all prefer
to be banks, benefiting from the their low cost of capital? Alternatively, will they all
prefer to be non-banks, benefiting from their hard budget constraints? Moreover, does
the mix of financiers in the market depend on the level of competition among them?
     To address these questions, we start by comparing the expected payoffs of banks
and non-banks. Since financiers offer the contracts, they get the total surplus from a
project less the agency rents they must leave on the table to incentivize entrepreneurs.
In a meeting between an entrepreneur and a non-bank, the total surplus is the value of
the innovative project, which can succeed in its first stage or not at all (given the hard
budget constraint). We define this as I , noting that we need to multiply K0 by the
non-bank's cost of capital (1 + r ):

                                  I := py I - (1 + r )K0 .                              (13)

Hence, since it meets an entrepreneur with probability q , the non-bank's expected payoff
is
                                                             BI
                           non-bank's payoff = q I - p            ,                     (14)
                                                             
where the second term is the entrepreneur's expected rent p(y - R1 ). In a meeting
between an entrepreneur and a bank, the total surplus is the value of the traditional
project, which could succeed in its first or second stage (given the soft budget con-
straint). We define this as T :

                          T := py T - K0 + (1 - p) py T - K1
                                                           T
                                                             .                          (15)

Hence, since it meets an entrepreneur with probability q , a bank's expected payoff is

                                            p
                 bank's payoff = q T -        B T + max Qb B T , bT          ,          (16)
                                            

where the second term is the entrepreneur's expected rent p(y - R1 ) + (1 - p)p(y - R1 -
R2 ).
     Different types of financiers coexist if and only if their payoffs are equal in equilib-




                                             17
rium, so a financier is indifferent between becoming a non-bank and a bank, or

                          BI                p
               q I - p         = q T -        B T + max Qb B T , bT              .          (17)
                                            

Each financier's choice can depend on the choices of others, since the probabilities q
and Qb depend on the proportion  of non-banks in the market. These probabilities in
turn depend on the number of financiers F , our measure of financing competition.
   To explain how the variety of financiers operating depends on competition, we sup-
pose for illustration that bT is small, so max Qb B T , bT       = Qb B T . Thus, the financiers'
indifference condition in equation (17) becomes

                                    BI         BT
                            I - p      = T - p    1 + Qb .                                  (18)
                                               

This expression captures a key trade-off in our model: an increase in banking compe-
tition, captured by the probability an entrepreneur meets a bank, Qb , exacerbates the
soft-budget-constraint problem, reducing the bank's profit on the RHS. The reason is
that if Qb is high, then the entrepreneur's continuation utility at the second stage is
high too; as a result, the bank must leave him more agency rent in the first stage (see
the IC in equation (5)). Thus, the more competitive the market is, the more financiers
benefit from keeping entrepreneurs captive.
   Now, since Qb is increasing in the number of banks in the market, financiers be-
come banks if not too many others do, and become non-banks otherwise. Rearranging
equation (18), we see that this leads to an interior mix of banks and non-banks in
equilibrium for
                                    1                 T
                     Qb = Qb :=         BI - BT +       - I               ,                 (19)
                                   BT                p
as long as this is a well-defined probability. Thus, given Qb = (1 - )Q(F ), we have
that
                                                    Qb
                                 = max 0, 1 -                .                              (20)
                                                   Q(F )
   Given Q > 0, the expression for  (equation (20)) implies that  is an increasing
function of F . If competition among financiers is very low,  is zero, indicating that no
non-bank operates. If competition is higher, some financiers become non-banks, and
the proportion that does increases as competition increases, so as to keep the problems
caused by the soft budget constraint at bay. But  never reaches 1. Non-banks never
take over the whole market, and banks provide some finance for all levels of competition
F , with the proportion of non-banks approaching 1 - Qb in the perfect competition limit
(F  ), as depicted in Figure 2, and formalized in the next proposition.




                                            18
     Proposition 3. (Intermediation variety.) Suppose that

                                                      bT K1    T
                                            max          ,         < Qb <1                (21)
                                                      B T p2 B T

     (where Qb is as defined in equation (19)).

       1. Non-banks are present only if competition among financiers F is sufficiently high.
       2. The proportion of non-banks is increasing in competition F .

       3. Non-banks never take over the entire market; rather, banks provide a positive
                    fraction of finance for all F .
         proportion  of non-banks 




                                                                        limF   = 1 - Qb




                                               financing competition F 

Figure 2: The proportion  of non-banks in the market as a function of competition F . (For
the plot, we used the "telephone" matching function (Stevens (2007)), which implies that
                    F
Q(F ) has the form 1+ F
                        .)

        For low competition F , all financiers become banks to take advantage of their fund-
     ing cost advantage. But as competition increases, and there are more banks in the
     market, it becomes easier for entrepreneurs to find banks to finance their second-stage
     investments, i.e. Qb goes up. As a result, entrepreneurs can extract more rent from
     their incumbent banks. Hence, non-banks emerge to solve this problem. They keep
     entrepreneurs captive, and hence are always effectively monopolists, unaffected by com-
     petition. Still, non-banks do not provide all the finance for high competition.
        The reason that banks provide a positive fraction of finance even for high F is
     that non-bank entry attenuates the effect of competition on banks, in the sense that it
     makes Qb less sensitive to F . There are two effects behind this. (i) There is the direct
     effect that when many new financiers become non-banks, an increase in the number of


                                                            19
       financiers leads to a relatively small increase in the number of banks--i.e. the higher 
       is, the less sensitive Qb = (1 - )F is to F . (ii) There is the indirect effect that when
       many new financiers become non-banks, an increase in the number of financiers can
       induce congestion, decreasing the likelihood an entrepreneur meets a bank.
          These congestion externalities are a hallmark of models of markets in which trad-
       ing/search frictions can make it hard to find a counterparty, e.g., the Mortensen and
       Pissarides (1994) model of labor markets, the Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005)
       model of OTC financial markets, and the Inderst and Mueller (2004) model of venture
       capital markets. Their practical importance notwithstanding, congestion externalities
       only amplify our result; they are not strictly necessary for it. To see this, observe that
       they matter only if Q(F ) is non-linear, but that our results hold even if it is linear: if
       Q(F ) = µF , Qb is proportional to the mass of banks in the market:17

                           Qb = (1 - )Q(F ) = µ(1 - )F = µ × |banks|,                         (22)

       and it is unaffected by the number of non-banks in the market--there are no congestion
       externalities. Nonetheless, we can use our expression for the proportion of non-banks
                                                    Q
       in equation (20) to get  = max 0, 1 -        µF   , which is positive only for sufficiently
       high competition F ; it is increasing, but at a decreasing rate; and it is never one (cf.
       3). Moreover, the argument is even more general. From equation (19), we can see
       that it applies whenever Qb is a function of only the number of banks in the market,
       Qb = f (1 - )F .


       3.5    Entrepreneurs Choose Not to Innovate
       So far, entrepreneurs who met banks chose traditional projects because they knew they
       could not get funding for innovative projects. We now turn to another reason that they
       might choose not to do innovative projects--anticipating being captive with innovative
       projects, they choose traditional projects to extract more rent. This can happen if
       parameters are such that banks are willing to finance innovative entrepreneurs (despite
       the soft-budget-constraint problem) but that if they do, these innovative entrepreneurs
       are captive:18

       Proposition 4. (Entrepreneurs choose not to innovate.) Suppose that the con-
       dition in equation (9) holds. But now suppose that the first inequality in Assumption 3
  17
    Where we must restrict attention to F  1/µ to ensure that this is a well-defined probability.
  18
    Although many theory papers study banking competition (see footnote 6), to our knowledge only two of
them study how it affects entrepreneurs' choices. These are Boyd and De Nicolò (2005), which shows that
increasing competition can increase entrepreneurs' risk-shifting, and Martinez-Miera and Repullo (2010),
which shows that diversification can offset the risk-shifting effect in Boyd and De Nicolò (2005). Goetz
(2018) finds empirical evidence that an increase in banking competition reduces the risk of bank failures.


                                                   20
       does not hold, or

                      I                                      p BI  p
                     K0  py I + 1 - p       py I - K1
                                                    I
                                                      -           - max Qb B I , bI                 (23)
                                                                   

       (which implies that banks fund an innovative project) and that

                                                             BI
                                                I
                                               K1 > p 2 Qb                                          (24)
                                                             

       (which implies that the innovative entrepreneur is captive to the bank).
          Entrepreneurs matched with banks choose the traditional project (possibly ineffi-
       ciently) if and only if interbank competition is sufficiently high, i.e.

                                                    bI + B I
                                           Qb                     - 1.                              (25)
                                                       BT

          Intuitively, when entrepreneurs choose projects, entrepreneurs face a trade-off. With
       the innovative project, they get high private benefits, but are captive; with the tradi-
       tional project, they get low private benefits, but are not. Thus, they may choose the
       traditional project, even if the innovative project is efficient, in the sense that the payoff
       y I is sufficiently high relative to y T .19 This points to another way that non-banks' high
       cost of capital can discipline entrepreneurs: it not only allows non-banks to commit
       to deny second-stage financing, which hardens entrepreneurs' soft budget constraints,
       but also allows them to commit to deny financing to traditional projects, which forces
       entrepreneurs to innovate:

       Lemma 5. (Non-banks force innovation.) Suppose that the conditions in Proposi-
       tion 4 are satisfied. Entrepreneurs with access to banks choose traditional projects, and
       those with access to non-banks choose innovative projects.
  19
     We refrain from giving a formal definition of efficiency mainly for two reasons. (i) With imperfect
markets (bilateral matching) and heterogeneous agents (different costs of capital), there is not a clear way
to define the discount rate that determines whether one project is better than another in an NPV sense. (ii)
With financiers' funding cost difference taken in reduced form, there is not a clear way to define aggregate
welfare. To do so, we would have to take a stand on where the difference comes from, and close the model
in more general equilibrium. We choose not to do this, given the cost of capital difference could reflect a
variety things (Section 4.2). Just for example, banks' low cost of capital could reflect a social purpose played
by safe deposits, and these deposits could be safe in part because they are backed by low-risk traditional
projects. In this case, investing in traditional projects need not be inefficient. In contrast, the low cost of
capital could reflect fiscal backing by the government. In this case, investing in traditional projects most
likely would be inefficient.




                                                      21
       4        Empirical Content, Discussion, Robustness, and
       Extensions
       In this section, we relate our findings to empirical evidence in the literature. Then
       we discuss some of our modeling assumptions, and show that our results are robust to
       alternative specifications and extensions.


       4.1       Empirical content
       Banks in our model represent institutions that take deposits, and have a low cost of
       capital as a result. Non-banks could represent a variety of institutions that do not take
       deposits, but still compete with traditional banks to finance entrepreneurs. Salient
       examples are finance companies and venture capital firms. Others are private equity
       firms,   20   insurance companies, and commercial mortgage banks.
            Our analysis of how entrepreneurs' and financiers' choices are jointly determined in
       general equilibrium sheds light on a number of stylized facts. The empirical findings
       in Chernenko, Erel, and Prilmeier (2018) are particularly relevant to our results. After
       presenting evidence of the importance of non-bank finance, which accounts for 32% of
       loans in their data, they show that firms are more likely to borrow from non-banks if
       they are more R&D-intensive and if the banking market is less concentrated. They also
       find that non-bank borrowers pay higher interest rates. These findings support three
       of our main predictions:
           1. Non-banks finance innovative projects (Proposition 2). For further support for this
              result, see, e.g., Kortum and Lerner (2000) on VCs, Lerner, Sorensen, and Strömberg
              (2011) on PEs, and (under the assumption that innovation is relatively risky21 )
              Carey, Post, and Sharpe (1998) and Denis and Mihov (2003) for finance compa-
              nies.
           2. The proportion of non-banks is increasing in competition (Proposition 3). For
              further support for this prediction, see, e.g., Boyd and Gertler (1994), IMF (2016),
              Remolona and Wulfekuhler (1992), and Shapiro and Pham (2008).
           3. Non-banks require higher repayments per unit of capital invested than banks do
              (Corollary 4).
  20
     Our model might not apply to LBOs, in which PEs often target low-risk firms. But it could apply to
other branches of the PE business. Indeed, anecdotally, it seems PEs are increasingly competing with banks
in the lending market. See, e.g., "The New Business Banker: A Private Equity Firm," Wall Street Journal,
August 12, 2018 and "How the Biggest Private Equity Firms Became the New Banks," Financial Times,
September 19, 2018.
  21
     In our baseline model, we assume that innovative and traditional projects have the same success prob-
ability. But, as discussed in Section 4.2, this is only to discipline the parameters and keep the equations
simple. In reality, the types of projects we call "innovative" are likely to be risky too.

                                                    22
          Another prediction is that non-banks discipline entrepreneurs by imposing a hard-
       budget constraint.

         4. Non-banks' termination threat disciplines entrepreneurs (Lemma 1 and Proposi-
            tion 2). For support for this prediction, see Gompers and Lerner (2001), who say
            "Staged capital infusion may be the most potent control mechanism a VC can
            employ (p. 155)."

       This could also shed light on why non-bank loans tend to have fewer covenants than
       bank loans (Chernenko, Erel, and Prilmeier (2018)): the termination threat could sub-
       stitute for covenants as a disciplining device.
          The evidence on how competition among financiers affects innovation is mixed. So
       are our predictions. Thus, our analysis offers a potential reconciliation of the existing
       empirical findings:

         5. Real-sector innovation may be increasing banking competition (because more non-
            banks enter, as in Proposition 3) or decreasing in banking competition (because
            fewer entrepreneurs innovate, as in Proposition 4). Chava et al. (2013) and Mao
            and Wang (2018) provide evidence consistent with the prediction that real-sector
            innovation increases with banking competition.22 Hombert and Matray (2016),
            Cornaggia et al. (2015), and (under the assumption that innovation is relatively
            risky) Kaviani and Maleki (2018) provide evidence that real-sector innovation de-
            clines with banking competition.

          Finally, our results stress the importance of access to finance for entrepreneurs'
       decisions.

         6. Access to (non-bank) finance leads to innovation (Proposition 2). For support
            for this prediction, see, e.g., Blanchflower and Oswald (1998), who find that one
            of the main reasons people choose not to pursue entrepreneurship is that they
            have limited access to financing, and Samila and Sorenson (2011), who find that
            an increase in the supply of venture capital makes people more likely to engage
            in entrepreneurship. Anecdotally, access not only to financing, but to the right
            type of financing, is a first-order consideration for entrepreneurs. For example,
            access to VC financing is among the most-cited reasons why entrepreneurs decide
            to headquarter in the Bay Area (e.g., Cohan (2013) and Wessel (2013)). Indeed,
            Chen et al. (2010) find that location is related to VC outcomes.
  22
    Under the assumption that, as is common in practice, banks finance with debt and non-banks with
equity, this prediction also sheds light on Hsu, Tian, and Xu's (2014) finding that firms innovate more when
equity markets are more developed, but the development of debt markets seems to discourage it. (Note,
however, that debt and equity are theoretically equivalent in our set-up.)



                                                    23
       4.2     Discussion
       Banks' and non-banks' cost of capital. Underlying all of our results is the as-
       sumption that banks have a lower cost of capital than non-banks. It generates the
       high hurdle rate that non-banks apply to investments,23 which in turn disciplines en-
       trepreneurs, hardening their budget constraints.24
          We stress above that banks' low cost of capital is likely due to their government
       guarantees and money-like deposits. But non-banks may have a higher cost of funding
       for other reasons as well. For example, unlike banks, non-banks such as VCs and
       PEs take on relatively few investments, and exposure to idiosyncratic risk could drive
       up their cost of capital.25 Moreover, non-banks are likely to care more about upside
       payoffs, given that leverage and incentive distortions make their payoffs convex.26 As a
       result, they may finance only entrepreneurs that still have high upside potential, which
       would also have the effect of hardening a soft budget constraint.27 Finally, they are
       also likely to finance riskier investments and hence have higher probability of default
       themselves. This would drive up the rate they have to pay on their own financing to
       compensate their investors endogenously.
          Innovative and traditional projects. For our results, the key distinction be-
       tween the two types of projects is the severity of the soft-budget-constraint problem:
       compared to entrepreneurs with traditional projects, those with innovative projects are
       costly to incentivize and expensive to refinance. We capture these important features
       of innovation by assuming that innovative projects have higher private benefits at each
       stage (B and b) and higher costs of continuation financing (K1 ). We assume, however,
       that all projects have the same start-up costs (K0 ), the same payoff given failure (zero),
       and the same success probabilities (p if entrepreneurs work and p -  otherwise). This
       simplifies the exposition, but means we have to rely entirely on a few parameters to
  23
      A few other papers show that VCs may impose high hurdle rates because the opportunity cost
of their capital is high, even if their cost of capital is not; see Inderst, Mueller, and Münnich (2006),
Jovanovic and Szentes (2013), and Khanna and Mathews (2017).
   24
      Our model thus explains why some finance must be intermediated: non-banks' high cost of cap-
ital on the right-hand side of their balance sheets gives them the commitment power they need to
make profitable investments on the left-hand side. See, e.g., Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002) and
Donaldson, Piacentino, and Thakor (2018) for other theories connecting intermediary assets and liabilities.
   25
      E.g., Metrick and Yasuda (2010) find that the median VC fund expects to make only 20 investments
over its lifetime and argue that "the expected number of investments plays an important role in driving the
overall volatility of the fund portfolio, which in turn has a significant effect on the expected present value of
revenue" (p. 2309).
   26
      For example, finance companies lever their investments with bank debt limiting their downside
risk (Chernenko, Erel, and Prilmeier (2018)), VCs want high upside payoffs to attract investor capital
(Piacentino (2019)), and the general partners in PEs have contracts that reward them more on the up-
side (Axelson, Strömberg, and Weisbach (2009)).
   27
      To capture this within our model, we need only to make the (reasonable) assumption that entrepreneurs'
upside potential is higher at the first stage than the second. We abstract from this in the baseline only for
simplicity; although it would amplify our results, it is not necessary for them.


                                                       24
generate meaningful differences across projects.
                                                                         T should
   In particular, the assumptions in equations (4) and (9) suggest that K1
                         I . This may be reasonable, even taken literally. For exam-
be "a lot" smaller than K1
ple, refinancing innovative projects could amount to starting over, whereas refinancing
traditional projects could be closer to minor upkeep. But it can also be taken as a
stand-in for differences in other parameters. Most notably, innovative projects actually
do pay off zero in the event of failure (Hall and Woodward (2010)), whereas traditional
                                                                                     T
projects are likely to have positive recovery value. Thus, the cost of continuation K1
should be interpreted as only the new capital needed for an entrepreneur to continue
a traditional project, which, net of the first period payoff, is likely to be much smaller
for traditional than innovative projects.
   In reality, innovative projects are likely to be riskier in the sense of having a lower
success probability too. Our framework can accommodate such heterogeneity without
becoming intractable (although the equations do look significantly more complicated).
We omit it only to present our results as clearly as we can.
   Parametric assumptions (numerical example). To focus on our main results,
we have made a number of assumptions on parameters. To show that they are not
overly restrictive, we give an example of "reasonable" parameters that satisfy all of the
them, i.e. Assumption 1, Assumption 2, Assumption 3, and Assumption 4 as well as the
hypothesis of Proposition 3 (equation (21)) and the condition in footnote 10: p = 3/4,
 = 1/2, r = 20%, y I = 200, y T = 100, K1
                                        I = 110, K T = 9.5, B I = 50, B T = 10,
                                                  1
bI = 20, and bT = 4.
   Bilateral matching/Competition. We use a model of random bilateral meetings
to embed a staged financing problem in market equilibrium. As touched on in the
Introduction, this is a useful set-up with precedent in the literature. It also allows us
to do comparative statics on the level of competition, which is captured by the number
of financiers F . Still, in the following sections, we show that this way of modeling
competition is not critical for our results.
   We should say that one thing that is critical for our results is that project choices
happen after entrepreneurs and financiers meet. This allows use to capture the idea
that access to finance is a driver of innovation (see, e.g., Hellmann and Puri (2000),
Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2011), and Lerner et al. (2015)). We could also model this
in other ways though. For example, we could assume that markets are somewhat
segmented, and some entrepreneurs have easier access to non-bank finance than others,
e.g., entrepreneurs located in Silicon Valley may have more access to VC finance than
those elsewhere. In this case, entrepreneurs would only innovate if they they were in
a market segment with enough non-banks. Indeed, we use this kind of reduced-form
market segmentation when we model Cournot competition in Section 4.3 below.



                                               25
          Incumbent's monitoring advantage. In our baseline model, we rely on the
       assumption that if an entrepreneur is refinanced by his incumbent financier, his private
       benefits are reduced from B to b, whereas if he is refinanced by a rival, they are not. This
       helps us to model imperfect competition. Even though financiers offer the contracts,
       the option to seek financing from a rival financier helps the entrepreneur to extract
       more surplus from his incumbent, because he can get higher private benefits/agency
       rents with the rival. (It is not strictly necessary, however; see Section 4.4.)
          The assumption is intended to capture incumbent financiers' monitoring advan-
       tage, due, for example, to any propriety informational advantages they obtain in the
       course of their relationship with the entrepreneur (see, e.g., Rajan (1992)). We should
       stress, however, that when the entrepreneur gets financing from a rival at the second
       stage, his private benefits are not reduced, even if he has repayments to make to his
       incumbent from the first stage. This could be because information acquired during
       second-stage financing is complementary to that acquired during the first-stage rela-
       tionship. Alternatively, it could be because the financier itself must have incentive to
       monitor, and does so only if it has a sufficiently large stake in the entrepreneur, as in
       Holmström and Tirole (1997).28 In particular, a financier must prefer to monitor at
       cost c, ensuring the entrepreneur works, and get its total repayment Rtot with prob-
       ability p, than not to monitor, inducing the entrepreneur to shirk, and get Rtot with
       probability p - :
                                         pRtot - c  (p - )Rtot                                    (26)

       or Rtot  c/ (which is (ICm ) on p. 672 of Holmström and Tirole (1997)). Thus, as
       long as max {R1 , R2 } < c/ < R1 + R2 , a financier monitors if and only if it has
       provided finance at both the first and second stages (i.e. only if Rtot = R1 + R2 ).


       4.3     Cournot Competition
       So far, we have captured competition among financiers as the probability that they
       find entrepreneurs in bilateral meetings. This way of modeling competition has the
       advantage of allowing us to study competition among financiers and multi-stage con-
       tracting in one framework. But it has the disadvantage of abstracting from the price
       and quantity choices that are central to more classical models. Hence, we now explore
       what happens if we replace our model of competition with a Cournot game in which
       financiers compete in the quantity of capital they supply.
          We find that our results are robust. Indeed, the equilibrium proportion of non-banks
        takes the same functional form as in the baseline model (equation (20)). However,
  28
    Using data on credit lines, Acharya et al. (2014) find empirical support for the predictions of this model
of monitoring.



                                                     26
with competition limited to quantities (rather than multi-stage contracts), we have
to make some reduced-form assumptions to capture the outcomes of our contracting
analysis above. In particular, we assume that markets are segmented, with banks
supplying capital to traditional entrepreneurs, non-banks to innovative ones. Then, as
above, we allow financiers to choose whether to be banks or non-banks, and characterize
the proportion of non-banks  as a function of the total number of financiers F .
   Before turning to supply-side competition, we model how each type of entrepreneurs'
aggregate demand for capital K depends on the price/interest rate R. (For now, we
suppress the index   {T, I }, which indicates whether variables correspond to the
traditional or innovative market segment.) We assume that there is a representative
entrepreneur of each type who uses the aggregate amount capital K to produce aggre-
gate output yK . As in the baseline model, we assume that entrepreneurs must exert
costly effort to generate output. Here, we assume that the cost is a quadratic function
of the project scale, equal to BK 2 /2. This generates a linear aggregate demand in each
market: given entrepreneurs

                                                         B 2
                              maximize (y - R)K -          K ,                     (27)
                                                         2

the first-order approach implies
                                           y-R
                                     K=        .                                   (28)
                                            B
   Financiers thus supply the capital K , and the price R clears the market in each
segment given each financier f supplies the quantity of capital kf . Thus, the market
clearing condition reads
                                     K=        kf ,                                (29)

where the sum is taken over all the financiers operating in the market segment. Given
the demand K in equation (28), we can write the market price as a function of kf :

                                   R=y-B          kf .                             (30)

This says that R depends on kf , and hence that financier f must take its effect on R
into account when it chooses kf to

                               maximize R - 1 - rf kf ,                            (31)

where rf is its cost of capital, equal to zero for a bank and r > 0 for a non-bank. From
here, we have the standard solution of a Cournot game with linear demand:

Lemma 6. (Cournot solution.) Let N denote the number of financiers in a market
segment. In the unique symmetric Nash equilibrium, a financier with cost of capital rf


                                          27
supplies capital
                                              y - 1 - rf
                                      k=                                                (32)
                                              B (1 + N )
at price
                                           N
                             R=y-             y - 1 - rf                                (33)
                                          1+N
and makes profit
                                                                    2
                                      1       y - 1 - rf
                                 =                                      .               (34)
                                      B         1+N
   From here, we can write financiers' indifference condition. If F is the total number
of financiers and we abstract from indivisibility, we can let the number of banks be
(1 - )F and of non-banks be F , as in the baseline model. Hence, we can equate
bank and non-bank profits from equation (34):

                                               2                                2
                     1       yT - 1                     1      yI - 1 - r
                                                   =                                ,   (35)
                    BT    1 + (1 - )F                   BI      1 + F

having used the fact that banks fund only traditional entrepreneurs and non-banks only
innovative. Solving for the proportion of non-banks  gives the next proposition.

Proposition 5. (Cournot intermediation variety.) The proportion of non-banks
is given by
                                                               a1
                                  = max           0 , a0 -                              (36)
                                                               F
where

                                          BT
                                          BI
                                                   yI - 1 - r
                          a0 =                                              ,           (37)
                                                   BT
                                 yT - 1 +          BI
                                                        (y I - 1 - r )
                                                   BT
                                 yT - 1 -          BI
                                                         yI - 1 - r
                          a1 =                                              .           (38)
                                                   BT
                                 yT   -1+          BI
                                                        (y I   - 1 - r)

   The functional form of the proportion of non-banks  in equation (36) is the same
as in the baseline model with linear matching probability, Q(F ) = µF (cf. equation
(20)). Hence, the mix of bank and non-bank finance depends on competition F in the
same way:

Corollary 5. Suppose that

                           1              2        1 I        2
                             yT - 1           >        y -1-r .                         (39)
                          BT                       B I


There are no non-banks for low financing competition F . For higher competition, the


                                               28
       proportion of non-banks is positive and increasing. However, the fraction of banks re-
       mains positive for all F .

       The condition in equation (39) ensures that banks have a sufficient funding cost advan-
       tage that it is better to be a monopolist bank financing traditional entrepreneurs than
       a monopolist non-bank financing innovative entrepreneurs.29 The analogous condition
       in the baseline model is Qb > 0 in equation (19).
          The analysis above affirms that our results about the mix of banks and non-banks in
       the market are not sensitive to how we model competition among them. With Cournot
       competition, as in the baseline model with random matching, banks and non-banks
       co-exist; non-banks enter only sufficiently competitive markets, and provide a greater
       proportion of financing as competition increase, but do not take over the market for
       any level of competition.


       4.4     Probabilistic Bertrand Competition
       Another way to model competition among financiers is to assume that incumbent fi-
       nanciers are Bertrand competing with rivals with probability Q and are monopolists
       with probability 1 - Q. Hence, Q is a measure of competition: with Q = 1, there is
       perfect competition among financiers and, with Q = 0, there is none. We find that
       Q plays a nearly identical role to the probability that an entrepreneur meets a rival
       in the baseline model, which implies our results are not sensitive to how we model
       competition (cf. Section 3.4). Like our baseline model, this set-up has the advantage
       of embedding our contracting model. But, unlike our baseline model, it has the dis-
       advantage of delivering complicated expressions, which we rely on approximations to
       simplify.
          Given innovative entrepreneurs are captive to their incumbent non-banks (Lemma
       2), getting a competing offer affects only bank-financed traditional entrepreneurs. Here,
       an entrepreneur's first-stage repayment is given by the same IC as in the baseline model
       (equation (6)),
                                                            B
                                            R1 = y - u -      ,                                 (40)
                                                            
       but the entrepreneur's continuation value u is now the average over his continuation
       value in two cases, (i) when he does not get a competing offer and (ii) when he does.
          When the entrepreneur does not get a competing offer, his second-stage IC binds,
  29
    To compare these monopoly profits, compare the payoffs in the indifference condition in equation (35)
given there is just a single financier in each market (i.e. given there is one non-bank, F = 1, or one bank,
(1 - )F = 1).




                                                    29
and we have the same condition as in equation (7) above:

                                      no comp          b
                                R1 + R2       =y-        .                          (41)
                                                       

When the entrepreneur does get a competing offer, on the other hand, the competing
bank's break-even condition binds (assuming parameters are such that working is still
IC), and we have that
                                      comp      K1
                                     R2    =       .                                (42)
                                                p
The entrepreneur's continuation value is thus

                                     no comp                comp
              u = (1 - Q)p y - R1 - R2       + Qp y - R1 - R2                       (43)
                             b
                = (1 - Q)p     + Q p(y - R1 ) - K1 .                                (44)
                             

Substituting back into the entrepreneur's IC in equation (40) allows us to solve for R1 ,

                                           b                 B +pb
                               y- p y-          - K1 Q -       
                        R1 =                                         ,              (45)
                                           1 - pQ

and, given a bank meets an entrepreneur, its payoff is as follows:

     incumbent bank's payoff = pR1 - K0 +
                                                           no comp
                                  + (1 - p)(1 - Q) p R1 + R2       - K1 +           (46)
                                                     comp
                                  + (1 - p)Q p R1 + R2    - K1 .

                  no comp    comp
Substituting for R2       , R2    , and R1 from equations (41), (42), and (45) and doing
a first-order approximation gives the next result:

Proposition 6. (Probabilistic Bertrand competition.) When incumbent banks
Bertrand compete with rivals with probability Q, if a bank meets an entrepreneur, its
payoff is
                                                         b+B
                    incumbent bank's payoff  T - p           - aQ,                  (47)
                                                          
where a > 0 is a constant. A non-bank's payoff is as in the baseline model.

   Given the expression for the incumbent bank's payoff in equation (47), financiers'
indifference condition has the same form as in the baseline model (equation (18)), and
hence will deliver the same results. This affirms that our results are not sensitive to
how we model competition.




                                           30
       4.5       Scarcity of Innovative Projects
       Here we show that our results are robust to, and indeed amplified by, the possibility
       that there could be relatively few truly innovative ideas available. To capture this, we
       suppose that the total supply of innovate projects is at most S I < 1. We maintain the
       assumption that entrepreneurs are ex ante identical, but we suppose that if there are
       E I > S I innovative entrepreneurs, each gets a viable project with probability S I /E I ,
       and otherwise gets zero. If E I  S I , they all get viable projects, as in the baseline
       set-up. Thus, for low F , our assumption here that innovative projects are limited does
       not affect our analysis above, since we found that for low competition F , few, if any,
       innovative projects are funded. For high F , however, it can make becoming a non-bank
       less attractive, leading fewer financiers to become non-banks, and thereby amplifying
       our result.
          To see why, observe that financiers' indifference condition now reads

                                     SI              BI               BT
                            min 1,           I - p         = T - p       1 + Qb ,                   (48)
                                     EI                               

       which is just the baseline indifference condition in equation (18) with non-banks' payoff
       multiplied by the probability of successful innovation, i.e. by min 1, S I /E I .30 Fol-
       lowing the analysis in Section 3.4, we can rearrange equation (48) and see that this
       leads to an interior mix of banks and non-banks in equilibrium for

               1                T                         BI                               SI
       Qb =          BI - BT +      - I    +        I
                                                      - p                    1 - min 1,             (49)
              BT                p            pB T                                          EI
                                  BI            SI
          = Qb +            I - p    1 - min 1, I     ,                                             (50)
                     pB T                      E

       where Qb is defined in equation (19). The next result follows immediately from solving
       for the proportion of non-banks .

       Proposition 7. (Intermediation variety with scarce innovative projects.) Sup-
       pose that the conditions of Proposition 3 hold and that there is a limited supply S I of
       innovative projects, assumed not to be too small. The proportion of non-banks , given
       by the solution of equation (48), is smaller than it is in the baseline model with elastic
       supply.

       Intuitively, with a scarce supply of innovative projects, being a non-bank becomes
       relatively less attractive, since they may end up with an entrepreneur who has no
       viable idea at all. Hence, fewer financiers become non-banks.
  30
     The number of innovative entrepreneurs, E I , is itself endogenous. In fact, it is just equal to the proba-
bility an entrepreneur meets a non-bank, E I = Q(F ), given entrepreneurs innovate if and only if they meet
non-banks. We do not use this here, however, because it is not necessary for our result below.

                                                      31
4.6     Congestion
Here we show that our results are robust to, and sometimes amplified by, the possibility
that similar financiers compete for the same entrepreneurs. To capture this, we allow
for congestion within banks and non-banks. We do this by assuming that the proba-
bility that a bank meets an entrepreneur is decreasing in the number of other banks
that operate, and likewise the probability that a non-bank does is decreasing in the
number of other non-banks. In particular, we suppose they meet entrepreneurs with
the "telephone" probabilities (Stevens (2007)):

                                        1                           1
                          qb :=                    and qnb :=          .                     (51)
                                  1 + (1 - )F                    1 + F

Now, financiers' indifference condition reads

                                      BI                   BT
                     qnb I - p             = qb T - p         1 + Qb          ,              (52)
                                                           

which is just equation (17) with banks' and non-banks' matching probability q replaced
by qb and qnb . Following the analysis in Section 3.4, we can rearrange equation (52)
and see that this leads to an interior mix of banks and non-banks in equilibrium for

               1               T                                        BI             qnb
      Qb =         BI - BT +       - I     +                    I - p             1-         (53)
              BT               p             pB T                                       qb
                                 BI    qnb
         = Qb +            I - p    1-       ,                                               (54)
                   pB T                 qb

where Qb is defined in equation (19). Solving for  gives the next result.

Proposition 8. (Intermediation variety with congestion.) Suppose that the con-
ditions of Proposition 3 hold and that there is congestion within banks and non-banks, as
specified in equation (51). In the perfect competition limit, the proportion of non-banks
is given by
                           1                                        2
                                  1 - Qb - 2 +         1 - Qb - 2       + 4       ,          (55)
                           2
where
                                                           BI
                                      :=           I - p                                     (56)
                                           pB T            
(and the expression in equation (55) is well defined between zero and one).
   The limiting proportion of non-banks is higher than in the baseline model if and only
if Qb > 1/2.

Since the limiting proportion of non-banks in the baseline model is 1 - Qb , the result
says that congestion in each market works as an additional equilibrating force, bringing


                                                  32
       the limiting proportion of non-banks closer to a half. The reason is that congestion
       pulls against the thin market, be it the market of banks or of non-banks.



       5      Conclusion
       We have developed a theory of intermediation variety in which non-banks co-exist with
       banks, despite having a strictly higher cost of capital. The reason is that non-banks
       use this high cost of capital to their advantage to commit not to provide continuation
       financing to innovative entrepreneurs, and thereby harden their soft budget constraints.
       In equilibrium, not only the variety of intermediaries in the market but also the variety
       of entrepreneurial investments they finance endogenously emerges entirely from the
       heterogeneity in financiers' cost of capital. Increasing competition among financiers
       leads to an increased proportion of non-banks, which in turn leads entrepreneurs to
       innovate more.
           Our analysis could give a new perspective on some policies. For example, within the
       context of our model, government safety nets that lower the cost of deposits for banks,
       such as bailout guarantees and deposit insurance, may make it harder for banks to
       commit not to provide refinancing, exacerbating the soft-budget-constraint problem for
       bank-financed entrepreneurs. Similarly, in contrast to the common view,31 subsidies to
       financing innovation, such as venture capital "incubators," may have a downside in the
       model. They may make it harder for non-banks to commit not to provide refinancing,
       creating a soft-budget-constraint problem for non-bank-financed entrepreneurs. In our
       model, it is the lack of such subsidies that distinguishes non-banks from banks and
       equips them to fund innovation.




31
     See, e.g., Bronzini and Piselli (2014).

                                                  33
6       Appendix
6.1     Proof of Lemma 1
Given the entrepreneur's second-stage IC (equation (7)), his incumbent financier is
willing to provide continuation financing if and only if the present value of its expected
repayment p(R1 + R2 ) = p(y - b/) is larger than its capital outlay K1 . Given a
non-bank has cost of capital r it denies continuation financing if

                                            b
                                p      y-       < (1 + r )K1 ,                       (57)
                                            

which holds by Assumption 4. Given a bank has cost of capital zero, it provides
continuation financing as long as

                                                b
                                       p y-          > K1 ,                          (58)
                                                

which holds by Assumption 1.


6.2     Proof of Lemma 2
We start by assuming that an entrepreneur with an innovative project is captive to the
incumbent non-bank; then we show that indeed he is captive, in the sense that no other
financier is willing to lend to him.
    Recall that, by Lemma 1, a non-bank does not provide continuation financing to an
innovative entrepreneur. Since, by assumption, entrepreneurs are captive to non-banks,
we determine the first-stage repayment via the entrepreneur's binding IC as

                                                     B
                                         R1 = y -      .                             (59)
                                                     

    Now, we verify that the entrepreneur is indeed captive, i.e. that no other non-bank
would be willing to provide continuation financing. Observe that if another financier
                                                         ^ 2 such that working is still
provides continuation financing, it must set a repayment R
incentive compatible, i.e. such that

                                            ^2  y - B .
                                       R1 + R                                        (60)
                                                    

This implies that
                                       ^2  B - B = 0
                                       R                                             (61)
                                            
Hence, no new financier will fund an innovative project--it gets repayment at most
zero.

                                                34
6.3    Proof of Corollary 1
Entrepreneurs with innovative projects are captive of their incumbent non-banks (Lemma
2) and have a HBC (Lemma 1). Thus, a non-bank's payoff is

                                                  B
                     pR1 - (1 + r )K0 = p y I -          - (1 + r )K0 ,            (62)
                                                  

having substituted from R1 from equation (59). A non bank funds an innovative en-
trepreneur whenever this payoff is positive, which holds by Assumption 4.


6.4    Proof of Corollary 2
First, recall that, by Lemma 1, the bank has a soft budget constraint with an innovative
entrepreneur. After failing, the entrepreneur can get continuation financing from the
incumbent, or possibly elsewhere. The incumbent financier offers the contract, and
hence offers the entrepreneur the highest repayment subject to two constraints: (i) the
entrepreneur's incentive compatibility constraint, which ensures he prefers to work than
to shirk, and (ii) the entrepreneur's participation constraint, which ensures he prefers
to stay with the incumbent than to look for finance elsewhere. One will be binding
in equilibrium. Hence, there are two cases: Case 1, in which the entrepreneur's IC is
binding with his incumbent, and Case 2, in which it is slack. We consider them in turn.
   Case 1: IC binding with incumbent. If the entrepreneur gets continuation financing
from the incumbent bank, his (binding) second-stage IC (equation (7)) implies

                                                   b
                                   R1 + R2 = y -     ,                             (63)
                                                   

which gives the entrepreneur the continuation value u = pb/ (equation 8). Hence, his
incentive compatibility constraint in the first stage (equation (5)) gives

                                              B + pb
                                   R1 = y -          .                             (64)
                                                

   Thus, a bank's profit is

                                                                             B+b
 pR1 - K0 + 1 - p p (R1 + R2 ) - K1 = py - K0 + (1 - p) py - K1 - p              . (65)
                                                                              

    Case 2: IC slack with incumbent. If the entrepreneur goes to the market and gets
                                                     ^ 2 , is limited by his IC
finance from a new financier, his repayment, denoted R

                                ^ 2 )  (p - )(y - R1 - R
                     p(y - R1 - R                      ^ 2 ) + B,                  (66)




                                           35
       or
                                                ^2  y - B .
                                           R1 + R                                               (67)
                                                        
       Given the new bank has offered the contract, this IC binds, and the entrepreneur gets

                                                    ^2 = p B
                                         p y - R1 - R                                           (68)
                                                           

       conditional on meeting a new financier willing to provide finance. We will see below
       that non-banks are never willing to provide continuation financing,32 so he can get
       continuation financing from a rival financier only if (but not necessarily if) he mets a
       bank, which happens probability Qb .
            The incumbent financier has to make the entrepreneur a TIOLI offer R2 that makes
       the entrepreneur indifferent between staying with him or going to the market. That is

                                                                  B
                                        p(y - R1 - R2 ) = Qb p                                  (69)
                                                                  

       or
                                                              B
                                          R1 + R2 = y - Q b     .                               (70)
                                                              
            The entrepreneur's (binding) first-stage IC (equation (5) with u = p(y - R1 - R2 ))
       says
                                   y - R1 - p(y - R1 - R2 ) = B.                                (71)

       Hence,
                                                                B
                                         R1 = y - (1 + p Qb )     ,                             (72)
                                                                
       and a bank's profit is

                                                                                    (1 + Qb )B
        pR1 - K0 + 1 - p p (R1 + R2 ) - K1 = py - K0 + 1 - p          py - K1 - p              . (73)
                                                                                        

            Combining the two cases above, we have that the bank does not finance an innovative
       entrepreneur if

                                                          B I + max Qb B I , bI
                    py I - K0 + 1 - p     py I - K1
                                                  I
                                                    -p                              < 0,        (74)
                                                                   

       which is implied by Assumption 3.
  32
    Specifically, in Lemma 4, we show that non-banks never provide second-stage finance to traditional
entrepreneurs financed by someone else at the first stage. This follows from Assumption 4. It actually turns
out that this does not affect this result, however, since it holds for all Qb .




                                                    36
6.5    Proof of Lemma 3
The proof is analogous to that of Lemma 1 for innovative entrepreneurs and the result
(that incumbent banks do refinance traditional entrepreneurs) follows directly from
Assumption 1.


6.6    Proof of Lemma 4
Hence we can focus on the statement that the traditional entrepreneur is not captive
to an incumbent bank. To prove it, we assume that an entrepreneur with a traditional
project is not captive to the incumbent bank, and proceed to show that indeed he is not,
in the sense that a rival bank is willing to finance him. We also show a rival non-bank
is not willing to finance him.
                                                          ^ 2 . It is willing to finance
   Denote the entrepreneur's repayment to a rival bank by R
the entrepreneur if
                                          ^ 2  K1 .
                                         pR                                          (75)

                          ^ 2 in (67):
We have an expression for R

                                   ^ 2 = y - B - R1 ,
                                   R                                                 (76)
                                             

where R1 denotes the entrepreneur's repayment to his incumbent, given by equation
(72). Thus, substituting in inequality (75), the rival bank will finance continuation if

                                              B
                                     p 2 Qb      K1 ,                                (77)
                                              

as stated in the lemma. Likewise, a rival non-bank will finance continuation if the LHS
exceeds (1 + r )K1 , which is never satisfied by Assumption 4.


6.7    Proof of Corollary 3
Here we find the conditions under which it is profitable for the bank to finance a
traditional entrepreneur in the first stage (even though he has a soft budget constraint
and is not captive to an incumbent bank (Lemma 4)).
   From equation (11), we know that the incumbent financier sets R2 such that

                                                   b      B
                           R2 = y - R1 - max         , Qb     .                      (78)
                                                          

And we know that working must be IC at the first stage, or

                           y - R1 - p(y - R1 - R2 )  B,                              (79)


                                              37
       which holds with equality given the financier offers the contract. Substituting R2 from
       above, we find that
                                               p                   B
                                    R1 = y -     max { Qb B , b } - .                             (80)
                                                                   
            Now, we can write the bank's payoff, which must be positive for it to provide first-
       stage financing:
                               pR1 - K0 + (1 - p) p(R1 + R2 ) - K1  0,                            (81)

       or
                                                           p
                       py - K0 + 1 - p     py - K1 -         B + max {Qb B, b}      0             (82)
                                                           
       which is implied by Assumption 3 given max {Qb B, b}  B .


       6.8      Proof of Proposition 1
       The result follows from those in Section 3.2. We know that a bank will not finance an
       innovative entrepreneur (Lemma 2); hence, an entrepreneur with access only to banks
       gets payoff of zero if he chooses the innovative project. And we know, in contrast, that
       a bank will finance a traditional entrepreneur (Lemma 3); hence, an entrepreneur gets
       positive payoff (due to his expected agency rent) if he chooses a traditional project.
       The result follows.


       6.9      Proof of Proposition 2
       Here we show that an entrepreneur who is matched with a non-bank prefers to invest
       in an innovative project. (In this proof, unlike others, it is useful to keep the super-
       scripts   {I, T } to index project parameters, and also add them to their associated
       repayments.)
            Recall that, by Lemma 1, the innovative entrepreneur has a HBC with a non-bank.
       His profit is
                                                              BI
                                            p y I - R1
                                                     I
                                                       =p        ,                                (83)
                                                              
                               I from equation (59).
       having substituted for R1
            An entrepreneur could have a hard or a soft budget constraint with a non-bank. If
       he has a HBC, he chooses the innovative project, given B I > B T (equation (2)). If he
       has a SBC he gets

                                p(y T - R1
                                         T
                                           ) + 1 - p p y T - R1
                                                              T    T
                                                                - R2 ,                            (84)

              T and RT are given in the proof of Corollary 2.33 Substituting this into the
       where R1      2
33
     That result actually pertains to a traditional entrepreneur's repayments to a bank, rather than to a non-


                                                      38
      entrepreneur's payoff above, we find that if he chooses a traditional project he gets

                                              BT            B T bT
                                          p      + p max Qb    ,        .                      (85)
                                                             

      Hence, he prefers the innovative project if

                                         BI    BT            B T bT
                                     p      >p    + p max Qb    ,                              (86)
                                                              

      or
                                          B I > max Qb B T , bT + B T ,                        (87)

      which is satisfied by Assumption 2.


      6.10        Proof of Corollary 4
      The result follows from those above: an entrepreneur who is matched with a non-
      bank chooses an innovative project (Proposition 2), whereas an entrepreneur who is
      matched with a bank chooses a traditional project (Proposition 1). The condition in
      the proposition says that the innovative project is more profitable.
            From the proof of Corollary 3, we have that a non-bank sets the repayment

                                                                   BI
                                                 non-bank
                                                R1        = yI -                               (88)
                                                                   

      and a bank sets the repayment

                                                             b      B       BT
                                 bank
                                R1    = y T - p max            , Qb     -      .               (89)
                                                                            

                                               non-bank > Rbank .
      Given the condition in the proposition, R1           1



      6.11        Proof of Proposition 3
      The basic analysis is in the text. But it relies on some assumptions, which we verify now:
      the condition in the proposition (equation 21) ensures that the following conditions hold
      if Qb = Qb equilibrium:

           1. max Qb B T , bT   = Qb B T . This implies that the indifference condition is indeed
              as in equation (18).

           2. The condition in equation (9) is satisfied. This implies that entrepreneurs' project
              choices are as described in Section 3.3.
bank. However, that does not affect the expressions, which are determined just by incentive compatibility.



                                                        39
     3. Qb is well-defined (less than one). This implies that the indifference condition
        holds with equality for all F sufficiently high, as described in equation (19).

Given these conditions are satisfied, the analysis in the text implies the proportion of
non-banks  takes the form described in equation (20), i.e.  = max {0, 1 - Qb /Q(F )}.
That Q is continuously increasing and Q(F )  1 as F   implies the statements in
the proposition (as illustrated in Figure 2).


6.12        Proof of Proposition 4
First, recall that, by Lemma 1, the bank has a soft budget constraint with an in-
novative entrepreneur; it follows from the hypothesis in equation (23), banks finance
innovative entrepreneurs despite this soft-budget-constraint problem. Now we show
that entrepreneurs choose traditional projects.
      Indeed, if the entrepreneur does the innovative project with a bank, he has a soft-
budget constraint (Lemma 1) but, given the hypothesis in equation (24), he is captive
(Lemma 2). His payoff is thus

                                                             BI   bI
                           payoff with innovative = p           +        .                (90)
                                                                  

      Instead, if the entrepreneur does a traditional project with a bank, he still has a
soft-budget constraint but he is not captive (Lemma 4). His payoff is thus

                                                    BT   max{Qb B T , bT }
                   payoff with traditional = p         +                         .        (91)
                                                              
      Hence, the entrepreneur prefers the traditional project over the innovative project
if

                           BT   max{Qb B T , bT }              BI   bI
                       p      +                         >p        +          .            (92)
                                                                    
      Or, since B I > B T and bI > bT , if

                                             bI + B I
                                    Qb                  - 1,                              (93)
                                                BT

which is the condition in the proposition.


6.13        Proof of Lemma 5
The result follows from the results in Proposition 2 and Proposition 4. By Proposi-
tion 2, entrepreneurs prefer to invest in innovative projects when matched with non-



                                               40
banks. And, by Proposition 4, entrepreneurs prefer to invest in traditional projects
when matched with banks.


6.14     Proof of Lemma 6
The result is a standard characterization of the equilibrium of a Cournot game with
linear demand. Here, we derive it here in four steps:

  1. We find each financier's supply from the FOC of the maximization problem in
     equation (31):
                                y-B      kf - 1 - rf - Bkf = 0.                          (94)

                                        N
  2. We impose symmetry, so K =         f =1 kf      = N kf . Now, equation (94) gives

                                                 y - 1 - rf
                                       kf =                 .                            (95)
                                                 B (N + 1)

  3. We find R from the entrepreneurs' demand in equation (30):

                                                        N
                            R = y - BN kf = y -             y - 1 - rf .                 (96)
                                                       N +1

  4. We substitute kf and R back into the objective function in equation (31) to find
     the equilibrium profits:

                       = (R - 1 - rf )kf                                                 (97)
                                   N                                y - 1 - rf
                        =    y-        y - 1 - rf - 1 - rf                               (98)
                                  N +1                              B (N + 1)
                                             2
                          1     y - 1 - rf
                        =                        .                                       (99)
                          B       1+N




6.15     Proof of Proposition 5
The result follows from the indifference condition in equation (35).


6.16     Proof of Corollary 5
The result follows from the expression in equation (36).




                                             41
6.17      Proof of Proposition 6
                       no comp      comp
Substituting for R1 + R2       and R2    from equations (41), (42) and then for R1
from equation (45) into the expression for the incumbent bank's payoff in equation 46
gives

    incumbent bank's
                        = -K0 + p 1 + (1 - p)Q R1 +
           payoff
                                                                                  (100)
                                                    b
                             + (1 - p)(1 - Q) p y -            - K1
                                                    
                                                                  b           B +pb
                                                  y - py - K1 - p   Q-          
                        = -K0 + p 1 + (1 - p)Q                                        +
                                                            1 - pQ
                                                    b
                             + (1 - p)(1 - Q) p y -    - K1 .
                                                    
                                                                                  (101)

Now we use the geometric series,
                                                  
                                        1
                                            =          (pQ)k                      (102)
                                     1 - pQ
                                                k =0

and do a first-order approximation in about zero in Q to write

                                                                      b+B
        incumbent bank's payoff  py - K0 + (1 - p) py - K1 - p            +
                                                                       
                                                                                  (103)
                                      B - (1 - p)b
                                      - p          - K1 Q
                                           
                                       b+B        B - (1 - p)b
                                    -p       - p               - K1 Q             (104)
                                                       

from the definition of the surplus  = T created with a bank (equation (15)). This is
decreasing in Q as long as
                                    B - (1 - p)b
                                p                - K1 > 0.                        (105)
                                         
   This last condition (equation (105)) is satisfied since we assumed that working was
                                                     comp
IC when the competing bank broke even, or when R2 = R2    . To see why, substitute
            comp
for R1 and R2    from equations (42) and (45) into the condition that the IC is slack




                                             42
and evaluate at Q = 0:

                       b         comp
                  y-     > R1 + R2                                                         (106)
                       
                                                  Q=0
                                              b                  B +pb
                              y - py - K1 - p   Q-                           K1
                          =                                              +                 (107)
                                        1 - pQ                               p
                                                                                  Q=0
                              B + pb K1
                          =y-       +   .                                                  (108)
                                      p

Rearranging gives exactly the condition in equation (105).


6.18       Proof of Proposition 7
Solving for  from equation (50) gives
                                                             I                     I
                                                                                        
                                            
                                   Qb +    pB T
                                                      I - p B
                                                            
                                                                                S
                                                                     1 - min 1, E I
                                                                                        
              = max       0, 1 -                                                           (109)
                                                           Q(F )                        

                                    Qb
                max 0, 1 -                  ,                                              (110)
                                   Q(F )

which is the expression for  in the baseline model (equation (20)).
   It remains only to check that entrepreneurs still choose innovative projects when
they meet non-banks, despite the risk that the projects are not viable. Given that
entrepreneurs strictly prefer innovative projects in the baseline model by Proposition
2, this is the case as long as the probability of getting a viable project S I /E I is high
enough, which it is given our assumption that S I is not too small.


6.19       Proof of Proposition 8
The argument follows from taking the limit as F   in financiers' indifference con-
dition. We have that Qb (F ) = (1 - )Q(F )  1 -  since Q(F )  1 by assumption
and that
                                                               1
                                      qnb                    1+F
                                   lim    = lim                1                           (111)
                                   F  qb   F 
                                                           1+(1-)F
                                                      1-
                                                  =      .                                 (112)
                                                       

Letting
                                                                BI
                                     :=                I - p                               (113)
                                           pB T                 



                                                      43
and substituting into the indifference condition in equation (54), we have

                                                  1-
                            1 -  = Qb + 1-                ,                     (114)
                                                   

which is a quadratic equation. The unique positive root is given by the expression in
the proposition (equation (55)).
   The result that the proportion of non-banks is higher than it is in the baseline
model if and only if Qb > 1/2 follows from direct comparison of this expression with
the limiting proportion of non-banks in the baseline model 1 - Qb (equation (20)).




                                          44
References
Acharya, V., H. Almeida, F. Ippolito, and A. Perez (2014). Credit lines as monitored
  liquidity insurance: Theory and evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 112 (3),
  287 ­ 319.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (2004).      Financial intermediaries and markets.   Economet-
  rica 72 (4), 1023­1061.

Axelson, U., P. Strömberg, and M. Weisbach (2009). Why are buyouts levered? the
  financial structure of private equity firms. Journal of Finance 64, 1549­1582.

Begenau, J. and T. Landvoigt (2017). Financial regulation in a quantitative model of
  the modern banking system. Working paper, Harvard Business School.

Besanko, D. and G. Kanatas (1993). Credit market equilibrium with bank monitoring
  and moral hazard. The Review of Financial Studies 6 (1), 213­232.

Bhattacharya, S. and G. Chiesa (1995). Proprietary information, financial interme-
  diation, and research incentives. Journal of Financial Intermediation 4 (4), 328 ­
  357.

Biais, B. and A. Landier (2015). Endogenous agency problems and the dynamics of
  rents. Working paper, HEC Paris.

Blanchflower, D. and A. Oswald (1998). What makes an entrepreneur?          Journal of
  Labor Economics 16 (1), 26­60.

Bolton, P. and X. Freixas (2000). Equity, bonds, and bank debt: Capital structure
  and financial market equilibrium under asymmetric information. Journal of Political
  Economy 108 (2), 324­351.

Bond, P. (2004). Bank and nonbank financial intermediation. Journal of Finance 59 (6),
  2489­2529.

Boot, A. and A. Thakor (1994). Moral hazard and secured lending in an infinitely
  repeated credit market game. International Economic Review 35 (4), 899­920.

Boot, A. and A. Thakor (1997). Financial system architecture. Review of Financial
  Studies 10 (3), 693­733.

Boot, A. W. A. and A. V. Thakor (2000). Can relationship banking survive competition?
  Journal of Finance 55 (2), 679­713.



                                          45
Botsch, M. and V. Vanasco (2019). Learning by lending. Journal of Financial Inter-
  mediation 37, 1 ­ 14.

Boualam, Y. (2018). Credit markets and relationship capital. Working paper, University
  of North Carolina.

Boyd, J. and G. De Nicolò (2005). The theory of bank risk-taking and competition
  revisited. Journal of Finance 60, 1329­1343.

Boyd, J. H. and M. Gertler (1994). Are banks dead? Or are the reports greatly
  exaggerated? Quarterly Review (Sum), 2­23.

Bronzini, R. and P. Piselli (2014). The impact of R&D subsidies on firm innovation.
  Working paper no. 960, Bank of Italy.

Cao, M. and S. Shi (2000). Screening, bidding, and the loan market tightness. Center for
  Financial Institutions Working Papers 00-09, Wharton School Center for Financial
  Institutions, University of Pennsylvania.

Carey, M., M. Post, and S. A. Sharpe (1998). Does corporate lending by banks and
  finance companies differ? Evidence on specialization in private debt contracting. The
  Journal of Finance 53 (3), 845­878.

Cetorelli, N. (2004). Real effects of bank competition. Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking 36 (3), 543­558.

Chan, Y.-S., D. R. Siegel, and A. Thakor (1990). Learning, corporate control and
  performance requirements in venture capital contracts. International Economic Re-
  view 31 (2), 365­81.

Chava, S., A. Oettl, A. Subramanian, and K. V. Subramanian (2013). Banking dereg-
  ulation and innovation. Journal of Financial Economics 109 (3), 759 ­ 774.

Chemmanur, T. J. and P. Fulghieri (1994). Investment bank reputation, information
  production, and financial intermediation. Journal of Finance 49 (1), 57­79.

Chen, H., P. Gompers, A. Kovner, and J. Lerner (2010). Buy local? The geography of
  venture capital. Journal of Urban Economics 67 (1), 90 ­ 102. Special Issue: Cities
  and Entrepreneurship.

Chernenko, S., I. Erel, and R. Prilmeier (2018). Nonbank lending. Working paper
  2018-13, Dice Center.




                                          46
Chrétien, E. and V. Lyonnet (2019). Traditional and shadow banks. Working paper,
  INSEE.

Cohan, P. (2013).    Why does location matter?        MIT Entrepreneurship Review,
  http://miter.mit.edu/why-does-location-matter/.

Cornaggia, J., Y. Mao, X. Tian, and B. Wolfe (2015). Does banking competition affect
  innovation? Journal of Financial Economics 115 (1), 189­209.

Crémer, J. (1995).    Arm's length relationships.    The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 110 (2), 275­295.

Dell'Ariccia, G. (2000). Learning by lending, competition, and screening incentives in
  the banking industry. Center for Financial Institutions Working Papers 10, Wharton
  School Center for Financial Institutions, University of Pennsylvania.

Dell'Ariccia, G. and R. Marquez (2004). Information and bank credit allocation. Journal
  of Financial Economics 72 (1), 185 ­ 214.

Denis, D. J. and V. T. Mihov (2003). The choice among bank debt, non-bank private
  debt, and public debt: Evidence from new corporate borrowings. Journal of Financial
  Economics 70 (1), 3 ­ 28.

Dewatripont, M. and E. Maskin (1995). Credit and efficiency in centralized and decen-
  tralized economies. The Review of Economic Studies (62).

Diamond, D. W. (1991). Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans
  and directly placed debt. Journal of Political Economy 99 (4), 689­721.

Diamond, D. W. and R. G. Rajan (2001). Banks and liquidity. American Economic
  Review 91 (2), 422­425.

Diamond, W. (2019). Safety transformation and the structure of the financial system.
  Working paper, Wharton School.

Donaldson, J. R. and G. Piacentino (2019). Money runs. Working paper, Washington
  University in St. Louis.

Donaldson, J. R., G. Piacentino, and A. Thakor (2018). Warehouse banking. Journal
  of Financial Economics 129 (2), 250 ­ 267.

Donaldson, J. R., G. Piacentino, and A. Thakor (2019). Household debt overhang and
  unemployment. The Journal of Finance 0 (0).



                                          47
Duffie, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen (2005). Over-the-counter markets. Econo-
  metrica 73 (6), 1815­1847.

Gersbach, H. and H. Uhlig (2007). On the coexistence of banks and markets. Scandi-
  navian Journal of Economics 109 (2), 225­243.

Goetz, M. R. (2018). Competition and bank stability. Journal of Financial Intermedi-
  ation 35, 57 ­ 69.

Gompers, P. and J. Lerner (2001, June). The venture capital revolution. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 15 (2), 145­168.

Grossman, S. J. and O. D. Hart (1986). The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory
  of vertical and lateral integration. Journal of Political Economy 94 (4), 691­719.

Guzman, M. G. (2000). Bank structure, capital accumulation and growth: a simple
  macroeconomic model. Economic Theory 16 (2), 421­455.

Hall, R. and S. Woodward (2010). The burden of the nondiversifiable risk of en-
  trepreneurship. American Economic Review (100), 1163­1194.

Hanson, S. G., A. Shleifer, J. C. Stein, and R. W. Vishny (2015). Banks as patient
  fixed-income investors. Journal of Financial Economics 117 (3), 449­469.

Harris, R. S., T. Jenkinson, and S. N. Kaplan (2014). Private equity performance:
  What do we know? The Journal of Finance 69, 1851­1882.

Hellmann, T. and M. Puri (2000, 06). The Interaction between Product Market and
  Financing Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital. The Review of Financial Stud-
  ies 13 (4), 959­984.

Hellmann, T. F., K. C. Murdock, and J. E. Stiglitz (2000). Liberalization, moral hazard
  in banking, and prudential regulation: Are capital requirements enough? American
  Economic Review 90 (1), 147­165.

Herkenhoff, K. F. (2019). The impact of consumer credit access on unemployment.
  NBER working paper no. 22846.

Holmström, B. and J. Tirole (1997). Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the
  real sector. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3), 663­91.

Hombert, J. and A. Matray (2016, 10). The Real Effects of Lending Relationships on
  Innovative Firms and Inventor Mobility. The Review of Financial Studies 30 (7),
  2413­2445.

                                           48
Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap, and D. Scharfstein (1993). The Choice Between Public and Pri-
  vate Debt: An Analysis of Post-Deregulation Corporate Financing in Japan. NBER
  Working Paper 4421, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Hsu, P.-H., X. Tian, and Y. Xu (2014). Financial development and innovation: Cross-
  country evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 112 (1), 116 ­ 135.

Inderst, R. and H. M. Mueller (2004). The effect of capital market characteristics on
  the value of start-up firms. Journal of Financial Economics 72 (2), 319­356.

Inderst, R., H. M. Mueller, and F. Münnich (2006, 10). Financing a portfolio of projects.
  The Review of Financial Studies 20 (4), 1289­1325.

International Monetary Fund (2016). Global Financial Stability Report--Fostering Sta-
  bility in a Low-Growth, Low-Rate Era. Washington.

Jensen, M. C. (1989). Eclipse of the public corporation. Harvard Business Review 67,
  61­74.

Jovanovic, B. and B. Szentes (2013). On the market for venture capital. Journal of
  Political Economy 121 (3), 493 ­ 527.

Kashyap, A. K., R. Rajan, and J. C. Stein (2002). Banks as liquidity providers: An
  explanation for the coexistence of lending and deposit-taking. The Journal of Fi-
  nance 57 (1), 33­73.

Kaviani, M. and H. Maleki (2018). The conservative corporation: Banking competition
  and decline in firms? risk-taking. Working paper, Temple University.

Keeley, M. C. (1990, December). Deposit insurance, risk, and market power in banking.
  American Economic Review 80 (5), 1183­1200.

Kerr, W. R., J. Lerner, and A. Schoar (2011, 10). The consequences of entrepreneurial
  finance: Evidence from angel financings. The Review of Financial Studies 27 (1),
  20­55.

Khanna, N. and R. Mathews (2017). The limits of reputation. Working paper, Michigan
  State University.

Kornai, J. (1979). Resource-constrained versus demand-constrained systems. Econo-
  metrica (47), 801­819.

Kornai, J. (1980). The Economics of Shortage. New York: North-Holland.



                                           49
Kortum, S. and J. Lerner (2000). Assessing the impact of venture capital to innovation.
  RAND Journal of Economics 31 (4), 674­692.

Lerner, J., A. Schoar, S. Sokolinski, and K. Wilson (2015, December). The globalization
  of angel investments: Evidence across countries. Working Paper 21808, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Lerner, J., M. Sorensen, and P. Strömberg (2011). Private equity and long-run invest-
  ment: The case of innovation. The Journal of Finance 66 (2), 445­477.

Mao, Y. and J. J. Wang (2018). Access to finance and technological innovation: Evi-
  dence from antebellum america. Working paper, Arizona State University.

Marquez, R. (2002). Competition, adverse selection, and information dispersion in the
  banking industry. Review of Financial Studies 15 (3), 901­926.

Martinez-Miera, D. and R. Repullo (2010). Does competition reduce the risk of bank
  failure? Review of Financial Studies 23 (10), 3638­3664.

Martinez-Miera, D. and R. Repullo (2017). Search for yield. Econometrica 85 (2),
  351­378.

Matutes, C. and X. Vives (2000). Imperfect competition, risk taking, and regulation in
  banking. European Economic Review 44 (1), 1­34.

Merton, R. C. and R. T. Thakor (2018). Customers and investors: A framework for
  understanding the evolution of financial institutions. Journal of Financial Interme-
  diation .

Metrick, A. and A. Yasuda (2010). The economics of private equity funds. Review of
  Financial Studies 23 (6), 2303­2341.

Mortensen, D. T. and C. A. Pissarides (1994). Job creation and job destruction in the
  theory of unemployment. The Review of Economic Studies 61 (3), 397­415.

Nagel, S. (2016, 07). The liquidity premium of near-money assets. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131 (4), 1927­1971.

Nanda, R. and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2013). Innovation and the financial guillotine. NBER
  Working Paper 19379, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc.

Payne, J. (2018). The disruption of long term bank credit. Working paper, New York
  University.



                                          50
Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan (1995). The effect of credit market competition on
  lending relationships. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (2), 407­43.

Piacentino, G. (2019). Venture capital and capital allocation. The Journal of Finance
  (forthcoming) 0 (0).

Rajan, R. G. (1992). Insiders and outsiders: The choice between informed and arm's-
  length debt. Journal of Finance 47 (4), 1367­400.

Remolona, E. and K. Wulfekuhler (1992). Finance companies, bank competition, and
  niche markets. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review (2).

Repullo, R. (2004). Capital requirements, market power, and risk-taking in banking.
  Journal of Financial Intermediation 13 (2), 156­182.

Repullo, R. and J. Suarez (2000). Entrepreneurial moral hazard and bank monitoring:
  a model of the credit channel. European Economic Review 44, 1931­1950.

Sahlman, W. A. (1990). The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations.
  Journal of Financial Economics 27 (2), 473­521.

Samila, S. and O. Sorenson (2011). Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic
  growth. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (1), 338­349.

Shapiro, R. J. and N. D. Pham (2008). The Role of Private equity in U.S. Capital
  Markets. Working paper, Sonecon.

Sharpe, S. A. (1990). Asymmetric information, bank lending, and implicit contracts:
  A stylized model of customer relationships. Journal of Finance 45 (4), 1069­87.

Song, F. and A. V. Thakor (2010). Financial system architecture and the co-evolution
  of banks and capital markets. The Economic Journal 120 (547), 1021­1055.

Startz, R. (1979). Implicit interest on demand deposits. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 5 (4), 515 ­ 534.

Stevens, M. (2007). New microfoundations for the aggregate matching function. Inter-
  national Economic Review 48 (3), 847­868.

Ueda, M. (2004). Banks versus venture capital: Project evaluation, screening, and
  expropriation. Journal of Finance 59 (2), 601­621.

von Thadden, E.-L. (1995). Long-term contracts, short-term investment and monitor-
  ing. Review of Economic Studies 62 (4), 557­75.


                                         51
von Thadden, E.-L. (1999). Liquidity creation through banks and markets: Multiple
  insurance and limited market access. European Economic Review 43 (4-6), 991­1006.

Wagner, W. (2009). Loan market competition and bank risk-taking. Journal of Finan-
  cial Services Research 37.

Wasmer, E. and P. Weil (2004). The macroeconomics of labor and credit market
  imperfections. American Economic Review 94 (4), 944­963.

Wessel,   M. (2013).      Don't build your startup outside of silicon valley.
  https://hbr.org/2013/10/dont-build-your-startup-outside-of-silicon-valley.

Yosha, O. (1995). Information disclosure costs and the choice of financing source.
  Journal of Financial Intermediation 4 (1), 3 ­ 20.




                                         52
