                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOW RESEARCH AFFECTS POLICY:
        EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM 2,150 BRAZILIAN MUNICIPALITIES

                                         Jonas Hjort
                                        Diana Moreira
                                         Gautam Rao
                                    Juan Francisco Santini

                                      Working Paper 25941
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25941


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019


We thank the Lemann Brazil Research Fund at Harvard, the Weiss Family Fund, the Warburg
Fund, and a JPAL Governance Initiative Pilot Grant for financial support; Teresita Cruz Vital,
Xinyue Lin, Brian Wheaton and especially Deivis Angeli and Vinícius Schuabb for excellent
research assistance; and Alberto Alesina, Juliano Assunção, Doug Bernheim, Stefano
DellaVigna, Pascaline Dupas, Benjamin Enke, Bruno Ferman, Claudio Ferraz, Gustavo Gonzaga,
Gianmarco León, Joana Naritomi, Muriel Niederle, Rohini Pande, Rudi Rocha, Chris Roth and
seminar audiences at Columbia, the Escola de Economia de São Paulo, Harvard, PACDEV, PUC-
Rio, Stanford, U.C. Davis, and USC for helpful suggestions. This project underwent ethics review
by the Committee on the Use of Human Subjects at Harvard University. The policy-adoption
RCT reported in this paper is registered at the AEA's Social Science Registry, number
AEARCTR0004273. The initial draft of this paper was part of Juan Francisco Santini's Ph.D.
dissertation at PUC-Rio. Juan would like to thank all members of his dissertation committee for
guidance and support throughout his Ph.D. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jonas Hjort, Diana Moreira, Gautam Rao, and Juan Francisco Santini. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Research Affects Policy: Experimental Evidence from 2,150 Brazilian Municipalities
Jonas Hjort, Diana Moreira, Gautam Rao, and Juan Francisco Santini
NBER Working Paper No. 25941
June 2019
JEL No. A11,D03,D04,D8,D9,H11,O2

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper investigates if research findings change political leaders' beliefs and cause policy
change. Collaborating with the National Confederation of Municipalities in Brazil, we work with
2,150 municipalities and the mayors who control their policies. We use experiments to measure
mayors' demand for research information and their response to learning research findings. In one
experiment, we find that mayors and other municipal officials are willing to pay to learn the
results of impact evaluations, and update their beliefs when informed of the findings. They value
larger-sample studies more, while not distinguishing on average between studies conducted in
rich and poor countries. In a second experiment, we find that informing mayors about research on
a simple and effective policy (reminder letters for taxpayers) increases the probability that their
municipality implements the policy by 10 percentage points. In sum, we provide direct evidence
that providing research information to political leaders can lead to policy change. Information
frictions may thus help explain failures to adopt effective policies.

Jonas Hjort                                       Gautam Rao
Graduate School of Business                       Department of Economics
Columbia University                               Harvard University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 622                      Littauer M-30
New York, NY 10027                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                          and NBER
hjort@columbia.edu                                grao@fas.harvard.edu

Diana Moreira                                     Juan Francisco Santini
University of California, Davis                   Innovations for Poverty Action
One shields avenue                                Paseo De La Reforma 296
1140 SSH building                                 Col Juárez, 06600
Davis, CA 95616                                   Mexico City
dsmoreira@ucdavis.edu                             Mexico
                                                  jsantini@poverty-action.org




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/4273
1        Introduction
Recent decades have seen an explosion of program evaluation research in economics.1 But how
interested in and open to academic research are political leaders? And, insofar as they "consume"
research, can and do they act on new findings? These are questions of fundamental importance
for the science ecosystem. Despite the money and effort devoted to evaluating policy impact, we
have little understanding of whether the conditions necessary for the public to ultimately benefit
hold: whether political leaders value such research; whether it changes their beliefs about policy
effectiveness; and whether leaders ultimately implement policies that they otherwise would not
have in response to new research findings. In short, is a lack of (access to) research information a
binding constraint on policy choice?
        In this paper, we provide experimental evidence on these questions. To do so, we leverage
an unusual collaboration with the National Confederation of Municipalities (Confederação Nacional
de Municípios, or CNM) in Brazil. We first report results from a demand/beliefs experiment mea-
suring policy-makers' willingness-to-pay (hereafter WTP) to learn the findings of rigorous impact
evaluation research, as well as how such findings affect their beliefs. 900 municipal officials (pri-
marily mayors) from 657 municipalities participated in this first experiment. To estimate the ulti-
mate impact on actual policy adoption, we use a second, larger-scale policy-adoption field experi-
ment with 1,818 Brazilian mayors. A randomly-selected treatment group of mayors was invited to
attend a research information session at a large CNM convention. A presenter informed the audi-
ence about the findings of a set of RCTs showing positive effects on tax compliance of a taxpayer
reminder letter policy. We then measured policy adoption at the municipality level 15 to 24 months
later. In combination, the demand/beliefs and policy-adoption experiments allow us to estimate
both the extent to which research findings influence policy if directly provided to political leaders,
and the interest and belief-updating that mediates such influence.
        Brazil's municipalities are an excellent setting to investigate how research affects policy practice
for three reasons. First, their political leaders hold a role analogous to that of many countries'
head of state: Brazilian mayors are directly elected and individually wield considerable de jure
power over policy choices within the areas municipalities control, and over 90 percent also raise
tax revenues locally.2 Second, there are 5,570 municipalities in Brazil, and our collaboration with
CNM gives us direct access to their leadership. This enabled us to carry out experiments at the
polity level. Finally, local governments and governments in developing countries may lack the
resources or technical capacity to acquire relevant research information.
        Demand/beliefs experiment. Our first experiment finds that the political leaders of Brazil's mu-
nicipalities exhibit significant demand for research and change their beliefs in response to research
findings. The policy context for the experiment is Early Childhood Development (ECD) programs,
    1
     For example, more than 2,500 studies have been registered with the American Economic Association's registry for
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) since its launch in May 2013.
   2
     In Brazil, municipalities control policy areas such as pre-school and primary education, and preventative health and
sanitation. Over 90 percent of Brazilian municipalities raise tax revenues locally--primarily from property and service
taxes--in addition to the federal and state transfers they receive.


                                                           2
whose impacts on children's test scores have been estimated in existing, rigorous research. We
make use of four otherwise comparable RCTs conducted in different locations and with different
sample sizes.3 Our experiment begins by eliciting beliefs about the likely impact of an ECD pol-
icy if implemented in the participant's own municipality. We then present the participant with
one randomly-selected study, mentioning two study characteristics (location and sample size).
We elicit the participant's WTP to learn the study's results using an incentive-compatible proce-
dure, and then randomize whether the individual actually receives the result (conditional on their
WTP).4 If the results of the study are revealed, we elicit the participant's posterior beliefs about the
likely effect of the policy. We also elicit incentivized beliefs about the likely effect in the contexts
where the policy was actually implemented and evaluated. Finally, we offer the participant the
opportunity to pay for practical advice on how to implement the ECD program.
       We find that, while participants hold widely varying beliefs about the impact of the ECD policy
to begin with, they are willing to pay an arguably fairly high amount to find out the results of
an impact evaluation: about USD 36 on average (under certain assumptions to benchmark the
experimental currency). The average WTP is higher for studies with a large sample size, and
among officials from municipalities that had already implemented a similar program, but not for
studies conducted in a location that is closer to Brazil's income level. Learning the results of an
RCT causes officials to update their beliefs about impact: their posterior is a weighted average
of their prior and the revealed study's findings. Consistent with the demand (WTP) findings,
policy-makers update their beliefs more when they receive large sample studies, but not when
they receive studies conducted in developing countries rather than the U.S. While we cannot rule
out that these differential responses to different studies are in part driven by attributes participants
expect to correlate with sample size and the economic development of the study location--the two
study characteristics we explicitly state--60 percent of the participants who report preferring the
large sample studies in a debriefing survey mention statistical precision as a reason.
       While our experiment is not designed to test a complete model of rational learning--we do
not know how much participants should pay for, or should update their beliefs in response to,
research--we find little evidence for certain deviations from Bayesian learning. Specifically, par-
ticipants on average do not display confirmation bias--they do not interpret information in a way
that tends to reinforce their prior--nor do they respond asymmetrically to good versus bad news
regarding the policy (relative to their prior). We also do not find evidence for politically-motivated
updating. Randomly informing participants (truthfully) that recent leftist governments in Brazil
strongly supported the use of ECD policies had no statistically significant effect on their priors,
WTP or belief-updating, on average or differentially by partisan affiliation.
       Altogether, the findings of our first experiment suggest that political leaders are fairly sophis-
   3
     The studies we use are Grantham-McGregor et al. (1991); Walker et al. (2005); Puma et al. (2010); Barnett (2011);
Attanasio et al. (2014). These are all high-quality studies of the impact of ECD in respectively Jamaica (first two studies),
the U.S. as a whole, Michigan, and Colombia, with varying sample sizes.
   4
     WTP is elicited in terms of an experimental currency. Specifically, each participant is endowed with lottery tickets
with a chance to win an expenses-paid trip to the United States. They may instead use some of these lottery tickets to
purchase access to the findings of the research.


                                                             3
ticated consumers of research information, at least once such information is made (easily) accessi-
ble. In line with this interpretation, we find that a higher posterior causally increases the policy-
maker's WTP for practical information on how to implement the policy.
    Policy-Adoption Experiment. Our second experiment shows that supplying mayors with research
findings affects the actual policies adopted by their municipalities. In this experiment, we as-
signed a randomly chosen subset of the mayors attending CNM's 2016 Novos Gestores convention
in Brasília--the heads of the governments of 1,818 Brazilian municipalities--to a treatment group
which was invited to attend an optional research information session.5 The policy tool discussed
in the session was reminder letters to taxpayers to induce them to comply with taxes. We chose
this policy both because its impact is well-documented in existing, rigorous research, and because
it is inexpensive and easy to implement. During the 45-minutes long information session, an ex-
perienced presenter introduced the idea of impact evaluation, described taxpayer reminder letters
and their content, and presented research findings from studies on the quantitative impact of such
letters on tax compliance.6 At the end of the session, mayors were provided with a printed policy
brief summarizing the information.
    We find that attending the research information session increased the probability that munic-
ipalities had implemented taxpayer reminders 15-24 months later by a remarkable 10 percentage
points, or 33 percent relative to the 32 percent of municipalities in the control group which already
implemented the policy.7 There is little evidence of heterogeneity in treatment effects by leader
or municipality characteristics; for example, term-limited mayors appear to be equally likely to
respond as mayors that face re-election incentives.
    In combination, the findings from our demand/beliefs and policy-adoption experiments make
clear that political leaders are interested in; update their beliefs in response to; and ultimately
act on new research findings. Of course, caveats and open questions remain. Our policy-adoption
experiment studies a low-cost and easy-to-implement policy: information might not be the binding
constraint to more expensive or technically demanding (but effective) policies being implemented.
We also do not capture the numerous less-direct channels through which research may influence
policy. Finally, if policy-makers do value research information and react to it, as we argue, this
raises an important question: what prevents them from acquiring such information in the status
quo? We hope that future work will shed light on these questions.
    This paper contributes to and bridges the literatures on state effectiveness on the one hand, and
   5
     The sampling frame consists of Brazilian municipalities with populations between 5,000 and 100,000 inhabitants
for which the mayor was confirmed to attend the Novos Gestores convention. 45 percent of all mayoral administra-
tions in Brazil within the relevant population range went to Brasília and thus were part of our sample. There are 881
municipalities in the treatment group and 937 municipalities in the control group.
   6
     The findings that were presented at the information session were based on the following studies Coleman (1996);
Hasseldine et al. (2007); Del Carpio (2013); Fellner et al. (2013); Castro & Scartascini (2015); Hallsworth et al. (2017).
   7
     We surveyed key bureaucrats in treatment and control municipalities with knowledge of the municipality's tax
policies (typically in the finance department) from February to November 2018--15-24 months after the Novos Gestores
convention--to verify whether taxpayer reminder letters were being implemented in the municipality. We additionally
called mayors and tax bureaucrats to measure both beliefs about policy impacts and policy adoption. In 81 percent of
the municipalities in the sample, at least one person was surveyed. There was no differential attrition between treatment
and control municipalities.


                                                            4
the role of evidence and experts' beliefs on the other. The former has focused on selection into the
state enterprise, and variation in politicians' and public sector workers' effectiveness under differ-
ent incentive schemes.8 Using a polity-level field experiment somewhat parallel to the manage-
ment interventions in private firms first studied in Bloom et al. (2013), we instead show that infor-
mation frictions at the top--heads of government's lack of knowledge of policies' effectiveness--
directly constrains policy decisions.9 Our findings make clear that it is not the case, for example,
that counterfactual policies' effectiveness is widely known "on the ground", nor that political lead-
ers are uninterested in, unconvinced by, or unable to act on new research information. This implies
that policy research can help political leaders improve their constituents' lives.
       By starting to unpack how political leaders' beliefs are shaped--and their consequences--we
also advance an emerging body of evidence on belief formation and the role of evidence. While
most such research studies beliefs in lay populations to identify systematic biases and heuristics
(see Benjamin (2018) for a review), we add to the smaller body of work studying the beliefs of
experts such as central bankers (Malmendier et al., 2017), academics (DellaVigna & Pope, 2018),
and judges (Chen et al., 2016).10 In this sense, our study is most closely related to Banuri et al. (2017),
Nellis et al. (2019), and Vivalt & Coville (2019), who study how the beliefs of policy professionals--
program officers, aid-agency workers, and government officials--respond to research findings and
new data. Complementing their work, we study the extent to which academic research changes
elected heads of government's beliefs; the extent to which they themselves value access to research,
and how policy adoption ultimately responds to research findings.11 It also complements recent
research showing that citizens do change their policy preferences in response to evidence, even on
controversial topics such as immigration (Grigorieff et al., 2016; Haaland & Roth, 2019).
       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional information about
Brazilian local governments and our partner organization. Section 3 presents the design and re-
sults from the demand/beliefs experiment. Section 4 discusses our second intervention, the policy-
adoption experiment, and finally we conclude in Section 5.
   8
      The literature on state effectiveness often views states as organizations and has focused on front-line public sector
workers (see Finan et al. (2017) for a review), bureaucrats (see e.g. Duflo et al. (2013); Nath (2015); Khan et al. (2016,
2019); Akhtari et al. (2018); Bertrand et al. (forthcoming); Best et al. (2018); Duflo et al. (2018); Rasul & Rogger (2018),
among others), and leaders' identities (Chattopadhyay & Duflo, 2004; Jones & Olken, 2005; Besley et al., 2011; Beaman
et al., 2012; Martinez-Bravo, 2014; Yao & Zhang, 2015; Easterly & Pennings, 2017; Martinez-Bravo, 2017; Bertrand et al.,
forthcoming; Xu, 2018). For an overview of the literature on politican motives, see Persson & Tabellini (2002).
    9
      In this sense the existing study closest to ours is Hoffmann et al. (2017). They carry out an innovative lab-in-the-field
incentive-compatible choice experiment in which elected county councilors in Kenya chose among alternative water
infrastructure projects. Other influential polity-level natural and field experiments such as Fujiwara & Wantchekon
(2013) and Bidwell et al. (2019)--and related studies in political science--have randomized how electoral campaigns
take place across electoral districts or villages and studied the impact on electoral outcomes.
   10
      Our policy-adoption experiment builds on the influential information-provision approach pioneered by Jensen
(2010) and many related studies (see, among others, Kling et al. (2012); Chetty & Saez (2013); Dizon-Ross (2018)).
   11
      Banuri et al. (2017), Nellis et al. (2019), and Vivalt & Coville (2019) study the belief-formation of (mostly U.K. and
U.S.-based) policy professionals. Like Nellis et al. (2019), we find evidence of fairly sophisticated processing of informa-
tion, with little evidence of obvious deviations from Bayesian learning. Unlike Vivalt & Coville (2019), we do not find
evidence of precision-neglect or of asymmetric responses to positive and negative news, and unlike Banuri et al. (2017),
we do not find evidence of ideologically-driven confirmation bias. Another related paper is Beynon et al. (2012), who
use an online experiment to study the optimal design of policy briefs.



                                                              5
2     Institutional Background and Context
This section provides relevant background information on municipal governments in Brazil, our
partner organization, and the conferences where our experiments began.


2.1     Brazilian municipalities

Municipalities are the lowest level of government in Brazil. In total, there are 5,570 municipalities
distributed across 26 states. Municipal governments are headed by elected mayors, who appoint
secretaries to lead the municipal bureaucracy. Once elected, mayors serve a four-year term and
can hold office up to two consecutive terms. Elections are generally considered fair, such that
politicians face some electoral accountability. In addition to the executive branch, Brazilian munic-
ipalities have a legislative branch, which reviews and approves the annual budget, participates in
the elaboration of local laws, and oversees the mayor's administration.
      In Brazil, as in many Latin American countries, provision of services is generally devolved to
municipalities, while revenue generation and collection is partially devolved. Municipal govern-
ments are responsible for key public services such as education, health, sanitation, and transporta-
tion. To cover the costs, municipalities rely in part on intergovernmental transfers. On average, 60
percent of municipalities' total revenues are transfers from state governments and the federal gov-
ernment. Part of the remainder is locally raised by municipalities themselves. Municipal govern-
ments are responsible for collecting local taxes, which represent on average 15 percent of municipal
revenues.
      In general, municipal governments are highly autonomous. The mayor negotiates the budget
allocation with the city councilors and has full autonomy over its execution. The mayor's office
thus holds policy-making authority over a wide range of areas. Our research information experi-
ments will involve two such areas: early-childhood education and locally raised taxes. We describe
these two areas in more detail in sections 3 and 4.


2.2     Our partner organization

This study leveraged a unique opportunity to conduct a series of large-scale experiments with
thousands of local political leaders through a partnership with Brazil's National Confederation
of Municipalities (CNM). CNM is a non-partisan organization that serves as a coordinating body
and advocate of Brazilian municipalities' interests at the state and federal level. Over 80 percent of
all Brazilian municipalities are members of CNM. Importantly for our purposes, CNM organizes
a variety of conferences and conventions throughout the year, in which thousands of municipal
officials from all over the country participate.
      These meetings provide an unusual opportunity to reach a large population of political leaders
in one place. Meeting attendees comprise mayors, vice-mayors, local legislators, and municipal
secretaries. Our demand/beliefs experiment was conducted at two of CNM's annual national con-
ventions (May 2017 and May 2018) and at 12 regional conferences held in different states (August-

                                                   6
December 2017).12 Our policy-adoption experiment was conducted at CNM's biggest national
conference--called Novos Gestores--which is held every four years in Brasília (October-November
2016). All mayors who were (re-)elected in the last municipal election are invited to attend Novos
Gestores.
       Our research-information interventions were one of the many activities that took place at these
meetings. The meetings are each approximately three days long, and are structured around differ-
ent training sessions and presentations by various political actors, including regional actors such
as the regional associations of municipalities, and public and private municipal suppliers, as well
as national ones such as CNM itself, federal government officials, congress representatives, and
often the Brazilian President. In addition to attending the presentations, local policy-makers use
the meetings to organize get-togethers with each other and with state and federal officials. Each
national conference brings around 4,000 municipal representatives and 2,000 mayors, while the
regional conferences attract around 200 local political leaders, of which approximately 50 are may-
ors. Thus, our experiments take place in a quite natural setting, where policy-makers are used to
receiving useful information.


2.3      Identifying target policies

All information we provided to policy-makers in the experiments satisfied two main conditions.
First, the policies we focused on were directly within the control, familiarity, and broadly stated in-
terest of municipal officials. Second, the information we provided was based on rigorous research,
with emphasis on studies that evaluated interventions in Latin American countries.
       To identify policy areas of interest to local policy-makers, we conducted comprehensive sur-
veys and focus groups with 60 mayors in May 2016. Substantial interest in acquiring research
information was reported by mayors, especially on pre-school education, preventive health care,
and management practices. Mayors were also concerned with budgetary issues, especially consid-
ering the fiscal crisis affecting state and local governments in Brazil at the time (Mulas-Granados,
2017). Based on mayors' priorities, we searched for, and systematically reviewed, research studies
on Google Scholar, and the websites of J-PAL, IPA, 3ie, World Bank, IADB, and leading policy and
research institutions in Brazil such as the repository of papers on IPEA, C-Micro-FGV, and on the
websites of leading Brazilian scholars. We identified a number of promising options, and after
coordinating with CNM, we decided to build the experimental interventions based on research in-
formation on early childhood development programs and on tax reminder letters. These policies
were appealing for our purposes because they were evaluated in existing, rigorous research, and
the taxpayer reminder letter policy we focus on in the policy-adoption experiment is inexpensive
and relatively easy to implement. In addition, the set of studies evaluating the impact of each of
the two policies varied in their attributes, allowing us to investigate how study features such as
sample size and location affect policy-makers' responses.
  12
   The 12 regional conferences were held in the following states: Alagoas, Bahia, Ceará, Espírito Santo, Maranhão,
Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Paraná, Piauí, Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina and São Paulo.



                                                        7
3        Demand/Beliefs Experiment
In this section, we describe an experiment to measure (a) whether Brazilian policy-makers exhibit
demand for research information, and (b) how receiving such information affects their beliefs. The
policy area this experiment focused on was Early Childhood Development (ECD) programs, a
well-studied topic in social science. We find that policy-makers value research on the effect of ECD
programs, and update their beliefs in a fairly sophisticated way in response.


3.1        Experimental setting and sample

We implemented the demand/beliefs experiment with 900 officials from 657 municipalities at 14
CNM meetings across Brazil in 2017 and 2018.13 The conferences were attended by mayors, vice-
mayors, municipal secretaries, and local legislators. We designed a half-hour long experiment that
was self-administered by participants using tablets. Research assistants recruited conference par-
ticipants during breaks in between sessions. Participation was voluntary but incentivized as de-
scribed in the next section. One of the researchers and one research assistant were present through-
out to monitor and answer questions.
         Almost 49 percent of participants in the experiment were mayors; 28 percent were local legis-
lators; 16 percent were municipal secretaries; and 7 percent were vice-mayors.14 The geographical
distribution of the municipalities represented is shown in Figure 2, and Table 1 displays summary
characteristics. About 37 percent of represented municipalities have mayors affiliated to a leftist
political party, and approximately 20 (78) percent of children aged 0 to 3 (4 to 5) years old in these
municipalities attend a pre-school educational establishment. 42 percent of participants report that
their municipalities have implemented ECD programs.


3.2        Experimental design

The structure of the experiment, depicted graphically in Figure 1, was as follows. We began by
introducing the ECD policy. Then we elicited participants' prior beliefs about the effectiveness of
the policy, and their willingness-to-pay (hereafter WTP) to learn the findings from related impact
evaluation research. Next, we revealed the findings, and finally, we elicited participants' posteriors
to assess the extent to which the research findings affected their beliefs. The Appendix provides
the key parts of the experimental script. Below, we describe the experiment in greater detail.
         Introductory Stage. We began with a short survey eliciting demographic and professional infor-
mation. Next, we described ECD programs, highlighting the key outcomes on which such pro-
grams are evaluated (test scores, cognitive skills) and how those outcomes are reported (standard-
ized effect sizes). To ease understanding of the policy and its objectives, we provided illustrative
    13
     The meetings comprised two national conferences held in Brasília (May 2017 and 2018), and twelve regional Diálogo
Municipalista conferences organized from August to December 2017 in the states of Alagoas, Bahia, Ceará, Espírito
Santo, Maranhão, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Paraná, Piauí, Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina and São Paulo.
  14
     We were able to complete the experiment with 38.8 percent of attending mayors, 48.5 percent of vice-mayors, 35.4
percent of municipal secretaries, and 40.9 percent of local legislators.


                                                          8
                               F IGURE 1: D EMAND /B ELIEFS EXPERIMENT:
                                              S TRUCTURE




examples of current similar programs in Brazil and presented participants with a few benchmarks
for effect sizes, such as the gains in standardized test scores associated with an additional year of
high school in Brazil (0.2 sd).
       Eliciting priors. We began the main part of the experiment by eliciting the participant's prior
beliefs. Specifically, we asked what they believed the impact of the policy on cognitive skills was
likely to be if it were to be implemented in his/her own municipality.15 Immediately after, we
asked a similar question about the expected impact in two other locations. These two other loca-
tions were randomly chosen out of four locations where academics have estimated the impact of
ECD programs using RCTs. These studies vary in location and sample size. They evaluate com-
parable ECD programs in Colombia (n=1420) (Attanasio et al., 2014), Jamaica (n=130) (Grantham-
McGregor et al., 1991; Walker et al., 2005), Michigan (n=123) (Barnett, 2011), and across multiple
  15
   For simplicity and due to limited time with each participant, we elicited only point predictions (about effects on
cognitive skills), rather than full probabilistic beliefs.



                                                         9
states in the U.S. (n=4667) (Puma et al., 2010). When the relevant studies were presented to the
participant, we highlighted both the study location and sample size.

                 Attributes                 Small Sample           Large Sample

                 Developing Country       Jamaica, n = 130       Colombia, n = 1420
                 Rich Country             Michigan, n = 123        USA, n = 4667

   While we cannot incentivize accurate beliefs about the impact in the participant's own mu-
nicipality (since we do not observe the true effect), we randomize incentives to accurately predict
the effect in the other two locations (where we can compare the participant's prediction to the es-
timates from the research). In practice, we found that the size of the incentives has no effect on
priors, WTP, or posteriors, suggesting that participants took the questions seriously even in the
absence of incentives, and that making better predictions for the sake of higher payoff within the
experiment is not an important driver of this paper's results.
   WTP and Belief Updating: Round 1. After the participants reported their priors, we offered them
the chance to purchase the findings (i.e. learn the estimated effect size) from one randomly-chosen
study. The experimental currency in which we elicited WTP consisted of lottery tickets, which
also incentivized participation. We initially endowed each participant with 100 such lottery tick-
ets, each with a chance of winning a free trip to visit the United States (typically a visit to Boston,
including a tour of the Harvard University campus). Participants could save their lottery tickets
for the lucky draw or use some, or all of them, to learn the estimated effect size of the study. Fol-
lowing a Becker-DeGroot-Marschak elicitation procedure (BDM), we measured the participant's
maximum WTP [0 to 100] to find out the results of the relevant study. We then drew a randomized
price for the study. If the price was below the participant's WTP, we revealed the findings and
deducted the price from the participant's stock of lottery tickets.
   To ensure that we observed belief updating for most participants, while maintaining incentive-
compatibility in the BDM procedure, the price was drawn from a distribution with high mass
at zero. Consequently, 80-90 percent (depending on the conference) of participants received the
information regardless of their WTP. We emphasize this sample for the belief-updating analysis,
since these participants receive the information without selection. For those who received the
information, we subsequently elicited posterior beliefs about the expected impact of the policy in
their own municipality, and in the study location that was not offered for purchase in this round.
   WTP and Belief Updating: Round 2. In the next stage, we presented the participant with a menu
of the three studies that were not offered for purchase in Round 1, again highlighting each study's
location and sample size. The participant received a fresh budget of 100 lottery tickets and was
told that one of the three studies would be randomly offered for purchase. They were asked to
report their WTP for each study, to be implemented if that study was randomly chosen for sale. We
thus obtained incentive-compatible WTPs for each of the three studies. We revealed the findings of
one study following the same procedure as before, and again elicited an updated posterior belief.


                                                  10
                            F IGURE 2: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                                    S AMPLE M UNICIPALITIES




3.3    Results

We interpret the results from our experiment through the lens of a standard Bayesian-learning
                                                           pr
framework. Suppose that policy-maker i has a prior belief Si   N (µpr  pr          pr
                                                                   i , i ), where µi is the
mean of i's prior and pr
                      i is the perceived variance or uncertainty of their prior about the likely
effect of the ECD policy if implemented in their municipality. The effect size from the research
                                           I  N (µI , I ), drawn from a distribution centered
study can be thought of as a noisy signal Si ,c       i ,c
around the true value µI , but with variance I
                                             i,c , where c indexes characteristics of the study, such
as its sample size or location. Then, a Bayesian policy-maker who wants to have accurate beliefs
                                                        po
(to minimize mean squared error) will form a posterior Si  :
                                          po
                                         Si  = (1 -  )Sipr + SiI,c
                        pr
with the weights  =    pr
                          i
                       i + I
                                  . That is, a Bayesian learner's posterior will be a convex combination
                            i,c
of their prior and the "signal" (i.e. the effect-size from the study), with weights proportional to the
perceived relative precision of each component.
      We can think of the key attributes of the study--location and sample size--as affecting the
perceived precision or informativeness of the noisy signal. If participants think that larger-sample


                                                    11
studies are more informative (I
                              i,large < i,small ), they will place greater weight on the effect size
                                        I

of larger-sample studies while forming their posterior beliefs. Importantly, if policy-makers value
having accurate beliefs about the effectiveness of ECD policies, their WTP for signals will be higher
for the signals which they will ex-post weight more strongly in their belief updating.
       Priors about effect size. We start by analyzing policy-makers' priors about the effectiveness of
ECD policies. The average policy-maker prior appears sensible. Appendix Table A.1 shows that
the average policy-maker believes that ECD policies are more effective in rich countries (effect size
of 0.46-0.49 sd) than in developing countries (effect size of 0.38-0.41 sd). On average, municipal
officials believe the effect size in their own municipality (0.4 standard deviations) is very close to
the average prior for the developing countries. However, this masks substantial heterogeneity in
priors: the standard deviation of priors is 0.22, implying substantial disagreement across policy-
makers.16
       Willingness-to-pay for estimated effect size. After policy-makers reported their priors, we elicited
their WTP to learn the research finding of one of the four (randomly assigned) studies. According
to the Bayesian framework, WTP should be larger the more informative the signal is perceived to
be. We estimate the following equation:
                            W T Pijs = 0 + 1 Developingijs + 2 Largeijs + ijs                                        (1)
where W T Pijs is the WTP (in terms of lottery tickets) for the research finding of policy-maker
i in round j  1, 2 for study s  Michigan, USA, Jamaica, Colombia. Developings equals one
for studies in Jamaica or Colombia and 0 otherwise. Larges equals one for the two large-sample
studies (Colombia with n=1420 and USA with n=4667) and 0 otherwise (Jamaica with n=130 and
Michigan with n=123). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
       Table 2 presents the OLS results from specification (1). Column 1 pools the two rounds, while
columns 2 and 3 present estimates separately for round 1 and round 2 respectively. We find that
policy-makers allocate on average 45 lottery tickets (out of the 100 tickets they are endowed with
each round) to learn about the effect size of a particular study. While this is a large share of their
experimental endowment, it is difficult to interpret the level directly since the currency is lottery
tickets, whose subjective value is unobserved. To benchmark the WTP, we calculated a money
metric for the experimental currency by offering gift cards from a major retail and online chain
(Lojas Americanas, similar to Walmart) for purchase using a similar BDM procedure to a sub-sample
of participants. We found that an additional lottery ticket was exchanged for approximately 0.80
USD worth of gift cards. This benchmarking must be interpreted with caution, but suggests that
the baseline WTP for the research finding of 45 lottery tickets was equivalent to 36 USD. There is
substantial heterogeneity in demand: the standard deviation of WTP is 32 lottery tickets. Yet, 98
percent of participants have strictly positive WTP.17
  16
    Of course, some of this variance in priors may reflect noise in the belief-elicitation process.
  17
    Readers might wonder why participants would not simply look up the research themselves. While this may hap-
pen to some extent, we believe that unfamiliarity with research-information sources, language barriers, and difficulty
interpreting academic writing are all factors that make this strategy difficult for our study participants. Our estimates
may be thought of as capturing their WTP for simplified, conveniently-presented, bottom-line information.


                                                           12
   We next analyze whether demand for research findings varies with the attributes of the re-
search. We find that political leaders are willing to pay about 8 percent more for large-sample size
studies than for smaller-sample studies. Thus, policy-makers appear to ex-ante value the statistical
precision of a study. This relationship is stronger in the second round, when studies are offered
side-by-side, but the second-round estimate is not statistically different from the first-round esti-
mate (p-value 0.496). In contrast, and contrary to our priors, we do not find significant differences
between the WTP for research findings from developing versus developed countries. This sug-
gests that Brazilian policy-makers do not consider studies from other developing countries to be
more informative--more externally valid for them--than rich-country studies.
   We report participant and municipality-level correlates of WTP in Appendix Table A.2. Only
three characteristics out of nineteen are significantly associated with WTP: whether the partici-
pant is male, whether their municipality has previously implemented an ECD policy, and whether
they reported having previously heard about such policies despite not having implemented them.
Through the lens of the framework, the latter correlations are not obvious: policy-makers with
more past experience with a policy might already perceive that they have a precise prior, and
therefore not value more information. Instead, we find that it is precisely the policy-makers who
implement and spend municipal resources on ECD programs who have the highest WTP for re-
lated research information.
   Belief Updating. Having established that political leaders value research findings, and pay more
for larger-sample studies, we turn to whether and how they actually update their beliefs upon
learning research findings. Note that if policy-makers purchase information purely to use it to per-
suade others, for instance, they might not update their own beliefs upon receiving the information.
   Following the Bayesian framework, we estimate the following equation:
                           P osteriorijs = 1 P riorij + 2 Signalijs + ij                          (2)
where P osteriorijs is policy-maker i's updated belief about the likely effect in their own munic-
ipality after learning the effect size from study Signalijs of study s in round j . Posteriors after
round 1 serve as priors for round 2, and standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
   Table 3 presents the OLS estimates of specification (2). Column 1 pools the two rounds, while
columns 2 and 3 present estimates separately for round 1 and round 2 respectively. Consistent
with the Bayesian framework, ^1 and ^2 are both positive and statistically significant, and sum up
to approximately 1. Participants place substantial weight on both their prior and the study finding,
and do not simply accept or repeat back the research finding. This finding reduces concerns about
experimenter demand effects. They place slightly greater weight on their prior when forming
beliefs about their own municipality, compared to beliefs about an alternative location (Column 4
vs. Column 2). They also place more weight on their prior in the second round, when it already
incorporates the finding of the first study they received. As described previously, by design, 80-90
percent of participants are assigned a zero price and receive the research information regardless of
their WTP. Column 5 restricts attention to these observations, and finds very similar results as in
the full sample.


                                                 13
       In order to test whether participants update more based on large-sample or developing-country
studies, we estimate:

  P osteriorijs = 1 P riorij + 2 Signalij
                       + 3 Developingijs × P riorij + 4 Developingijs × Signalij
                                                + 5 Largeijs × P riorij + 6 Largeijs × Signalij + ij (3)
where Largeijs and Developingijs are defined as in equation (1). Under the framework, if an
individual perceives a study to be more informative, they will place more weight on the signal from
that study and correspondingly less weight on their prior. Therefore, to test whether participants
perceive (say) large-sample studies to be more informative, we can test whether 5 < 0 and 6 > 0,
or instead (a weaker test) whether 6 - 5 > 0.
       Table 4 presents the OLS results of specification (3). Again, Column 1 pools the two rounds,
while columns 2 and 3 present estimates separately for each round. We find consistent evidence
that participants place greater weight on signals from large-sample studies, but not on signals from
developing-country studies.18 This lines up with the findings on WTP, and confirms that these
policy-makers find larger-sample studies to be more informative, but do not consider studies from
developing and rich countries to be differentially informative. The greater weight placed on large-
sample studies is evident also in round 1, when one study is presented in isolation. The pattern
of results holds up, and indeed is slightly strengthened, when we restrict attention to cases where
the price drawn was zero in Column 5.
       Caveats, Confounds and Qualifications. While we interpret the differences in WTP and belief-
updating across sample size and study location as the direct effect of these two characteristics,
both could be correlated in policy-makers' minds with omitted variables such as the quality of the
research, the scale of implementation of the program, etc. To shed light on this, we conducted a
debriefing survey with a subset of the sample (n=296). We find that 60 percent of policy-makers
who preferred large-sample studies chose statistical precision as the reason. Intriguingly, a smaller
share also reported preferring larger-sample studies because they are more likely to have evaluated
programs implemented at scale (23 percent) and by the government (15 percent). In the case of
study location, the survey results are more mixed: while individuals who preferred studies from
Colombia or Jamaica reported their lower standard of living and similar state capacity as reasons, a
substantial share also reported preferring the US studies, and listed a higher standard of living and
similar state capacity as reasons. One interpretation is that some policy-makers in Brazil may see
their municipalities as closer to developing countries, while others may see themselves as closer to
rich countries.
       The results on belief updating (but not WTP) have another potential confound in interpretation:
the two larger-sample studies in practice estimated smaller effect sizes. This is a feature in the
four studies we use, and also more generally documented in the ECD literature (Barnett, 2011).
  18
   Contrary to the Bayesian learning framework, the reduction in weight on the prior is smaller than the increase in
weight on the signal.



                                                        14
 What if participants simply update more (in proportional terms) for some reason in response to
 small effect sizes? There is no clear theoretical reason to expect this. Nonetheless, we have some
 unplanned variation which may shed light on this concern: in six of the fourteen conferences where
 the experiment was conducted, we reported a different (smaller) effect-size for certain studies.
 Specifically, for the small-sample studies, we truthfully reported an estimated effect size of the
 study, but assessed at a much longer time period, which resulted in a smaller effect size. Appendix
 Table A.3 tests whether the larger weight on large-sample study signals is less pronounced in those
 conferences. Consistent with our initial interpretation, the weight placed on sample size does not
 vary significantly across these conferences.


 3.4     Potential deviations from Bayesian learning

 In this section, we test for potential deviations from Bayesian learning by testing for asymmetric
 updating, confirmation bias, and politically-motivated updating.
       Confirmation bias and asymmetric updating. Confirmation bias is the tendency to acquire and
 interpret information in a way that confirms one's pre-existing beliefs (Nickerson, 1998). This
 phenomenon has been studied in a number of settings, and debates exist as to its prevalence and
 importance in causing polarization and making individuals immune to evidence (see e.g. Lord
 et al., 1979; Kuhn & Lao, 1996; Nyhan & Reifler, 2010; Wood & Porter, 2019). It is natural to therefore
 ask if political leaders and other policy-makers exhibit confirmation bias when faced with evidence
 from research on policy effectiveness. Do policy-makers who start off with more positive beliefs
 about a particular policy under-react to negative (disconfirming) information about that policy
 relative to positive (confirming) information? And do policy-makers with negative priors do the
 reverse? We test this by estimating equations of the form:

P osteriorijs = 1 P riorij + 2 (Signalij - P riorij ) + 3 (Signalij - P riorij ) × P ositiveSurpriseij + ij
                                                                                                                            (4)
 where P ositiveSurpriseij = 1{Signalij - P riorij > 0} is a dummy equal to 1 when the revealed
 effect-size from the study is larger than the participant's prior, and 0 otherwise. 3 > 0 implies
 that participants place more weight on positive news than on negative news, while 3 < 0 would
 imply placing more weight on negative news than on positive news.19
       Table 5 reports the results. Column 1 shows that, on average, policy-makers do not react asym-
 metrically to positive news relative to negative news. Columns 2 and 3 contrast the estimates for
 participants with prior beliefs above versus below the median respectively, while Columns 4 and
 5 do the same for participants in the top versus bottom quartiles instead. We find no evidence
 of confirmation bias.20 Column 6 pools together the policy-makers with priors above and below
   19
      See also Vivalt & Coville (2019). An alternative way to set up the estimating equation would be as in Equation 3,
 interacting the prior and signal separately with P ositiveSurprise. We choose to instead include the Signal - P osterior
 term and its single interaction with P ositiveSurprise for ease of exposition and interpretation, especially once we
 examine politically-motivated information processing in Table 6.
   20
      Columns 2 and 4 show that individuals with high prior beliefs do not react more to positive news. Columns 3 and
 5 show that, if anything, policy-makers with low priors react more to positive rather than negative news, although the


                                                           15
 the median, and tests whether individuals react more to confirming rather than disconfirming ev-
 idence; they do not.21 Column 7 repeats this for individuals in the top and bottom quartiles, and
 finds a similar result. Altogether, we find no evidence for confirmation bias or asymmetric updat-
 ing on average when policy-makers are presented with research evidence on policy effectiveness.
     Politically-motivated information processing. Politically-motivated reasoning is thought to be a
 source of persistent disagreement over facts (Kahan, 2016). There is evidence that providing infor-
 mation on politically-charged topics can actually increase polarization, and that many individuals
 neglect information that is inconsistent with their group's position (e.g. Baekgaard et al. (2017);
 Nyhan & Reifler (2010)). However, much of this evidence comes from student or Mturk samples
 and often without incentives for truthful reporting. We have little evidence on potential biases in
 political leaders' belief-updating (Vivalt & Coville, 2019; Nellis et al., 2019). We thus randomized
 messaging that (truthfully) revealed strong support for the ECD policy from past left-of-center
 governments (Lula and Dilma's governments from the Labor Party, PT). The partisan-support
 message was: "In Brazil, the PT government strongly advocated for early-childhood development
 policies. In 2007, Fundeb was created to include pre-school and nursery enrollment in the head-
 count for federal transfers. Programs for pre-school and nursery construction, such as the pro-
 Infancia program, were also launched during Lula's government, and expanded during Dilma's
 administration." This message is shown before the prior elicitation and briefly reiterated before
 the WTP elicitation. The objective of the message was to create a partisan association between
 ECD programs and the PT party, and to observe whether this influences belief-updating differen-
 tially across left versus right-wing policy-makers. To study effects on priors and WTP, we estimate:
        Yij = 0 + 1 P artisanM essagei + 2 Lef tisti + 3 P artisanM essagei × Lef tisti + ij                          (5)
 where Yij is the policy-maker's elicited prior or WTP; Lef tisti is a binary variable equal to one
 if the policy-maker self-reports as a leftist on an ideology scale; and P artisanM essagei is equal
 to one if they received the randomized partisan message and zero otherwise. 3 captures the
 differential effect of the partisan message on left-wing policy-makers.
     To study effects on belief-updating, we estimate, separately for left-wing and right-wing policy-
 makers, specifications of the form:

P osteriorijs = 1 P riorij + 2 (Signalij - P riorij ) + 3 (Signalij - P riorij ) × P ositiveSurpriseij +
                            4 (Signalij - P riorij ) × P ositiveSurpriseij × P artisanM essagei + ij                  (6)
     Table 6 reports the results. Columns 1 and 2 present effects on priors and WTP from speci-
 fication (5). We find no significant effects on either priors or WTP from providing the partisan
 message, either on right-wing policy-makers (1 ) or differentially for leftist policy-makers (3 ), al-
 though the estimates for WTP are somewhat imprecise. Columns 3 and 4 estimate (6) separately
 for left-wing and right-wing policy-makers to study belief updating. We find no evidence that
 estimates are imprecise.
   21
      We define a variable Conf irmingN ews equal to 1 if an individual with an above-median prior receives a (still more)
 positive signal or if an individual with a below-median prior receives a (still more) negative signal, and 0 otherwise.



                                                            16
the partisan message causes leftists to begin to respond more to positive signals (4 in Column 3),
nor does it cause rightists to respond more to negative signals (-4 in Column 4). In an alterna-
tive specification in Column 6, we define a variable P artisanP ref erredSignal and test whether
the partisan message causes policy-makers to respond more to messages which they `prefer' (i.e.
signals which are high in the case of leftist participants and signals which are low in the case of
right-wing participants). Again, we find no evidence for this. If anything, the coefficient goes in
the wrong direction.
      Overall, we find little evidence of politically-motivated beliefs, demand for information or pro-
cessing of information among our sample of policy-makers. However, there are important caveats
to this conclusion. First, it could be that the partisan message does not have an effect because indi-
viduals already knew of the support of past PT leaders for the policy. This was not our sense from
field work, but we cannot rule it out. Second, there is suggestive evidence in Table 6 that, in the ab-
sence of the partisan message, right-wing policy-makers do respond less to positive news. Third,
statistical power is limited in this analysis since the cross-randomization was only conducted in a
sub-sample. Finally, ECD programs are generally not a highly charged political topic. Politically-
motivated reasoning may well occur in other domains and contexts.


3.5     Demand/beliefs experiment: discussion

We have three main findings from the demand/beliefs experiment. First, political leaders in Brazil
value learning about research on policy effectiveness. They pay more for larger sample studies,
but not for developing-country studies. Second, they also change their beliefs when confronted
with evidence from research: they place substantial weight on the new information. They place
more weight on larger-sample studies, but again, not on developing-country studies. Third, we
have little evidence for specific deviations from the Bayesian framework we considered, such as
asymmetric updating, confirmation bias and politically-motivated processing of information. In
short, policy-makers seem to both value evidence and update their beliefs in a quite sophisticated
way.
      WTP for implementation information. But does access to research lead to more effective policies
being adopted? At the very end of the demand/beliefs experiment, participants were given the
chance to purchase practical information on how to implement ECD policies, using a fresh budget
of lottery tickets. We interpret WTP for such advice as a revealed-preference proxy for interest in
implementing the policy. Since we experimentally vary bundles of study attributes provided--
effect size, developing country context, and large sample--and found that these affect posteriors,
we can use these attributes as instruments for participants' posterior. Appendix Table A.4 shows
the results. We find that more positive beliefs about ECD programs--shaped through learning
about research findings--causally increase WTP for implementation information. While this pro-
vides clean, experimental evidence on the effect of research information on demand for policy
implementation via changed beliefs, in the next section we turn to a field experiment which mea-
sures policy adoption itself.


                                                   17
4     Policy-Adoption Experiment
In this section, we describe a nationwide field experiment to test whether supplying the heads of
local governments with evidence from policy-effectiveness research influences the policies imple-
mented in their polities. We show that informing Brazilian mayors about the effectiveness of a
policy to increase tax compliance causally increases adoption of the policy in their municipality
1-2 years later.


4.1     Background: Taxpayer reminder letters

The essence of our policy-adoption experiment is to inform a treatment group of mayors about the
existing research evidence on a particular policy that has been shown to increase tax compliance:
reminder letters to taxpayers.
      We chose this particular policy for three reasons. First, increasing tax compliance is important
to mayors: they reported considerable interest in increasing tax revenues in our focus groups and
scoping surveys. Over 90 percent of Brazilian municipalities raise taxes locally and enforcement of
municipal taxes is under the control of municipal governments. Like in most developing countries,
taxpayer compliance is a challenge in Brazil. A prominent think tank estimates that at least 20
percent of taxpayers do not comply with property taxes, for instance (De Cesare & Smolka, 2004).
      Second, the effectiveness of reminder letters has been rigorously evaluated in multiple RCTs,
including two in Latin America (Coleman, 1996; Hasseldine et al., 2007; Del Carpio, 2013; Fellner
et al., 2013; Castro & Scartascini, 2015; Hallsworth et al., 2017). Such interventions have been found
to be surprisingly effective. For instance, Del Carpio (2013) finds that simple reminder letters
increased tax compliance in Peru by 10 percent, while letters that additionally included social-
norm language by emphasizing that most people pay their taxes on time increased compliance by
20 percent.
      Third, reminder letters are inexpensive and relatively easy to implement, while not being obvi-
ously politically sensitive. On the one hand, this means that the policy we chose is likely positively
selected in terms of the potential for changes in policy-maker beliefs to translate into policy change.
On the other hand, we expect that reminder letters are likely an effective policy tool in part because
they are low-cost and easy to implement.
      Reminder letters to taxpayers are uncommon but far from unheard of in Brazil. In our endline
survey for this experiment, 32 percent of control municipalities reported using some form of re-
minder messages to taxpayers. This sometimes involved sending letters, but also included other
communication channels such as text messages, flyers, and media advertising.


4.2     Experimental setting

The policy-adoption experiment was conducted at a large CNM convention--the Novos Gestores
meeting--for recently elected and re-elected mayors in October-November 2016. The convention
is held every four years to train mayors who are about to start their four-year term the following

                                                   18
January. Each mayor participates in the conference for about two days, and can attend multiple
training sessions led by CNM staff. The sessions cover a variety of public policy areas, such as ed-
ucation, economic development, health, tourism, and local taxes. Multiple sessions run in parallel
throughout the conference.
       The sample frame for the experiment was mayors attending the convention who represented
municipalities with populations between 5,000 and 100,000. The total sample consists of 1,818 mu-
nicipalities, which represents 45 percent of all mayoral administrations in Brazil in that population
range. Figure 3 shows the spatial distribution of the sample municipalities.

                                 F IGURE 3: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
                                          S AMPLE M UNICIPALITIES




       Table 7 provides descriptive statistics on the sample of mayors and municipalities for the
policy-adoption experiment. We see, for example, that almost 90 percent of the mayors are men;
about 60 percent have at least a bachelor degree; and 16 percent are in their second and last term
in office.22 The average municipality in the sample has a population of about 21,000 residents.
  22
     This low share of mayors in their second term is explained, in part, by the political crisis Brazil was going through at
the time of the most recent municipal elections (2016), which led to a decrease in the proportion of incumbent politicians
winning re-election.




                                                             19
4.3      Experimental design

Mayors attending the conference were randomized into treatment (n=881) and control (n=937)
groups.23 All mayors were free to attend any of CNM's regular Novos Gestores training sessions,
but only mayors in the treatment group were invited, by email and text message, to attend our
research information session. The session was advertised as being on the topic of how to increase
local tax revenues, and was framed as a training session organized by CNM as well as researchers
at Columbia and Harvard Universities. Since participation was optional, our experiment should
be thought of as having an encouragement design. Table 7 shows that the treatment and control
groups are largely balanced on mayor's characteristics as well as municipal characteristics.
       The information session lasted 45 minutes and was led by an experienced instructor. The in-
structor began by introducing and defining policy impact, cost-effectiveness, and impact evalua-
tion research. She then provided a description of taxpayer reminder letters, including presenting
an example template. Next, she presented the findings (i.e. the estimated effect sizes) of a set of
rigorous studies evaluating the impact of taxpayer reminder letters. A list of reminder letter char-
acteristics found to be effective in inducing taxpayers to pay their taxes on time--stating the tax
payment deadline; mentioning the possibility of fines and audits for not paying taxes on time; and
stating that most people pay their taxes on time--was emphasized, and effect sizes were provided
where possible.
       The information presented was simplified and the presentation was concise. We avoided jargon
and regression tables. The 30-minute presentation was followed by 15 minutes for questions from
the audience.24 At the end of the session, mayors received a professionally-produced policy brief
with the same information content as the presentation, including references to the cited papers.25


4.4      Data

To measure how the research information provided affected policy adoption and political leaders'
beliefs, we conducted in-depth phone surveys of relevant municipal officials from treatment and
control municipalities 15 to 24 months after the session. We attempted to reach the bureaucrat in
charge of implementing tax policy in each municipality, as well as the mayor him- or herself.26
  23
      The randomization was stratified on the mayor's education level, whether the mayor was term-limited, the average
education level among public employees in the municipality, and the municipality's population size, Gini coefficient,
and region. A slightly larger share of municipalities was assigned to the control group due to logistical concerns asso-
ciated with our capacity to manage a large number of treatment group participants and the capacity of the room that
CNM designated for our intervention.
   24
      During the 15 minutes reserved for open discussions with mayors, mayors often asked interesting questions about
reminder letters and other alternative policies on tax compliance: for example, whether the effects would be the same
if the messages were sent by email or text messages, whether the policy could be used to encourage tax debtors to
pay their balance, and whether financial incentives such as discounts or lotteries for paying taxes on time are effective
policies. We avoided providing confident answers to such questions.
   25
      Appendix Figures A.8, A.9, A.10, and A.11 show the policy brief.
   26
      Typically, secretaries of finance are responsible for the tax division in Brazilian municipalities. Nevertheless, we
specifically asked municipalities' telephone attendants to pass the call on to the person in charge of the tax division.
Once we were transferred, we confirmed whether the person actually held that position or asked to get the phone
number of the person in charge of implementing tax policy.


                                                           20
       The survey was supervised by a research assistant, and conducted by a team of nine surveyors
who were blinded to treatment status and the research hypotheses. When the survey ended after
10 months of phone calls, we had successfully interviewed at least one person in 81 percent of our
sample of municipalities--75 percent of the chief tax bureaucrats and 50 percent of the mayors in
the sample.27 There was no differential attrition between treatment and control groups, and ob-
servable characteristics of the successfully contacted municipalities are similar across both groups,
as reported in Table 7.
       The survey lasted approximately 15 minutes. The key questions asked were whether the mu-
nicipality sends taxpayers reminders to pay their taxes, and whether the messages feature the
characteristics described in the information session and evaluated in the literature: mentioning the
due date, the possibility of fines or audits, and language regarding the social norm of paying taxes
on time. We also elicited beliefs about the likely impact of such a policy, even if the municipality
reported not using such reminders. In addition, we asked questions that served as attention and
comprehension checks as well as placebo questions on which we would expect null effects of the
treatment.
       In addition to the phone survey, we gathered demographic, electoral, and budgetary data from
official sources for all municipalities for which such data is available.28 It is not possible to observe
tax compliance itself in the administrative data so our primary outcome is whether municipalities
implemented the policy. Since concerns about experimenter demand effects or other reporting
biases may arise for reports from mayors, we separately report responses from tax department
bureaucrats and mayors.


4.5      Results

Participation in information sessions. 37.9 percent of the mayors in the treatment group chose to
attend our session. In contrast, less than 1 percent of control group mayors attended the session.
The opportunity costs of attending--foregoing the opportunity to attend other parallel training
sessions or conducting meetings with other politicians and officials--were high. Moreover, some
mayors did not have accurate contact information stored in the CNM system, and thus did not
receive our invitation messages at all. We therefore consider 37.9 percent to be a fairly high rate of
treatment group participation.
       Appendix Table A.5 reports predictors of participation in the research information session.
Younger and college-educated mayors are 7 and 15 percentage points more likely to participate
  27
     We were not able to make any contact with 10 percent of the sample municipalities, due to not being able to locate
a working phone number. This share was also balanced across treatment and control groups. On average, many hours
of work were needed before we could talk to the chief tax bureaucrats and mayors over the phone, mainly collecting
municipalities' phone numbers. Not all Brazilian municipalities publish or have updated contact information on their
websites, so we collected phone numbers through google searches, facebook, by calling other local institutions such as
hospitals and schools, etc.
  28
     Demographic data is available from the Brazilian Statistical Office (IBGE). Brazil's Superior Electoral Court provides
data on electoral outcomes and mayors' characteristics. Budgetary data was retrieved from the National Treasury, which
compiles and releases self-reported accounting records from all Brazilian municipalities every year.



                                                            21
than others, but term-limited mayors are no less likely to participate than mayors in their first
term. None of the municipal characteristics, such as poverty rates, inequality, or income per capita,
predict participation.
       Policy adoption. We find that a mayor attending the research information session leads to a 10
percentage point increase in the use of reminder letters to taxpayers--an increase of 33 percent
over the proportion of control group municipalities that had started using such a reminder policy
at some point in the past. Table 8 presents Treatment-on-Treated (ToT) estimates, using random-
ized treatment status as an instrument for participation in the information session.29 The outcome
variable is a dummy equal to one if the respondent reports that the carefully-described policy is
used in their municipality and zero otherwise. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality
level. In Column 1, the ToT coefficient is 10.3 percentage points (s.e.=5.3 percentage points), com-
pared to a base of 31.7 percentage points in the control group. Adding controls in Column 2 leaves
the point estimate largely unchanged. Column 3 drops respondents who failed an attention check,
again leaving the coefficient unchanged.30 Most importantly, the point estimates are very similar if
we restrict attention to responses from mayors (Column 4) or tax department officials (Column 5).
Given that we have little concern about tax department officials misreporting details of tax com-
pliance policies differentially between treatment and control groups, this increases our confidence
that the effects we estimate are not driven by reporting biases.
       Appendix Tables A.7 and A.8 investigate heterogeneity in treatment effects by mayor's and mu-
nicipal characteristics. We find suggestive evidence that leftist mayors respond more to receiving
research information, but the estimates are not precise enough for statistical significance. We have
little evidence for heterogeneity by term-limits for mayors, population size of municipality, and
measures of municipal government human capital. Appendix Table A.9 reports effects separately
for the different design components of taxpayer reminder letters, and shows that the effects are
fairly similar on the probability of using letters emphasizing the due date, mentioning the threat
of audits/penalties, and mentioning social norm language, although the latter is a larger effect in
relative terms, since it is particularly unlikely to be used in the control municipalities. Finally, Ap-
pendix Table A.10 reports no effects on a placebo question (the use of e-procurement in municipal
government), and reports no effects on the use of financial incentives for compliance with taxes--a
common policy which might conceivably have been seen as a substitute for the reminder-letters
policy.
       Beliefs. We also measured beliefs about the effectiveness of reminder letters, which--especially
given the evidence presented in Section 3--we consider a plausible mechanism through which
the ultimate impact on policy adoption may arise. We asked respondents about the likely effect
of the policy in their municipality, whether or not the policy was currently implemented. We
compare their stated beliefs with the estimated effect sizes shared with participating mayors in
  29
    Appendix Table A.6 presents the Intent-to-Treat estimates.
  30
    The attention check was: "The tax reminders sent informed taxpayers that the Brazilian constitution was reformed
in 1988". Since we consider this exceedingly unlikely as text for a tax reminder, we infer that respondents who answer
`yes' to this question are simply not paying attention or following the questions.



                                                         22
the research information session and policy briefs provided.31 Appendix Table A.11 reports that
beliefs are more accurate in the treatment group even 15-24 months after treatment. Specifically,
the absolute deviation of beliefs from the effect sizes mentioned in the research information session
is 20 percent lower than in the control group. The fact that the beliefs are more accurate not just
among mayors, but also among tax-department bureaucrats, implies information-flow within the
municipal government, perhaps made easier by providing the participants with shareable policy
briefs.


4.6     Policy-adoption experiment: discussion

This experiment has one simple but important result: when political leaders in Brazil are provided
information from research on the impact of a cost-effective policy, they change the actual policies
in use in their polities. This implies that, consistent with the findings from our demand/beliefs
experiment, policy-makers are open to new evidence; care about policy effectiveness; and have at
least some capacity and desire to translate evidence into policy change.
      Two caveats to this interpretation are worth noting. First, we cannot rule out that the estimated
effects are driven in part by mayors simply learning of the existence of taxpayer reminder poli-
cies, rather than due to the quantitative estimates of their impact from research. As noted above,
however, taxpayer reminder policies are far from unknown in Brazil, with about a third of mu-
nicipalities already using some form of such reminders. Moreover, we found evidence of more
accurate beliefs in the treatment group. Thus, it seems unlikely that the impact on policy adop-
tion would have been the same if we had merely described the policy. Second, we considered
a policy that is inexpensive and relatively easy to implement. Other effective policies may have
higher up-front costs, be more technically demanding, or be more politically sensitive, in which
case changing beliefs about effectiveness may not as readily translate into policy change. On the
other hand, our policy adoption experiment also does not capture the numerous, less direct chan-
nels through which research may ultimately influence policy practice.


5     Conclusion
Policy is important for economic development. What role can policy-effectiveness research play in
spurring the spread of effective policies and the abandonment of ineffective ones? One possibility
is that lack of (access to) research information is not a binding constraint on policy choice, for
example because political leaders are self-interested and electoral competitive pressures too weak
to motivate the effort required to change policy, or because leaders have limited real power over the
policies in use. Alternatively, frictions may constrain political leaders' access to existing research.
  31
     Mayors were informed that the estimated effect sizes found in the existing research studies were 10 percent, 12
percent, and 20 percent, depending on the variants of the policy (i.e. tax payment due dates, risk of audits/penalties,
and social norms regarding paying taxes).




                                                          23
    In this paper, we investigate how informing political leaders about research findings affects pol-
icy beliefs and practice. Using experiments with the elected heads of Brazil's local governments--
mayors--we first show that political leaders value access to impact evaluations, and update their
beliefs when informed of the research findings. Mayors (and other local policy-makers in our sam-
ple) appear to be fairly sophisticated consumers of accessible research, for example paying more
for studies--such as those with a large sample size--that subsequently affect their beliefs more.
In the second half of the paper, we show that providing mayors with research findings document-
ing positive impact of an inexpensive and easy-to-implement policy increases the probability that
their municipality implements the policy by 10 percentage points. Making research information
directly and easily available to policy-makers therefore appears to influence policy. This suggests
that information frictions may play an important role in explaining failures to adopt effective poli-
cies.
    It is arguably surprising that such information frictions persist. After all, even if political lead-
ers themselves do not read academic journals, information frictions should generate incentives for
actors interested in enhancing social welfare to access academic research and connect policy re-
search with practice to eliminate these frictions. Empirically, the reach of think tanks and other or-
ganizations that institutionalize and scale up transmission of research findings to political leaders
still appears limited in developing countries. We hope that future research will expand our under-
standing of how research's impact on policy practice can be better understood and enhanced.




                                                   24
References
A KHTARI , M ITRA , M OREIRA , D IANA , & T RUCCO , L AURA. 2018. Political turnover, bureaucratic
  turnover and the quality of public services. Mimeo.

ATTANASIO , O RAZIO P, F ERNÁNDEZ , C AMILA , F ITZSIMONS , E MLA OA, G RANTHAM -
  M C G REGOR , S ALLY M, M EGHIR , C OSTAS , & R UBIO -C ODINA , M ARTA. 2014. Using the in-
  frastructure of a conditional cash transfer program to deliver a scalable integrated early child
  development program in Colombia: cluster randomized controlled trial. Bmj, 349, g5785.

B AEKGAARD , M ARTIN , C HRISTENSEN , J ULIAN , D AHLMANN , C ASPER M ONDRUP, M ATHIASEN ,
  A SBJØRN , & P ETERSEN , N IELS B JØRN G RUND. 2017. The role of evidence in politics: Motivated
  reasoning and persuasion among politicians. British Journal of Political Science, 08, 1­24.

B ANURI , S HEHERYAR , D ERCON , S TEFAN , & G AURI , VARUN. 2017. Biased policy professionals. Policy
  Research Working Paper Series 8113, The World Bank.

B ARNETT, W S TEVEN. 2011. Effectiveness of early educational intervention. Science, 333(6045),
  975­978.

B EAMAN , L ORI , D UFLO , E STHER , PANDE , R OHINI , & T OPALOVA , P ETIA. 2012. Female leadership
  raises aspirations and educational attainment for girls: A policy experiment in India. Science,
  335(6068), 582­586.

B ENJAMIN , D ANIEL J. 2018. Errors in probabilistic reasoning and judgment biases. NBER Working
  Paper No. 25200.

B ERTRAND , M ARIANNE , B URGESS , R OBIN , C HAWLA , A RUNISH , & X U , G UO. forthcoming. The
  glittering prizes: Career incentives and bureaucrat performance. Review of Economics Studies.

B ESLEY, T., M ONTALVO , J. G., & R EYNAL -Q UEROL , M. 2011. Do educated leaders matter? Eco-
  nomic Journal, 121(554), F205­227.

B EST, M ICHAEL C ARLOS , H JORT, J ONAS , & S ZAKONYI , D AVID. 2018. Individuals and organizations
  as sources of state effectiveness, and consequences for policy design. NBER Working Paper No. 23350.

B EYNON , P ENELOPE , C HAPOY, C HRISTELLE , G AARDER , M ARIE , & M ASSET, E DOARDO. 2012.
  What difference does a policy brief make? Mimeo 3ie.

B IDWELL , K ELLY, C ASEY, K ATHERINE , & G LENNERSTER , R ACHEL. 2019. Debates: Voting and ex-
  penditure responses to political communication. Stanford University GSB Working Paper No. 3066.

B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , E IFERT, B ENN , M C K ENZIE , D AVID , M AHAJAN , A PRAJIT, & R OBERTS , J OHN.
  2013. Does management matter: evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1),
  1­51.


                                                  25
C ASTRO , L UCIO , & S CARTASCINI , C ARLOS. 2015. Tax compliance and enforcement in the Pampas
  evidence from a field experiment. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 116, 65­82.

C HATTOPADHYAY, R AGHABENDRA , & D UFLO , E STHER. 2004. Women as policy makers: Evidence
  from a randomized policy experiment in India. Econometrica, 72(5), 1409­1443.

C HEN , D ANIEL L, M OSKOWITZ , T OBIAS J, & S HUE , K ELLY. 2016. Decision making under the
  gambler's fallacy: Evidence from asylum judges, loan officers, and baseball umpires. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 131(3), 1181­1242.

C HETTY, R AJ , & S AEZ , E MMANUEL. 2013. Teaching the tax code: Earnings responses to an exper-
  iment with EITC recipients. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1), 1­31.

C OLEMAN , S TEPHEN. 1996. The Minnesota income tax compliance experiment: State tax results.

D E C ESARE , C LAUDIO , & S MOLKA , M ARTIM. 2004. Diagnóstico sobre o IPTU. Tech. rept. Lincoln
  Institute of Land Policy.

D EL C ARPIO , L UCIA. 2013. Are the neighbors cheating? Evidence from a social norm experiment
  on property taxes in Peru. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Working Paper.

D ELLAV IGNA , S TEFANO , & P OPE , D EVIN. 2018. Predicting experimental results: Who knows
  what? Journal of Political Economy, 126(6), 2410­2456.

D IZON -R OSS , R EBECCA. 2018. Parents' beliefs about their children's academic ability: Implications for
  educational investments. NBER Working Paper No. 24610.

D UFLO , E STHER , G REENSTONE , M ICHAEL , PANDE , R OHINI , & RYAN , N ICHOLAS. 2013. Truth-
  telling by third-party auditors and the response of polluting firms: Experimental evidence from
  India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1499­1545.

D UFLO , E STHER , G REENSTONE , M ICHAEL , PANDE , R OHINI , & RYAN , N ICHOLAS. 2018. The value
  of discretion in the enforcement of regulation: Experimental evidence and structural estimates
  from environmental inspections in India. Econometrica, 86(6), 2123­2160.

E ASTERLY, W ILLIAM , & P ENNINGS , S TEVEN. 2017. Shrinking dictators: how much economic growth
  can we attribute to national leaders? DRI Working Paper No. 94.

F ELLNER , G ERLINDE , S AUSGRUBER , R UPERT, & T RAXLER , C HRISTIAN. 2013. Testing enforcement
  strategies in the field: Threat, moral appeal and social information. Journal of the European Eco-
  nomic Association, 11(3), 634­660.

F INAN , F REDERICO , O LKEN , B ENJAMIN A., & PANDE , R OHINI. 2017. The personnel economics
  of the developing state. In: B ANERJEE , A BHIJIT, & D UFLO , E STHER (eds), Handbook of Field
  Experiments, Volume II. North Holland.


                                                   26
F UJIWARA , T HOMAS , & WANTCHEKON , L EONARD. 2013. Can informed public deliberation over-
  come clientelism? Experimental evidence from Benin. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 5(4), 241­255.

G RANTHAM -M C G REGOR , S ALLY M, P OWELL , C HRISTINE A, WALKER , S USAN P, & H IMES ,
  J OHN H. 1991. Nutritional supplementation, psychosocial stimulation, and mental development
  of stunted children: the Jamaican Study. Lancet, 338(8758), 1­5.

G RIGORIEFF , A LEXIS , R OTH , C HRISTOPHER , & U BFAL , D IEGO. 2016. Does information change atti-
  tudes towards immigrants? representative evidence from survey experiments. IZA DP No. 10419.

H AALAND , I NGAR , & R OTH , C HRISTOPHER. 2019. Labor market concerns and support for immigra-
  tion.

H ALLSWORTH , M ICHAEL , L IST, J OHN A, M ETCALFE , R OBERT D, & V LAEV, I VO. 2017. The be-
  havioralist as tax collector: Using natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Journal
  of Public Economics, 148, 14­31.

H ASSELDINE , J OHN , H ITE , P EGGY, J AMES , S IMON , & T OUMI , M ARIKA. 2007. Persuasive commu-
  nications: Tax compliance enforcement strategies for sole proprietors. Contemporary Accounting
  Research, 24(1), 171­194.

H OFFMANN , V IVIAN , J AKIELA , PAMELA , K REMER , M ICHAEL , S HEELY, RYAN , & G OODKIN -
  G OLD , M ATTHEW. 2017. There is no place like home: Theory and evidence on decentralization and
  politician preferences. Mimeo IFPRI.

J ENSEN , R OBERT. 2010. The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 515­548.

J ONES , B ENJAMIN F., & O LKEN , B ENJAMIN A. 2005. Do leaders matter? National leadership and
  growth since World War II. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 835­864.

K AHAN , D AN M. 2016. The politically motivated reasoning paradigm, part 1: What politically mo-
  tivated reasoning is and how to measure it. Emerging Trends in the Social and Behavioral Sciences,
  1­16.

K HAN , A DNAN , K HWAJA , A SIM , & O LKEN , B EN. 2016. Tax farming redux: Experimental evidence
  on performance pay for tax collectors. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(1), 219­271.

K HAN , A DNAN , K HWAJA , A SIM , & O LKEN , B EN. 2019. Making moves matter: Experimental
  evidence on incentivizing bureaucrats through performance-based postings. American Economic
  Review, 109(1), 237­270.

K LING , J EFFREY, M ULLAINATHAN , S ENDHIL , S HAFFIR , E LDAR , V ERMEULEN , L EE , & W ROBEL ,
  M ARIAN V. 2012. Comparison friction: Experimental evidence from medicare drug plans. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 199­235.

                                                 27
K UHN , D EANNA , & L AO , J OSEPH. 1996. Effects of evidence on attitudes: Is polarization the norm?
  Psychological Science, 7(2), 115­120.

L ORD , C HARLES G, R OSS , L EE , & L EPPER , M ARK R. 1979. Biased assimilation and attitude polar-
  ization: The effects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality
  and Social Psychology, 37(11), 2098.

M ALMENDIER , U LRIKE , N AGEL , S TEFAN , & YAN , Z HEN. 2017. The making of Hawks and Doves:
  Inflation experiences on the FOMC. NBER Working Paper No. 23228.

M ARTINEZ -B RAVO , M ONICA. 2014. The role of local officials in new democracies: Evidence from
  Indonesia. American Economic Review, 104(4), 1244­1287.

M ARTINEZ -B RAVO , M ONICA. 2017. The local political economy effects of school construction in
  Indonesia. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(2), 256­289.

M ULAS -G RANADOS , C ARLOS. 2017. How to fix the fiscal crisis in Brazil's states. Tech. rept. Interna-
  tional Monetary Fund.

N ATH , A NUSHA. 2015. Bureaucrats and politicians: How does electoral competition affect bureaucratic
  performance? IED Working Paper 269, Boston University.

N ELLIS , G ARETH , D UNNING , T HAD , G ROSSMAN , G UY, H UMPHREYS , M ACARTAN , H YDE , S U -
  SAN   D., M C I NTOSH , C RAIG , & R EARDON , C ATLAN. 2019. Learning about cumulative learning:
  An experiment with policy practitioners.

N ICKERSON , R AYMOND S. 1998. Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises.
  Review of General Psychology, 2(2), 175­220.

N YHAN , B RENDAN , & R EIFLER , J ASON. 2010. When corrections fail: The persistence of political
  misperceptions. Political Behavior, 32(2), 303­330.

P ERSSON , T ORSTEN , & TABELLINI , G UIDO E NRICO. 2002. Political economics: explaining economic
  policy. 1 edn. Vol. 1. The MIT press.

P UMA , M ICHAEL , B ELL , S TEPHEN , C OOK , R ONNA , H EID , C AMILLA , S HAPIRO , G ARY, B ROENE ,
  PAM , J ENKINS , F RANK , F LETCHER , P HILIP, Q UINN , L IZ , F RIEDMAN , J ANET, et al. 2010. Head
  Start impact study. Final report. Tech. rept. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
  Administration for Children & Families.

R ASUL , I MRAN , & R OGGER , D ANIEL. 2018. Management of bureaucrats and public service deliv-
  ery: Evidence from the Nigerian civil service. Economic Journal, 128(608), 413­446.

V IVALT, E VA , & C OVILLE , A IDAN. 2019. How do policymakers update?




                                                  28
WALKER , S USAN P, C HANG , S USAN M, P OWELL , C HRISTINE A, & G RANTHAM -M C G REGOR ,
  S ALLY M. 2005. Effects of early childhood psychosocial stimulation and nutritional supple-
  mentation on cognition and education in growth-stunted Jamaican children: prospective cohort
  study. Lancet, 366(9499), 1804­1807.

W OOD , T HOMAS , & P ORTER , E THAN. 2019. The elusive backfire effect: Mass attitudes' steadfast
  factual adherence. Political Behavior, 41(1), 135­163.

X U , G UO. 2018. The costs of patronage: Evidence from the British Empire. American Economic
  Review, 108(11), 3170­3198.

YAO , YANG , & Z HANG , M UYANG J. 2015. Subnational leaders and economic growth: evidence
  from Chinese cities. Journal of Economic Growth, 20(4), 405­436.




                                                  29
      TABLE 1: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
         S UMMARY STATS AND BALANCE


VARIABLES                 Mean Control        Developing          Large

Mayors' Characteristics
Male                           87.87             -1.3211        -4.0462***
Age                            48.45             -0.0997          -0.4731
College                        58.43             2.7315           0.0545
2nd Term                       19.97             0.3243           -0.1866
Leftist Political Party        37.57             -1.0846          1.7034

Municipalities' Characteristics
Population                     24.39              1.4364          1.2248
College Population            484.73              -7.6688         1.7868
Public Adm College             33.11             -0.9649*         -0.8442
Poverty                        26.62              0.4999          0.4229
Gini                           49.91              0.4802*         0.4444
Big South                      49.26              -0.8158         -1.1354
Per Capita Income               0.45              -0.0280         -0.0177
Kids in School (0-3)           19.24            -1.0415**         0.0754
Kids in School (4-5)           78.68              -0.4169         0.1541

ECD Policy Survey Characteristics
Mayor                      50.59                 -0.2295          -1.4094
Prof Politician            29.88                 0.7786           -0.4208
Leftist Scale              21.89                 -2.4781          -1.9016
Implemented ECD            41.86                 0.3214           -3.1046
Heard ECD                  25.74                 -0.7741          -0.0720

Observations                    676               1,371           1,371
Round                         1 and 2            1 and 2         1 and 2
Clusters                        676                766             766
Notes: OLS results. Sample mean of control observations. Control ob-
servations are those for which dummy developing and dummy large are
equal to zero, where dummy developing is equal to one for Jamaica and
Colombia, and dummy large is equal to one for Colombia and US. Each
cell reports the estimated coefficient of a regression of each characteris-
tic on a dummy which is equal to one for Jamaica and Colombia and
zero otherwise (Developing), and on a dummy which is equal to one
for Colombia and US and zero otherwise (Large). Male-Leftist Politi-
cal Party (1/0, mayors belonging to a center-leftist party according to
historical political platforms), are characteristics of the mayor that runs
the municipality. Population indicates municipality number of inhab-
itants (in thousands). College Population indicates municipality share
of adults with college degrees. Public Administration College indicates
the share of municipal public employees with college degrees. Poverty
refers to municipalities' poverty rate. Gini refers to the Gini coefficient
of municipality. Big South indicates the share of municipalities from the
south, southeast and mid-west regions; and 0 are north and northeast
regions. Per Capita Income indicates municipality monthly income per
capita. Kids in School (0-3) indicates municipality share of kids 0-3 years
old that attend pre-school education. Kids in School (4-5) indicates mu-
nicipality share of kids 4-5 years old that attend pre-school education.
Mayor-Heard ECD are characteristics self-reported by participants in the
survey experiment. Professional Politician indicates whether the partic-
ipant occupied an elective position in the previous term. Leftist Scale
indicates whether the participant self-identified as leftist (0-4) on a 0-10
scale. Implemented ECD indicates whether the participant reported the
municipality implemented a ECD program before. Heard ECD indicates
whether the participant reported that he/she had heard about ECD pro-
grams before. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


                                    30
     TABLE 2: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
W ILLINGNESS TO PAY BY STUDY CHARACTERISTICS


                         (1)          (2)          (3)
     LHS Variable       WTP          WTP          WTP

     Large            3.7704***      2.3414     4.3478***
                       (0.7908)     (2.3956)     (1.0160)
     Developing         0.3332       1.5766       -0.3308
                       (0.7902)     (2.3964)     (1.0038)

     Observations       2,578         766         1,812
     Round             1 and 2         1            2
     Clusters            766          766          605
     Mean LHS           44.73        48.52        43.12
     SD LHS             31.84        33.12        31.15
     Notes: OLS results. The dependent variable is will-
     ingness to pay, which is elicited in two different
     rounds. Developing is a dummy which is equal to one
     for Jamaica and Colombia and zero otherwise. Large
     is a dummy which is equal to one for Colombia and
     US and zero otherwise. Difference in number of clus-
     ters between columns 2 and 3 is due to a different ex-
     perimental design of last CNM conference, in which
     only one study was offered for purchase. Mean LHS is
     the mean WTP on the left-hand side of each equation.
     SD LHS is the standard deviation of WTP on the left-
     hand side of each equation. Robust standard errors
     clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. *
     p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. P-value of Large
     (column 2) = Large (column 3) test is .496. P-value of
     Developing (column 2) = Developing (column 3) test
     is .516.




                               31
                      TABLE 3: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                                 B ELIEF UPDATING


                        (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)
LHS Variable         Posterior         Posterior         Posterior         Posterior          Posterior

Prior                0.6850***         0.5906***         0.8066***         0.5512***           0.6845***
                      (0.0221)          (0.0295)          (0.0248)          (0.0302)            (0.0247)
Signal               0.3190***         0.3729***         0.2476***         0.4166***           0.3214***
                      (0.0199)          (0.0261)          (0.0241)          (0.0301)            (0.0223)

Observations          1,188            702               486                544                 929
Round                1 and 2            1                 2                   1               1 and 2
Beliefs About      Municipality     Municipality      Municipality      Random Study        Municipality
BDM Price = 0          No              No                No                  No                 Yes
Clusters               702             702               486                544                 529
Notes: OLS results. The dependent variables are posterior beliefs, which are declared after successfully
buying the results from a study in each round. Prior is the belief of the respondent about the effect, right
before buying some study. Signal is the bought study's effect size. When dealing with a second update in
posteriors, the first update is treated as a prior. Difference in clusters between columns 2 and 3 is due in
part to a different experimental design of last CNM conference, in which only one study was offered for
purchase. Beliefs About specifies which location the beliefs are elicited for, either the respondent's own
municipality (columns 1, 2, 3, and 5) or one of the four possible study locations (column 4). BDM Price =
0 indicates whether participant received the information regardless of their WTP. Robust standard errors
clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                    32
                        TABLE 4: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
   B ELIEF UPDATING : W EIGHT PLACED ON LARGE - SAMPLE AND DEVELOPING - COUNTRY
                                                         STUDIES



                                             (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)
LHS Variable                              Posterior        Posterior         Posterior         Posterior          Posterior

Prior                                     0.6434***         0.5600***        0.7715***         0.6685***          0.6701***
                                           (0.0374)          (0.0531)         (0.0477)          (0.0543)          (0.0408)
Signal                                    0.3200***         0.3738***        0.2409***         0.3351***          0.3018***
                                           (0.0287)          (0.0398)         (0.0386)          (0.0429)          (0.0320)
Prior*Developing                           -0.0161           -0.0255          -0.0269           -0.0920            -0.0154
                                           (0.0401)          (0.0599)         (0.0501)          (0.0574)          (0.0451)
Signal*Developing                           0.0231            0.0128           0.0487            0.0682             0.0350
                                           (0.0356)          (0.0516)         (0.0488)          (0.0578)          (0.0390)
Prior*Large                                -0.0567           -0.0896          -0.0373           -0.0558           -0.0998*
                                           (0.0492)          (0.0689)         (0.0633)          (0.0713)          (0.0543)
Signal*Large                              0.3377***         0.4072***        0.2736***         0.2729**           0.3880***
                                           (0.0736)          (0.0959)         (0.1035)          (0.1170)          (0.0845)

Observations                               1,188            702              486                 544                929
Round                                     1 and 2            1                2                   1               1 and 2
Beliefs About                           Municipality     Municipality     Municipality      Random Study        Municipality
BDM Price = 0                               No              No               No                  No                 Yes
Clusters                                    702             702              486                 544                529
P-value Prior*Dev.=Signal*Dev.             0.582           0.717            0.419               0.142              0.525
P-value Prior*Large=Signal*Large           0.001           0.002            0.051               0.071              0.000
Notes: OLS results. The dependent variables are posterior beliefs, which are declared after successfully buying the results from
a study in each round. Prior is the belief of the respondent about the effect, right before buying some study. Signal is the
bought study's effect size. When dealing with a second update in posteriors, the first update is treated as a prior. Developing
is a dummy which is equal to one for Jamaica and Colombia and zero otherwise. Large is a dummy which is equal to one for
Colombia and US and zero otherwise. Difference in clusters between columns 2 and 3 is due in part to a different experimental
design of last CNM conference, in which only one study was offered for purchase. Beliefs About specifies which location the
beliefs are elicited for, either the respondent's own municipality (columns 1, 2, 3, and 5) or one of the four possible study
locations (column 4). BDM Price = 0 indicates whether participant received the information regardless of their WTP. Robust
standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                              33
                                                                      TABLE 5: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                                                           T ESTING FOR A SYMMETRIC U PDATING AND C ONFIRMATION B IAS


                                                                                       (1)                (2)                     (3)                 (4)                (5)                    (6)                           (7)
     Priors                                                                       Full Sample      Above the Median        Below the Median       Top Quartile     Bottom Quartile      Above/Below Median            Top/Bottom Quartile

     LHS Variable                                                                   Posterior            Posterior              Posterior           Posterior          Posterior                Posterior                    Posterior

     Prior                                                                          1.0196***            0.9885***              1.1833***           0.9871***          1.2293***                1.0167***                    1.0128***
                                                                                     (0.0218)             (0.0250)               (0.0612)            (0.0280)           (0.0859)                 (0.0158)                     (0.0187)
     Signal-Prior                                                                   0.3489***            0.3104***                -0.0306           0.3106***            -0.4659                0.3369***                    0.3440***
                                                                                     (0.0522)             (0.0573)               (0.3009)            (0.0609)           (0.7954)                 (0.0257)                     (0.0288)
     Signal-Prior * Positive Surprise                                                 -0.0406              0.0025                  0.2889             -0.0199            0.7351
                                                                                     (0.0690)             (0.1051)               (0.3215)            (0.1271)           (0.8146)
     Signal-Prior * Confirming News                                                                                                                                                              -0.0939                      -0.1052
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.0620)                     (0.0823)

     Observations                                                                     929                 548                     381                 440                276                      929                          716
     Round                                                                          1 and 2             1 and 2                 1 and 2             1 and 2            1 and 2                  1 and 2                      1 and 2
     Beliefs About                                                                Municipality        Municipality            Municipality        Municipality       Municipality             Municipality                 Municipality
     BDM Price = 0                                                                    Yes                 Yes                     Yes                 Yes                Yes                      Yes                          Yes
     Clusters                                                                         529                 375                     278                 316                211                      529                          459
     P-value (Signal-Prior)=Positive Surprise (Above vs Below Median)                                                           0.3963
     P-value (Signal-Prior)=Positive Surprise (Top vs Bottom Quartile)                                                                                                   0.3573
34




     Notes: OLS results. The dependent variables are posterior beliefs, which are declared after successfully buying the results from a study in each round. Prior is the belief of the respondent about the effect, right before buying some
     study. Signal is the bought study's effect size. When dealing with a second update in posteriors, the first update is treated as a prior. Positive Surprise is a dummy which is equal to one if the bought study's effect is greater than
     the respondent's prior about the effect. Confirming News is a dummy which is equal to one if the respondent's prior about the effect was above the median/top quartile (below the median/bottom quartile) and the bought study's
     effect is greater (smaller) than the respondent's prior. Beliefs About specifies which location the beliefs are elicited for, either the respondent's own municipality or one of the four possible study locations. BDM Price = 0 indicates
     whether participant received the information regardless of their WTP. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
                                         TABLE 6: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                                                   PARTISAN SUPPORT


                                                                        (1)         (2)            (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
Political View                                                          Any         Any            Left             Right              Any               Any

LHS Variable                                                            Prior       WTP         Posterior         Posterior         Posterior         Posterior

Partisan Message                                                       -0.0215     -1.7860
                                                                      (0.0273)    (4.1797)
Leftist                                                                -0.0433     -6.9875
                                                                      (0.0411)    (6.1908)
Partisan Message*Leftist                                                0.0775    10.6305
                                                                      (0.0609)    (8.6526)
Prior                                                                                           0.9418***         1.0487***         1.0271***         1.0034***
                                                                                                 (0.0721)          (0.0381)          (0.0344)          (0.0282)
Signal-Prior                                                                                      0.2723          0.4572***         0.4134***         0.3055***
                                                                                                 (0.1764)          (0.0992)          (0.0874)          (0.0411)
Signal-Prior * Positive Surprise                                                                  0.1478          -0.2038*           -0.1287
                                                                                                 (0.2282)          (0.1222)          (0.1065)
Signal-Prior * Positive Surprise * Partisan Message                                               -0.0356           0.0491
                                                                                                 (0.1555)          (0.0822)
Signal-Prior * Positive Surprise * Leftist                                                                                            0.0918
                                                                                                                                     (0.1309)
Signal-Prior * Positive Surprise * Leftist * Partisan Message                                                                        -0.0404
                                                                                                                                     (0.1535)
Signal-Prior * Partisan-Preferred Signal                                                                                                               0.1671*
                                                                                                                                                       (0.0895)
Signal-Prior * Partisan-Preferred Signal * Partisan Message                                                                                             -0.1564
                                                                                                                                                       (0.1057)

Observations                                                             312         881           71               232               303               303
Round                                                                     1        1 and 2      1 and 2           1 and 2           1 and 2           1 and 2
Beliefs About                                                                                 Municipality      Municipality      Municipality      Municipality
BDM Price = 0                                                                                     Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Clusters                                                                 312         341           40               128               168               168
Mean LHS                                                                0.388       49.25
Notes: OLS results. In column 1, the dependent variable is respondents' priors. In column 2, the dependent variable is willingness to pay for studies.
In columns 3-6, the dependent variable is posterior beliefs, which are declared after successfully buying the results from a study in each round. Partisan
Message is a dummy variable which takes the value of 1 if the respondent received a message linking early childhood education policies to a leftist party
in Brazil. Leftist is a dummy which is equal to one if the participant self-identified as leftist (0-4) on a 0-10 scale. Prior is the belief of the respondent about
the effect, right before buying some study. Signal is the bought study's effect size. When dealing with a second update in posteriors, the first update is
treated as a prior. Beliefs About specifies which location the beliefs are elicited for, either the respondent's own municipality or one of the four possible
study locations. BDM Price = 0 indicates whether participant received the information regardless of their WTP. Mean LHS is the average of the left-hand
side variable of each equation. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                          35
                         TABLE 7: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
                             S UMMARY STATS AND BALANCE


                                                at Baseline                        at Endline
VARIABLES                            Mean Control        Treatment      Mean Control        Treatment

Mayors' Characteristics
Male                                      88.26              1.41            90.01             -0.14
Age                                       46.76            1.32***           47.08            1.61***
College                                   57.74             -0.76            57.66             0.73
2nd Term                                  15.69              1.56            15.18             0.91
Leftist Political Party                   32.98              2.10            32.76             1.36

Municipalities' Characteristics
Population                                 20.86              -0.06           20.23             0.06
College Population                          5.17              -0.15            5.47             -0.14
Public Adm College                         32.60               0.84           33.51             -0.01
Poverty                                    26.41              -0.27           23.05             0.11
Gini                                       50.33              -0.19           49.37             0.17
Big South                                  51.01              -0.62           59.92             -2.36
Per Capita Income                         457.64               3.42          489.23             2.78
Local Taxes Revenues (2010-15)              6.06               0.09            6.40             0.08

Joint F-test (p-value)                                        0.18                              0.17

Follow-Up Survey Response Rate
Municipality                                                                 80.15              1.69
Mayor                                                                        51.65              -2.28
Finance Staff                                                                75.03              0.80
Notes: Sample means by experimental group and differences in means between groups at baseline
and endline. There were 937 (751) municipalities in control group and 881 (721) in treatment group
at baseline (endline). Male-Leftist Political Party (1/0, mayors belonging to a center-leftist party ac-
cording to historical political platforms), are characteristics of the mayor that runs the municipality.
Population indicates municipality number of inhabitants (in thousands). College Population indicates
municipality share of adults with college degrees. Public Administration College indicates the share of
municipal public employees with college degrees. Poverty refers to municipalities' poverty rate. Gini
refers to the Gini coefficient of municipality. Big South indicates the share of municipalities from the
south, southeast and mid-west regions; and 0 are north and northeast regions. Per Capita Income indi-
cates municipality monthly income per capita. Local Tax Revenues (2010-2015) indicates the average
share of municipal tax revenues on total municipal revenues from 2010 to 2015. Joint significance F-
test p-value, and follow-up survey response rate--municipality, mayor and finance staff--at endline.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                   36
                    TABLE 8: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
                      P OLICY ADOPTION : TAX REMINDERS


                                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)
LHS Variable                    Adopted       Adopted      Adopted      Adopted         Adopted

Information Session              0.1031*      0.1073**      0.1011*       0.1148        0.1076*
                                 (0.0531)     (0.0522)      (0.0539)     (0.0776)       (0.0649)

Observations                      2,271         2,269        2,054         912           1,357
Respondent                         All           All          All         Mayor      Finance Staff
Attention Check                    No            No           Yes          No             No
Mayor Characteristics              No            Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Municipal Characteristics          No            Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Clusters (Municipalities)         1465          1464         1412          912           1357
Mean Control                      0.317         0.317        0.298        0.367          0.283
Notes: 2SLS estimation results. The dependent variable is a dummy which takes the value of
1 if respondent says the policy was adopted in municipality, and 0 otherwise. Information Ses-
sion is a dummy which takes the value of 1 if the municipality's mayor attended the informa-
tion session about tax reminders. This last variable is instrumented with treatment assignment.
Attention Check refers to whether respondents that answered positively to the attention check
component of the reminders policy are excluded from the model, where the attention check
was "The tax reminders sent informed taxpayers that the Brazilian constitution was reformed
in 1988"'. Mayors' characteristics included in the model are: Male (1/0); Age above-below me-
dian (1/0); College (1/0); 2nd Term (1/0) and Leftist Political Party (1/0, mayors belonging to
a center-leftist party according to historical political platforms). Municipalities' characteristics
included in the model are: Population above-below median (1/0); College Population above-
below median (1/0); College Public Administration employees above-below median (1/0);
Poverty above-below median (1/0); Gini above-below median (1/0); Big South (1/0, where
1 are south, southeast and mid-west regions; and 0 are north and northeast regions); monthly
Per Capita Income above-below median (1/0); Local Tax Revenues share above-below median
(1/0);. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parenthesis. * p < 0.1,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                 37
                     For Online Publication




      TABLE A.1: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                    P RIOR BELIEFS


Beliefs About           N     Mean       SD       Effect Size in Study

Own Municipality       900     0.40     (0.22)               -
123; Michigan          145     0.46     (0.22)             0.87
130; Jamaica           160     0.41     (0.20)             0.91
1420; Colombia         152     0.38     (0.19)             0.26
4667; USA              148     0.49     (0.21)             0.15
Notes: Sample mean and standard deviation of participants' priors. Be-
liefs About refers to the location about which the prior is asked. N indi-
cates the number of observations in each location, and the last column
reports the effect size described in the corresponding study.




                                   38
 TABLE A.2: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
W ILLINGNESS TO PAY: OTHER DETERMINANTS

                                          (1)      (2)        (3)         (4)
 LHS Variable                            WTP      WTP        WTP         WTP

 Mayors' Characteristics
 Male                                    6.63**                         6.34**
                                         (3.21)                         (3.19)
 Age                                     -1.43                          -1.63
                                         (2.11)                         (2.12)
 College                                  1.79                           3.14
                                         (2.16)                         (2.21)
 2nd Term                                 2.55                           2.89
                                         (2.58)                         (2.87)
 Leftist Political Party                  1.49                           0.93
                                         (2.13)                         (2.20)
 Municipalities' Characteristics
 Population                                         1.95                  1.29
                                                  (2.24)                (2.22)
 College Population                                -0.10                  0.00
                                                  (2.78)                (2.81)
 Public Adm College                                 1.66                  0.23
                                                  (2.30)                (2.31)
 Poverty                                            1.82                  0.56
                                                  (5.70)                (5.61)
 Gini                                              -0.91                 -0.70
                                                  (2.51)                (2.49)
 Big South                                          0.36                  2.23
                                                  (4.66)                (4.66)
 Per Capita Income                                 -0.74                 -0.91
                                                  (5.10)                (4.96)
 Kids in School (0-3)                               1.37                  0.87
                                                  (2.32)                (2.33)
 Kids in School (4-5)                               1.99                  1.95
                                                  (2.42)                (2.39)
 ECD Policy Survey Characteristics
 Mayor                                                      -0.89       -0.95
                                                            (2.08)      (2.16)
 Prof Politician                                            -0.69       -1.58
                                                            (2.34)      (2.47)
 Leftist Scale                                               0.51        0.13
                                                            (2.51)      (2.57)
 Implemented ECD                                           11.69***    11.90***
                                                            (2.39)      (2.50)
 Heard ECD                                                  6.82**      6.54**
                                                            (2.68)      (2.77)

 Observations                            2,578    2,578      2,578       2,578
 Clusters                                 766      766        766         766
 Mean LHS                                44.73    44.73      44.73       44.73
 Notes: OLS results. The dependent variable is willingness to pay, which is
 elicited in two different rounds. We expressed all continuous variables as
 indicators of above/below the median of the distribution of municipalities.
 Mayors' characteristics: Male (1/0); Age above-below median (1/0); Col-
 lege (1/0); 2nd term (1/0); Leftist Political Party (1/0, mayors belonging to
 a center-leftist party according to historical political platforms). Municipal-
 ities' characteristics: Population above-below median (1/0); College Pop-
 ulation above-below median (1/0); Public Administration College above-
 below median (1/0); Poverty above-below median (1/0); Gini above-below
 median (1/0); Big south (1/0, where 1 are south, southeast and mid-west
 regions; and 0 are north and northeast regions); Per Capita Income above-
 below median; Kids in School (0-3) above-below median (1/0) of the share
 of kids 0-3 years old that attend pre-school education; Kids in School (4-5)
 above-below median (1/0) of the share of kids 4-5 years old that attend pre-
 school education. ECD Policy Survey characteristics: Mayor (1/0); Profes-
 sional Politician (1/0); Leftist Scale (1/0); Implemented ECD (1/0) indicates
 whether the participant reported the municipality implemented a ECD pro-
 gram before; Heard ECD (1/0) indicates whether the participant reported
 that he/she had heard about ECD programs before. Mean LHS is the mean
 WTP on the left-hand side of each equation. Robust standard errors clus-
 tered at the individual level are in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
 p < 0.01

                                       39
                    TABLE A.3: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
B ELIEF UPDATING : LARGE - SAMPLE AND DEVELOPING - COUNTRY STUDIES - D IFFERENT
                                                 EFFECT SIZES


                                             (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)
    LHS Variable                          Posterior        Posterior         Posterior           Posterior

    Prior                                 0.5871***        0.4270***         0.7073***           0.5587***
                                           (0.0641)         (0.1160)          (0.0699)            (0.1026)
    Signal                                0.3274***        0.4087***         0.2647***           0.3677***
                                           (0.0412)         (0.0663)          (0.0507)            (0.0607)
    Prior*Developing                        0.0253           0.0574           -0.0135             -0.0606
                                           (0.0653)         (0.1096)          (0.0792)            (0.0948)
    Signal*Developing                       0.0142          -0.0069            0.0384              0.0511
                                           (0.0462)         (0.0747)          (0.0610)            (0.0752)
    Prior*Large                            -0.0328           0.0062           -0.0527              0.0834
                                           (0.0771)         (0.1325)          (0.0935)            (0.1217)
    Signal*Large                          0.3337***         0.2856*          0.4207**              0.1615
                                           (0.1133)         (0.1560)          (0.1634)            (0.1720)
    Prior*Long-run                          0.0839           0.1928            0.0717              0.1336
                                           (0.0859)         (0.1411)          (0.0954)            (0.1258)
    Signal*Long-run                         0.0097          -0.0537            0.0195             -0.0461
                                           (0.0675)         (0.1008)          (0.0831)            (0.0942)
    Prior*Developing*Long-run              -0.1258          -0.2390           -0.0788             -0.1214
                                           (0.0975)         (0.1549)          (0.1034)            (0.1299)
    Signal*Developing*Long-run              0.1480          0.2835*            0.0804             0.2361*
                                           (0.0939)         (0.1452)          (0.1076)            (0.1346)
    Prior*Large*Long-run                   -0.0193          -0.1345            0.1562             -0.1292
                                           (0.1140)         (0.1730)          (0.1246)            (0.1571)
    Signal*Large*Long-run                  -0.0442           0.1089          -0.4122*              0.0469
                                           (0.1750)         (0.2398)          (0.2127)            (0.2541)

    Observations                            929             493               436                 493
    Round                                 1 and 2            1                 2                   1
    Beliefs About                       Municipality     Municipality      Municipality       Random Study
    BDM Price = 0                           Yes             Yes               Yes                 Yes
    Clusters                                529             493               436                 493
    Notes: OLS results. The dependent variables is posterior beliefs, which are declared after successfully
    buying the results from a study in each round. Prior is the belief of the respondent about the effect, right
    before buying some study. Signal is the bought study's effect size. When dealing with a second update in
    posteriors, the first update is treated as a prior. Developing is a dummy which is equal to one for Jamaica
    and Colombia and zero otherwise. Large is a dummy which is equal to one for Colombia and US and
    zero otherwise. Beliefs About specifies which location the beliefs are elicited for, either the respondent's
    own municipality or one of the four possible study locations. BDM Price = 0 indicates whether participant
    received the information regardless of their WTP. Long-run is a dummy which is equal to one (zero) for
    the six (eight) conferences in which the informed effect sizes were assessed in adulthood for 0.38 (0.91) for
    Jamaica, 0.50 (0.87) for Michigan, or just continue to be assessed shortly after the intervention was over
    0.18 (0.15) for USA, 0.26 (0.26) for Colombia. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are
    in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                         40
           TABLE A.4: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
            VALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATION REPORT


                           (1)                            (2)
LHS Variable       Implementation Report          Implementation Report

Final Posterior           14.9885***                      47.6139**
                           (5.4457)                       (23.3722)

Observations                  685                           685
Instruments                                              Avg Signal
Clusters                      685                           685
Mean LHS                     59.68                         59.68
Notes: OLS (column 1) and 2SLS (column 2) results. Dependent variable is
willingness to pay for a policy implementation report. Final Posterior is the
value of the last updated belief, that being after buying one or two results.
Instrument is either the received signal or the average of the received signals
in the case the participant have bought two results. Mean LHS is the average
policy implementation report valuation on the left-hand side of each equa-
tion. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parenthe-
ses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                       41
            TABLE A.5: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
I NDIVIDUAL AND MUNICIPAL PREDICTORS OF SESSION PARTICIPATION


                                                   (1)                       (2)
     LHS Variable                          Information Session       Information Session

     Mayors' Characteristics
     Male                                          0.0168                   -0.0013
                                                  (0.0546)                  (0.0559)
     Age                                         -0.0713**                 -0.0776**
                                                  (0.0327)                  (0.0335)
     College                                     0.1551***                 0.1500***
                                                  (0.0327)                  (0.0333)
     2nd Term                                     -0.0051                   -0.0005
                                                  (0.0441)                  (0.0449)
     Leftist Political Party                       0.0327                    0.0402
                                                  (0.0345)                  (0.0350)
     Constant                                    0.3041***                 0.3532***
                                                  (0.0619)                  (0.1124)

     Observations                                     881                      878
     Municipal Characteristics                        No                       Yes
     R-Squared                                      0.0335                   0.0416

     Municipalities' Characteristics
     Population                                   -0.0079                   -0.0164
                                                  (0.0343)                  (0.0339)
     College Population                            0.0634                    0.0421
                                                  (0.0466)                  (0.0458)
     Public Adm College                           -0.0345                   -0.0372
                                                  (0.0339)                  (0.0335)
     Poverty                                      -0.1015                   -0.0739
                                                  (0.0903)                  (0.0928)
     Gini                                          0.0449                    0.0413
                                                  (0.0382)                  (0.0379)
     Big South                                     0.0258                    0.0597
                                                  (0.0662)                  (0.0661)
     Per Capita Income                            -0.0762                   -0.0642
                                                  (0.0839)                  (0.0855)
     Local Tax Revenues (2010-2015)               -0.0245                   -0.0119
                                                  (0.0459)                  (0.0451)
     Constant                                    0.4343***                 0.3532***
                                                  (0.0937)                  (0.1124)

     Observations                                     878                      878
     Individual Characteristics                       No                       Yes
     R-Squared                                      0.0084                   0.0416
     Notes: Linear probability results. Response variable is information session participa-
     tion and takes the value of 1 for mayors that attended the information session and 0
     otherwise. Mayors' characteristics included in the model are: Male (1/0); Age above-
     below median (1/0); College (1/0); 2nd Term (1/0) and Leftist Political Party (1/0,
     mayors belonging to a center-leftist party according to historical political platforms).
     Municipalities' characteristics included in the model are: Population above-below me-
     dian (1/0); College Population above-below median (1/0); College Public Administra-
     tion employees above-below median (1/0); Poverty above-below median (1/0); Gini
     above-below median (1/0); Big South (1/0, where 1 are south, southeast and mid-west
     regions; and 0 are north and northeast regions); monthly Per Capita Income above-
     below median (1/0); Local Tax Revenues share above-below median (1/0);. Robust
     standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parenthesis. * p < 0.1, **
     p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

                                               42
                  TABLE A.6: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
                   ITT P OLICY ADOPTION : TAX REMINDERS


                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)
LHS Variable                   Adopted      Adopted      Adopted      Adopted         Adopted

Treatment Assignment            0.0402*      0.0422**     0.0392*       0.0469        0.0412*
                                (0.0208)     (0.0206)     (0.0210)     (0.0321)       (0.0250)

Observations                     2,271        2,269        2,054        912            1,357
Respondent                        All          All          All        Mayor       Finance Staff
Attention Check                   No           No           Yes         No              No
Mayor Characteristics             No           Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes
Municipal Characteristics         No           Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes
Clusters (Municipalities)        1465         1464         1412         912            1357
Mean Control                     0.317        0.317        0.298       0.367           0.283
Notes: OLS estimation results. The dependent variable is a dummy which takes the value of 1
if respondent says the policy was adopted in municipality. Treatment Assignment is a dummy
which takes the value of 1 if the mayor was assigned to the treatment group. Attention Check
refers to whether those observations that answer positively to the attention check component of
the reminders policy are excluded from the model, where the attention check was "The tax re-
minders sent informed taxpayers that the Brazilian constitution was reformed in 1988". Mayors'
characteristics included in the model are: Male (1/0); Age above-below median (1/0); College
(1/0); 2nd Term (1/0) and Leftist Political Party (1/0, mayors belonging to a center-leftist party
according to historical political platforms). Municipalities' characteristics included in the model
are: Population above-below median (1/0); College Population above-below median (1/0); Col-
lege Public Administration employees above-below median (1/0); Poverty above-below median
(1/0); Gini above-below median (1/0); Big South (1/0, where 1 are south, southeast and mid-west
regions; and 0 are north and northeast regions); monthly Per Capita Income above-below median
(1/0); Local Tax Revenues share above-below median (1/0);. Robust standard errors clustered at
the municipality level are in parenthesis. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                43
            TABLE A.7: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
P OLICY ADOPTION : MAYORS ' HETEROGENEITIES ABOUT TAX REMINDERS


                                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)
LHS Variable                            Adopted      Adopted     Adopted      Adopted        Adopted

Characteristic                             Male          Age      College     2nd Term     Leftist Party

Information Session                      -0.0544     0.1515**      0.1481      0.1084*         0.0700
                                         (0.2007)    (0.0661)     (0.1051)     (0.0588)       (0.0691)
Information Session*Characteristic        0.1715     -0.1045      -0.0663      -0.0321         0.0913
                                         (0.2081)    (0.1076)     (0.1212)     (0.1373)       (0.1072)
Characteristic                            0.0077      0.0191       0.0081       0.0149        -0.0234
                                         (0.0483)    (0.0288)     (0.0293)     (0.0398)       (0.0301)

Observations                              2,271          2,271      2,271       2,271          2,271
Respondent                                 All            All        All         All            All
Attention Check                            No             No         No          No             No
Clusters (Municipalities)                 1465           1465       1465        1465           1465
Mean Control                              0.317          0.317      0.317       0.317          0.317
Notes: 2SLS estimation results. The dependent variable is a dummy which takes the value of 1 if re-
spondent says the policy was adopted in municipality. Information Session is a dummy which takes
the value of 1 if the municipality's mayor attended the information session about tax reminders. This
last variable is instrumented with treatment assignment. Attention Check refers to whether respondents
that answered positively to the attention check component of the reminders policy are excluded from
the model, where the attention check was "The tax reminders sent informed taxpayers that the Brazilian
constitution was reformed in 1988"'. Mayors' characteristics included as interactions are: Male (1/0);
Age above-below median (1/0); College (1/0); 2nd Term (1/0) and Leftist Political Party (1/0, mayors
belonging to a center-leftist party according to historical political platforms). Robust standard errors
clustered at the municipality level are in parenthesis. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                    44
                       TABLE A.8: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
       P OLICY ADOPTION : MUNICIPALITIES ' HETEROGENEITIES ABOUT TAX REMINDERS


                                            (1)             (2)                (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)
LHS Variable                              Adopted         Adopted            Adopted           Adopted      Adopted      Adopted       Adopted        Adopted

Characteristic                           Population     College Pop     PubAdm College         Poverty        Gini       Big South    Pc Income     Local Taxes

Information Session                        0.1289*          0.0836             0.1180          0.1266*      0.1709**       0.1001        0.0992         0.0705
                                           (0.0743)        (0.0749)           (0.0731)         (0.0740)     (0.0803)      (0.0877)      (0.0770)       (0.0754)
Information Session*Characteristic         -0.0515          0.0351            -0.0320           -0.0437      -0.1155       0.0130        0.0111         0.0557
                                           (0.1060)        (0.1061)           (0.1062)         (0.1057)     (0.1066)      (0.1099)      (0.1057)       (0.1060)
Characteristic                              0.0110          0.0434             0.0317         -0.0743***    -0.0555*     0.0855***     0.0903***        0.0314
                                           (0.0287)        (0.0287)           (0.0288)         (0.0286)     (0.0288)      (0.0294)      (0.0286)       (0.0288)

Observations                                2,271           2,271              2,271             2,271        2,271        2,271         2,271          2,269
Respondent                                   All             All                All               All          All          All           All            All
Attention Check                              No              No                 No                No           No           No            No             No
Clusters (Municipalities)                   1465            1465               1465              1465         1465         1465          1465           1464
Mean Control                                0.317           0.317              0.317             0.317        0.317        0.317         0.317          0.317
Notes: 2SLS estimation results. The dependent variable is a dummy which takes the value of 1 if respondent says the policy was adopted in municipality.
Information Session is a dummy which takes the value of 1 if the municipality's mayor attended the information session about tax reminders. This last variable
is instrumented with treatment assignment. Attention Check refers to whether respondents that answered positively to the attention check component of the
reminders policy are excluded from the model, where the attention check was "The tax reminders sent informed taxpayers that the Brazilian constitution was
reformed in 1988"'. Municipalities' characteristics included in the model are: Population above-below median (1/0); College Population above-below median
(1/0); College Public Administration employees above-below median (1/0); Poverty above-below median (1/0); Gini above-below median (1/0); Big South
(1/0, where 1 are south, southeast and mid-west regions; and 0 are north and northeast regions); monthly Per Capita Income above-below median (1/0); Local
Tax Revenues share above-below median (1/0);. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parenthesis. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                       45
             TABLE A.9: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
   P OLICY ADOPTION : TAX REMINDERS INFORMATION COMPONENTS


                                   (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)
LHS Variable                     On Time       Audit      Social Norm       Before Due        Letter

Information Session              0.1019**      0.0703       0.1048***         0.0881*        0.0853**
                                 (0.0518)     (0.0469)       (0.0370)         (0.0511)       (0.0408)

Observations                       2,269        2,269         2,269            2,269           2,269
Respondent                          All          All           All              All             All
Attention Check                     No           No            No               No              No
Mayor Characteristics               Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes
Municipal Characteristics           Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes
Clusters (Municipalities)          1464         1464          1464             1464            1464
Mean Control                       0.313        0.224         0.113            0.293           0.156
Notes: 2SLS estimation results. The dependent variable is a dummy which takes the value of 1
if respondent says the information component of the policy was adopted in municipality, and 0
otherwise. On Time refers to a reminder message highlighting the tax payment deadline. Au-
dit refers to a reminder message highlighting the risks of audits for not paying taxes on time.
Social Norm refers to a reminder message highlighting the social norm of paying taxes. Before
due refers to sending the reminder message before taxes' due date. Letter refers to sending the
reminder message using a hard copy letter. Information Session is a dummy which takes the
value of 1 if the municipality's mayor attended the information session about tax reminders.
This last variable is instrumented with treatment assignment. Attention Check refers to whether
respondents that answered positively to the attention check component of the reminders policy
are excluded from the model, where the attention check was "The tax reminders sent informed
taxpayers that the Brazilian constitution was reformed in 1988" Mayors' characteristics included
in the model are: Male (1/0); Age above-below median (1/0); College (1/0); 2nd Term (1/0) and
Leftist Political Party (1/0, mayors belonging to a center-leftist party according to historical politi-
cal platforms). Municipalities' characteristics included in the model are: Population above-below
median (1/0); College Population above-below median (1/0); College Public Administration em-
ployees above-below median (1/0); Poverty above-below median (1/0); Gini above-below me-
dian (1/0); Big South (1/0, where 1 are south, southeast and mid-west regions; and 0 are north
and northeast regions); monthly Per Capita Income above-below median (1/0); Local Tax Rev-
enues share above-below median (1/0);. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality
level are in parenthesis. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                  46
          TABLE A.10: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
P OLICY ADOPTION : FINANCIAL INCENTIVES AND E - PROCUREMENT


                                              (1)                     (2)
      LHS Variable                    Financial Incentives      E-procurement

      Information Session                     0.0077                 0.0254
                                             (0.0553)               (0.0643)

      Observations                             2,206                  1,694
      Respondent                                All                    All
      Attention Check                           No                     No
      Mayor Characteristics                     Yes                    Yes
      Municipal Characteristics                 Yes                    Yes
      Clusters (Municipalities)                1451                   1190
      Mean Control                             0.602                  0.449
      Notes: 2SLS estimation results. The dependent variable is a dummy
      which takes the value of 1 if respondent says the policy was adopted
      in municipality. Information Session is a dummy which takes the value
      of 1 if the municipality's mayor attended the information session about
      tax reminders. This last variable is instrumented with treatment assign-
      ment. Attention Check refers to whether respondents that answered
      positively to the attention check component of the reminders policy
      are excluded from the model, where the attention check was "The tax
      reminders sent informed taxpayers that the Brazilian constitution was
      reformed in 1988". Mayors' characteristics included in the model are:
      Male (1/0); Age above-below median (1/0); College (1/0); 2nd Term
      (1/0) and Leftist Political Party (1/0, mayors belonging to a center-leftist
      party according to historical political platforms). Municipalities' char-
      acteristics included in the model are: Population above-below median
      (1/0); College Population above-below median (1/0); College Public
      Administration employees above-below median (1/0); Poverty above-
      below median (1/0); Gini above-below median (1/0); Big South (1/0,
      where 1 are south, southeast and mid-west regions; and 0 are north
      and northeast regions); monthly Per Capita Income above-below me-
      dian (1/0); Local Tax Revenues share above-below median (1/0);. Ro-
      bust standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parenthe-
      sis. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                          47
                           TABLE A.11: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
              B ELIEFS AND CONFIDENCE : TAX REMINDERS AND FINANCIAL INCENTIVES


Panel A                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)                   (4)                       (5)                       (6)
LHS Variable                    | Belief-10% |      | Belief-10% |      | Belief-10% |        | Belief-10% |            | Belief-10% |            | Belief-10% |

Information Session                -1.6003**            -1.7238*           -1.5180*                0.1747                   -0.7834                   0.6749
                                    (0.6271)            (0.9202)           (0.7959)               (0.6287)                  (0.9431)                 (0.8018)

Mean Control                         6.775               6.824               6.742                  7.172                    6.857                     7.382
Panel B                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)                   (4)                       (5)                       (6)
LHS Variable                    | Belief-12% |      | Belief-12% |      | Belief-12% |        | Belief-12% |            | Belief-12% |            | Belief-12% |

Information Session                -1.3648***           -1.3052*           -1.4196**               0.3033                   -0.3511                   0.6387
                                    (0.5170)            (0.7322)            (0.6816)              (0.5239)                  (0.7727)                 (0.6811)

Mean Control                         6.968               6.859               7.041                  7.006                    6.719                     7.198
Panel C                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)                   (4)                       (5)                       (6)
LHS Variable                    | Belief-20% |      | Belief-20% |      | Belief-20% |        | Belief-20% |            | Belief-20% |            | Belief-20% |

Information Session                  -0.6139             -0.1079            -0.9931                0.7405                    0.9865                   0.5974
                                    (0.6884)            (0.9862)            (0.9245)              (0.7336)                  (1.0530)                 (0.9529)

Mean Control                         9.122               8.389               9.616                  7.904                    7.860                     7.933
Panel D                              (1)                 (2)                (3)                    (4)                       (5)                      (6)
LHS Variable                      Confidence          Confidence         Confidence             Confidence                Confidence               Confidence

Information Session                  0.0820              0.1072              0.0843                -0.0114                  -0.3072*                  0.1946
                                    (0.1063)            (0.1697)            (0.1367)              (0.1122)                  (0.1753)                 (0.1418)

Mean Control                        -0.0171              0.109               -0.102               -0.00291                   0.126                    -0.0894
Observations                         2,184               859                1,325                 2,154                      844                     1,310
Respondent                            All               Mayor           Finance Staff              All                     Mayor                 Finance Staff
Policy                          Tax Reminders       Tax Reminders      Tax Reminders       Financial Incentives      Financial Incentives     Financial Incentives
Attention Check                       No                 No                  No                    No                        No                       No
Mayor Characteristics                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                   Yes                       Yes                      Yes
Municipal Characteristics             Yes                Yes                 Yes                   Yes                       Yes                      Yes
Clusters (Municipalities)            1439                859                1325                  1431                       844                     1310
Notes: 2SLS estimation results. In panels A, B and C, the dependent variable is the absolute difference between self-reported beliefs about effect sizes of policy on
local tax revenues, and the informed effect size of the reminder letters policy during the information session. In panel D, the dependent variable is self-reported
confidence level about beliefs in a likert-scale of 1 to 5 (standardized to mean 0 and standard deviation 1). Information Session is a dummy which takes the value
of 1 if the municipality's mayor attended the information session about tax reminders. This last variable is instrumented with treatment assignment. Attention
Check refers to whether respondents that answered positively to the attention check component of the reminders policy are excluded from the model, where
the attention check was "The tax reminders sent informed taxpayers that the Brazilian constitution was reformed in 1988". Mayors' characteristics included in
the model are: Male (1/0); Age above-below median (1/0); College (1/0); 2nd Term (1/0) and Leftist Political Party (1/0, mayors belonging to a center-leftist
party according to historical political platforms). Municipalities' characteristics included in the model are: Population above-below median (1/0); College
Population above-below median (1/0); College Public Administration employees above-below median (1/0); Poverty above-below median (1/0); Gini above-
below median (1/0); Big South (1/0, where 1 are south, southeast and mid-west regions; and 0 are north and northeast regions); monthly Per Capita Income
above-below median (1/0); Local Tax Revenues share above-below median (1/0);. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parenthesis.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                             48
                      F IGURE A.1: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                                   ECD: DESCRIPTION




Notes: Survey experiment script.




                                          49
                        F IGURE A.2: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                                 ECD: GOAL AND MEASURE




Notes: Survey experiment script.




                                            50
                        F IGURE A.3: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                                    ECD: BENCHMARKS




Notes: Survey experiment script.




                                            51
                        F IGURE A.4: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                            P RIOR ELICITING : OWN MUNICIPALITY




Notes: Survey experiment script.




                                            52
                        F IGURE A.5: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                             P RIOR ELICITING : OTHER CONTEXT




Notes: Survey experiment script.




                                            53
                        F IGURE A.6: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                                   BDM INSTRUCTIONS




Notes: Survey experiment script.




                                            54
                        F IGURE A.7: D EMAND /B ELIEFS E XPERIMENT:
                         P OSTERIOR ELICITING : OWN MUNICIPALITY




Notes: Survey experiment script.




                                            55
                         F IGURE A.8: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
                                     P OLICY B RIEF : PAGE 1




Notes: Taxpayer reminder letters policy brief.




                                                 56
                         F IGURE A.9: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
                                     P OLICY B RIEF : PAGE 2




Notes: Taxpayer reminder letters policy brief.




                                                 57
                        F IGURE A.10: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
                                    P OLICY B RIEF : PAGE 3




Notes: Taxpayer reminder letters policy brief.




                                                 58
                        F IGURE A.11: P OLICY-A DOPTION E XPERIMENT:
                                    P OLICY B RIEF : PAGE 4




Notes: Taxpayer reminder letters policy brief.




                                                 59
