                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES:
               THE SUPPLY SIDE OF BUILDING A SKILLED WORKFORCE

                                          John Bound
                                          Breno Braga
                                         Gaurav Khanna
                                          Sarah Turner

                                       Working Paper 25945
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25945


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




This paper was presented at the Russell Sage Foundation Conference "Improving Employment
and Earnings in Twenty-First Century Labor Markets", September 20-21, 2018, and is expected
to be forthcoming RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences. We thank
Max Huppertz for excellent research assistance, Alexandra Tammaro for editorial assistance, and
Harry Holzer, Sandy Baum, Michael McPherson, participants in the Russell Sage Foundation
conference and two reviewers for insightful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25945.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John Bound, Breno Braga, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Universities: The Supply Side of Building a Skilled Workforce
John Bound, Breno Braga, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 25945
June 2019
JEL No. I25,J24,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

Over the past few decades, public universities have faced significant declines in state funding per
student. We investigate whether these declines affected the educational and research outcomes of
these schools. We present evidence that declining funding induced public universities to shift
toward tuition as their primary source of revenue. Selective research universities enrolled more
out-of-state and international students who pay full fare and increased in-state tuitions,
moderating impacts on expenditures. Public universities outside the research sector had fewer
options to replace stagnating state appropriations, requiring diminished expenditures and
increased in-state tuitions. The evidence we present suggests that the cuts negatively affected
degree attainment at the undergraduate and graduate levels. While the evidence on research is
mixed, there are indications that the impact of spending declines on research outcomes may
become evident over a longer time period

John Bound                                       Gaurav Khanna
Department of Economics                          University of California, San Diego
University of Michigan                           9500 Gilman Drive
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                         La Jolla, CA 92037
and NBER                                         gauravk@ucsd.edu
jbound@umich.edu
                                                 Sarah Turner
Breno Braga                                      University of Virginia
Urban Institute                                  Department of Economics
bbraga@urban.org                                 Monroe Hall, Room 237
                                                 248 McCormick Rd
                                                 Charlottesville, VA 22903
                                                 and NBER
                                                 sturner@virginia.edu
        Public colleges and universities have been major drivers of growth in collegiate attainment over

the past century (Goldin and Katz, 1999); today, these institutions enroll 77% of all undergraduate

students (67% of students at the four-year level) and award 64% of all bachelor's degrees. Public research

universities award 72% of doctorate degrees in science and engineering fields and receive roughly half of

the federal research funds devoted to academic institutions. Thus, public universities serve a central role

in producing college-educated workers and scientific innovations. Yet an increasingly common refrain

over the past decade from knowledgeable experts is that "public higher education appears to be in a state

of crisis" (Ehrenberg, 2006.a).

        The overall amount of subsidy per student enrolled in higher education from states has eroded

over the past quarter century, and the financial health and educational quality of these institutions would

appear challenged by reductions in state appropriations. On a per student basis, constant dollar

appropriations from state governments to higher education have decreased by 16% since 1990, with the

bulk of this decline in the last decade (SHEEO, 2018). It seems natural to imagine that the reduction in

state support for public research universities would manifest itself in a decline in both the educational

effectiveness and the research capacity of these institutions. Declining subsidies might be projected to

impact a host of activities that are part of universities' portfolios that are not fee for service or revenue

generating: including doctorate education, need-based financial aid, and research.

        In this paper, we use available data to examine the impact of declining state support for public

research universities on both their educational and research functions. Heterogeneity across states in the

decline gives us econometric leverage for studying the impact of these declines. We find evidence that the

more highly ranked research universities have been able to adapt to declining subsidies by raising tuition,

attracting out-of-state students and international students, and, to some extent, raising funding from

philanthropic sources. Outside the top tier of research universities, our evidence suggests that public

universities--particularly those that do not emphasize research and doctorate education as part of their


                                                                                                                1
missions--have not been able to replace lost dollars. The evidence suggests that budget cuts have affected

the quantity of undergraduate and graduate degrees awarded. And, as has been widely demonstrated, it is

degrees at the bachelor's level and above that have garnered the greatest increases in labor market returns

over the past three decades (Autor, 2014). Evidence on the impact of budget cuts on research output from

these universities is somewhat mixed, though many public universities remain to this day some of the

most highly ranked research universities in the world (Shanghai 2018). Going forward, there is reason for

concern that continued stagnation of state support for public universities will adversely impact the supply

of skilled workers with undergraduate and graduate degrees to the workforce, along with the long-term

research capacity which contributes to economic growth.



Section 1: Public Universities in the Context of U.S. Higher Education

        Significant public subsidies for colleges and universities from state sources in the first three-

quarters of the 20th century brought about the transformation in American higher education at two

margins. The first was a dramatic expansion in the scale and breadth of higher education--the shift to

"mass higher education"--which encompassed not only the growth of existing public universities but also

the expansion and upgrading of a large network of community colleges and broad-access institutions. In

addition, states invested in "research universities" to engage in the production of knowledge and scientific

excellence. The investments in public research universities could be viewed as a way for states to not only

grow the stock of college-educated labor but to also build scientific expertise complementary to local

industry (Goldin and Katz, 1999).

        Some public universities received greater support from states than others. As Goldin and Katz

(1999) document, those states with the strongest public university sectors were those without established

private universities and those with a broad potential middle class and industries dependent on agriculture

and mining likely to benefit from scientific innovation. States in the Midwest and western U.S. entered

the post-war era with the strongest research universities.



                                                                                                             2
        Resources for higher education were especially plentiful in the two decades following World War

II, a period sometimes referred to as the "Golden Years" of higher education. One study cites an average

annual growth rate of 8% in education and general expenditures per student during the 1960s (Cheit,

1971). The post­World War II era not only defines the period of a massive increase in access to U.S.

higher education in terms of increased enrollment rates, but it also captures a rise to preeminence in

graduate education and research innovation.


Within-State Markets

        The overall public sector of higher education includes a much broader range of institutions that

provide "mass" higher education and often offer courses of study with strongly vocational or professional

orientations. For these institutions, it is the dissemination of knowledge, not the production of knowledge

via research, that is the primary mission. With the massive increase in demand for higher education and

the public commitment to increasing collegiate opportunities in the post-World War II era, states added

new four-year colleges and community colleges. Between 1950 and 1980, the number of public four-year

institutions increased from 344 to 464, while the number of two-year community colleges increased by

nearly a factor of 3, from 297 to 846 (Table 317.10, Digest of Education Statistics).

        At public colleges and universities, the tuition price for in-state students is often appreciably less

than the cost of instruction, implying substantial across-the-board subsidies which are afforded by

appropriations from the state governments. Historically, the gap between tuition paid and cost of

instruction was greater at the research universities than at the community colleges or broad-access four-

year institutions (Winston, 2000).

        Community colleges tend to focus on local markets, essentially within commuting distance, while

comprehensive universities may draw from a regional area encompassing a quadrant of a state and, in

some cases, these universities may have particular subject-level expertise. The research universities

generally draw students from across the state and, in some cases, may draw students from the national and

international market, with these out-of-state students paying much higher tuition levels that are far closer


                                                                                                                 3
to the "market" levels charged by private institutions. In Section 2, we present empirical evidence on the

changing stratification within states in tuition levels and appropriations from the state.


Public Research Universities in a Mixed Market

         The categorization of institutions as "research universities" is neither discrete nor static. There is

a continuum of research intensity among universities in both the public and private sectors and, to the

extent that higher education competes along the margins of quality and prestige, some institutions face

incentives to become "research universities" (Labaree, 2017). In this analysis of public research

universities, we focus attention on three categorizations which distinguish public universities: the first is

membership in the American Association of Universities (AAU), representing the most resource-intensive

and selective public research universities. 1 Today, of the 62 universities that form the American

Association of Universities, 34 are American public universities.

         The second and third categories depend on the taxonomy employed by the Carnegie Foundation

for the Advancement of Education (2010), which classifies institutions based on sponsored research

funding, doctorates awarded, and other metrics. 2 Research universities (which include the AAU schools)

are the 136 public, doctorate-granting universities which have high or very high research activity

according to the 2010 Carnegie definition. Non-research universities are 292 broad-access public

institutions which are a combination of those that grant master's degrees as their highest degree and those

that grant doctorate degrees but are not classified by the 2010 Carnegie definition as having high or very

high research activity. We refer to non-research schools as "broad access" universities, even as the sample

excludes institutions that only grant bachelor's degrees and other specialized four-year institutions.



1
  With U.S. doctoral education in its infancy at the dawn of the 20th century, the presidents of a set of leading
institutions initiated an effort to reduce disarray and develop uniformity of standards for doctorate education and
founded the American Association of Universities.
2
  The Carnegie Classification taxonomy classifies institutions by the highest level of degrees awarded and research
intensity, measured by factors such as research expenditures, doctorates awarded, and number of research-focused
faculty. Among institutions awarding doctorate degrees, there are three categories: (1) very high research activity,
(2) high research activity, and (3) doctoral universities. The combination of (1) and (2) form the basis of our "high
research activity" group and (3) along with the "master's institutions" for the "non-research" category of four-year-
degree-granting colleges and universities.

                                                                                                                        4
        Both research and doctorate education became less concentrated in a few institutions over the

course of the 20th century. While the original 14 AAU members awarded 90 percent of doctorates in

1900, AAU members awarded about 50 percent of U.S. doctorates in 2000. Over the century, the number

of institutions awarding doctorates grew to nearly 400, and the annual number of doctorates awarded

grew to more than 40,000. This growth tended to favor public universities. Public doctorate-granting

institutions outnumbered private institutions by 1952, and by the 1970s, public universities accounted for

about two-thirds of doctorates awarded (National Science Foundation, 2006).

        The institutions distinguished as "research universities" for their production of doctorate

education and research output exist in a "mixed market" in which public and private institutions compete

directly for students, faculty, and research support. The two most salient distinctions between research

universities in the public and private sectors are scale and funding structures. Not only do the AAU public

universities award more doctorate degrees than their private counterparts, but on average, they enroll

250% more students at the undergraduate level. The top 24 largest AAUs by undergraduate enrollment

are all public, and in the top 30, the only private university is NYU. This greater scale generally follows

with lower per student resource intensity. The typical disciplinary department is generally not much larger

in terms of tenure-track faculty size in a public university than in a private university. 3

        Sources of revenue support also differ with institutional control. While private institutions rely on

tuition revenues and (among the elite) endowment returns, public universities draw on state subsidies and

tuition revenues with a more modest role for endowment returns. In exchange for funds provided by the

state government, public universities have a mandate to provide collegiate opportunities to in-state

students, which is usually manifested in below-cost tuition rates and preferential treatment in admissions.

Public research universities face constraints and incentives tied directly to state funding, while they also

compete at the national (and international) levels for faculty and research innovation with marquee-name


3
 In terms of the quality of undergraduate education, five public universities typically appear among the top 30
undergraduate colleges and universities in the U.S. The University of California, Berkeley, UCLA, the University of
Michigan­Ann Arbor, the University of Virginia, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill are in the top
30 universities ranked by U.S. News and World Report (2018).

                                                                                                                  5
private universities. In the next section, we turn to the examination of changing public support for public

universities across states.



Section 2: Declines in State Support and Implications for Public Universities


           We start by documenting trends in the aggregate state expenditures on public colleges and

universities. Figure 1 plots appropriations per full-time equivalent enrollment (FTE) and local and state

revenue from 1980 through 2017. 4 Since the early 1990s, there has been a substantial decline in

appropriations per student, from about $9,000 per FTE in 1990 to about $7,600 per FTE in 2017. The

secular decline is punctuated by clear downward cycles following recessions in 1990, 2001, and 2008.

This downward trend reflects, in part, a growth in FTE enrollment relative to the size of the working-age

population in the U.S. and in part, the increase in the relative costs of higher education. In other words,

the increase in college enrollment during the period imply more students per taxpayer, which could lead

to less higher education funding per student. That said, as also noticeable in Figure 1, an important

contributor to this decline was the drop in the share of state general fund expenditures devoted to higher

education. Indeed, based on our calculations, if this share had remained constant at its early 1990s level,

appropriations per FTE at public universities would have remained essentially constant over the past 25

years. 5


                                                  <Include Figure 1>


           It is worth emphasizing that there is substantial variation among states in the changes over time in

state appropriations per FTE. Figure 2 illustrates this for a subset of states between 1989 and 2017. 6




4
  We use the Higher Education Cost Adjustment (HECA) index, which was designed to reflect changes in the cost of
higher education. Primarily because the higher education sector is dependent on college-educated labor, the HECA
has risen roughly 30% more than the CPI (3.6% per year versus 2.8% per year, 1980­2015).
5
  Between 1980 and 2016, appropriations as a share of state general revenue fell from 0.042 to 0.027. Ceteris
paribus, had the share remained at 0.042, appropriation in 2016 would have been over 58% higher than they were, at
a little bellow $12,000 per FTE.
6
  Appendix Figure A1 shows changes between 2001 and 2017 for all states.

                                                                                                                6
States like New York are among the relative "winners," even as traditionally well-funded systems of

higher education in Michigan and Wisconsin continue to lose funds. Historically, the more research-

intensive universities have received more generous funding from states. In 1997, the public research

universities received on average a bit over $16,000 per undergraduate student in state appropriations,

while the non-research universities receive on average just under $9,000 per undergraduate. Over the next

two decades, cuts would be approximately proportional, narrowing the difference in support measured in

levels (Figure A2).


                                                <Include Figure 2>


        Various factors have plausibly contributed to the decline in appropriations as a share of state

budgets. The higher education budget is often described as a "balance wheel" of state budgets, as many

states determine the amount of appropriations to colleges and universities by what is left over after other

spending priorities (Bell, 2008). Past research has suggested that the variation in higher education budgets

is derived from the interplay between a state's revenue cycle and spending obligations, like Medicaid

(Kane, Orszag, and Apostolov, 2005). Indeed, in the aggregate, the increase in the share of state spending

on Medicaid closely matches the decline in the share devoted to tertiary education. Other factors broadly

associated with the decline in state funding for higher education include increased expenditures on

elementary to secondary education, often mandated by school finance litigation (Labaree, 2017) and

increased expenditures for corrections.


        However, despite the fact that Medicaid put fiscal pressure on state budgets, the empirical

evidence using more recent data does not support the centrality of Medicaid in explaining the decline in

higher education expenditures. Using data from 1980 to 2014, we regress state-level appropriations per

capita on Medicaid expenditures per capita (Table A1). The coefficient on per capita Medicaid

expenditures is -0.026 (0.014), which suggests that the increase in Medicaid expenditures accounts for a

bit less than 20% of the decline in state appropriations for higher education. While point estimates are not



                                                                                                              7
precise, we find that changes in expenditures on Medicaid can account for only a modest fraction of the

total decline in state appropriations, suggesting there must be other important forces at work.


        Beyond fiscal pressure on state budgets, there are several factors that could plausibly lead to a

decline in the willingness of state legislature to support public universities. The national integration of the

market for higher education (Hoxby, 2009) has meant that high-achieving students increasingly go out of

state for their education. Historically, many of the states that provided significant public support for

higher education were in the Midwest, such as Michigan, Wisconsin, Indiana, Minnesota, and Iowa, and

these states have been losing college graduates (Bound and Holzer, 2000, Bound et al. 2004, Moretti,

2013). In addition, it seems likely that states enjoy a smaller share than they used to in terms of the

economic returns to research activity. These factors are likely to have decreased the political will of state

legislators to support higher education. While these factors may reduce the political will to support higher

education, it is difficult to find credible statistical support for these hypotheses with only 50 states in

interdependent economies.


Section 3: Adapting Revenues of Public Universities


        How do public universities accommodate changes in state appropriations? As a basic accounting

identity, either expenditures must fall with a decline in appropriations or other sources of support must

increase. We examine the link between expenditures, revenue sources, and appropriations, both

graphically and in a regression context, comparing research universities with other four-year institutions.


        With the unit of analysis at the level of the university and academic year, our main data are drawn

from the Department of Education's Integrated Postsecondary Data System (IPEDS) survey modules and

the American Survey of Colleges assembled by the College Board, which are surveys of institutions that

record information on finances, student characteristics, and institutional outcomes. In providing an

empirical characterization of outcomes, we focus on three non-mutually exclusive groups of public

universities, as described in section 1: AAU universities (34), research (136), and non-research (292). In


                                                                                                                8
the analysis that follows, we distinguish expenditures by type (excluding auxiliary enterprises like

university hospitals) and revenues by source, with particular attention to tuition levels and total tuition

revenues.


         Our primary interest is in the impact of budget cuts on educational and research outcomes, which

is inherently a question of causal inference. Related to the study of the effect of budget changes on

educational outcomes are accounting relationships illustrating the financial adjustments and choices made

in response to declines in state appropriations. We present the accounting relations as descriptive

regressions using ordinary least squares (OLS). In measuring the effect of appropriation changes on

educational outcomes, we recognize that the state appropriations to specific universities may reflect some

endogeneity, and we emphasize an instrumental variable (IV) strategy based on plausibly exogenous

state-level aggregate variation. As long as a state's aggregate appropriations are not dependent on a

specific institution's enrollment decisions or research output, our instrumental variable estimates should

represent consistent estimates of the causal effect of appropriations on student outcomes. 7 To be precise,

we use appropriations to all institutions in a state as an instrument for observed institutional

appropriations.


         Expenditure Adjustments

We regress university-level expenditures (and, later, revenues, endowments, tuition rates, and patenting

output) on appropriations, cohort size, and state economic conditions such as the unemployment rate in

some specifications. With observations at the level of the university (i) and the year (t), we follow the

specification:


                           = 0 + 1   +   +  +  +  ,                                     (1)




7
  This strategy has been used by us in previously published work (Bound, Braga, Khanna, and Turner, 2019), as well
as by other authors (Deming and Walters, 2017; Chakrabarti et al., 2018). Authors often use total state
appropriations net of an institution's own appropriations. Estimating using such instruments produces results similar
to the ones we report here.

                                                                                                                   9
where the outcome of interest (yit) and institution-level appropriations ( ) are specified in logs. The

vector  includes state-level controls such state population at age 18, and unemployment rate in some

specifications, which capture some of the in-state demand for higher education. With year and institution

fixed effects ( and  ), we abstract from secular changes in the entire economy and institution-specific,

time-invariant characteristics. The year fixed effects control for the overall increase in the demand for a

college-education from domestic and foreign applicants, with year fixed effects in specifications for each

group of universities accounting for overall changes in demand for universities in the group.


         In Table 1, we study the relationship between appropriations and expenditures. While certain

types of expenditures, like institutional support--which includes expenses for general administrative

services and management--are more responsive to changes in appropriations across the board, research

expenditures are less sensitive to such changes. 8 For the resource-intensive AAU institutions, there is

essentially no systematic relationship between overall university academic expenditures (E&G) and state

appropriations. There is a higher, but statistically indistinguishable from zero, elasticity of 0.156 for the

sample of all research universities. The public colleges and universities outside of this research intensive

sector provide strong contrast, with a positive association between appropriations changes and total

expenditures [0.301 (0.031)]. Similarly, non-research universities display a meaningful relationship

between instructional expenditures and appropriations, whereas there is no detectable relationship for

AAUs.


                                                     <Include Table 1>


         In turn, three functional categories capture most university expenditures: instruction, research,

and institutional support, with the latter capturing many of the centralized operational components of



8
  "Institutional support" is defined by IPEDS as a functional expense category that includes expenses for the day-to-
day operational support of the institution such as "general administrative services, central executive-level activities
concerned with management and long-range planning, legal and fiscal operations, space management, employee
personnel and records, logistical services such as purchasing and printing, and public relations and development.
Also includes information technology expenses related to institutional support activities."

                                                                                                                     10
university activities. It is only in the "institutional support" category where there is a consistent and

positive link to appropriations across all types of public universities. Presumably, university-wide

infrastructure projects and investments are sensitive to the availability of general support from the state.

On the other hand, research expenditures show little sensitivity to state appropriations. To the extent that

these are funded by the federal government and private sponsors, this may be unsurprising. Yet there is

some evidence (Ehrenberg, Rizzo, and Jakubson 2007) that some startup and faculty support costs are

shouldered from institutional funds, and it would appear that these expenditures are largely insulated from

appropriations changes.


         At the AAU universities, there is essentially no link between appropriations and instructional

expenditures, of which the number of faculty and their salaries is the largest expense, suggesting that

there are few adjustments in class size or faculty hiring in response to changes in appropriations. At the

other extreme of non-research universities, there is a significant and positive elasticity for instructional

expenditures: a 10% decrease in state support ties to a 2.93% decrease in instructional expenditures,

implying that the quantity and quality of instruction offered to students varies directly with state

appropriations.


         What the expenditure changes show are striking differences within the public university sector:

the top public research universities have demonstrated resilience to changes in state funding, while the

expenditures at the non-research universities are strongly tied to state-level fortunes. How, then, have

these research institutions adjusted revenues?


         Potential Sources of Revenue

         Alternative sources of revenue to state appropriations include tuition flows, private gifts, and

federal (and private) funds for research. 9 The capacity to tap these sources to replace lost state

appropriations depends on market conditions and the fungibility of funds from alternative sources.


9
  In addition, a typical university will have some "auxiliary services" lines on its income statement which represent
flows from activities like hospitals or athletic facilities.

                                                                                                                    11
Because state appropriations are broadly unrestricted, it is more difficult to employ either federal research

funding or private philanthropy to replace state funds, as these sources are often--though not always--

restricted to specific purposes.

         Tuition revenue has been the primary source of funds to replace lost state appropriations. The

main dimension of differentiated pricing occurs at the undergraduate level, with in-state students paying a

lower tuition than out-of-state students. 10 As an accounting matter, tuition revenues can increase by

changing either increasing tuition levels or changing the relative quantities of students paying high and

low tuition levels.


         As an economics matter, the capacity of institutions to raise tuition revenue by adjusting price or

quantities is determined within a market context. While universities are not perfect substitutes, there is

ample evidence that many public research universities operate in a national market where students are

choosing among public and private options. 11 In this sense, universities will have only limited scope to

adjust the prices charged to out-of-state students in response to changes or stagnation in state funding. On

the other hand, universities have much more scope to raise in-state tuition charges subject to constraints

imposed by state political actions. As modeled by Bound, Braga, Khanna, and Turner (2018), a public

university weighs added tuition revenue against the potentially endogenous legislative response of

reduced funding. Because the outside option for many in-state students is a non-profit private institution

of comparable (or greater) quality but at a much higher price, public universities have the capacity to

increase prices for these students without a significant impact on demand.


         In addition to tuition price changes, public universities can adjust total tuition revenues by

changing the quantity and composition of students. Note that to increase revenue, an institution must add

(or substitute) a student for whom the net revenue will exceed marginal cost, leading to an emphasis on


10
   Also, institutions typically charge different tuitions among program areas, with graduate programs in professional
fields generally priced most closely to the rates charged by peers in the private sector.
11
   For any student, the demand for an out-of-state university will likely depend on the quality, price, and admission
probability at his in-state option and the net price and quality of the private options where he is likely to receive
offers of admission.

                                                                                                                   12
recruiting out-of-state domestic and foreign students. The ease (or difficulty) of drawing revenue

generating students depends in large part on institutional quality and the overall supply pool. Expansion

in demand from abroad, particularly the increased capacity of families in China to pay for a college

education, and growth in the college-age population in states where in-state options are limited (Bound,

Hershbein, and Long 2009 and Bound, Braga, Khanna, and Turner 2018), generates a potential pool from

which universities can expand on the extensive margin.


         Tuition Revenue Response

         Figure 3 shows the coincident changes in appropriations and tuition shares as a fraction of

expenditures between 1997 and 2012. As total expenditures are larger in magnitude than revenues from

appropriations and tuition, these fractions together are less than 1. 12 Figure 3 highlights the sharp increase

in tuition shares relative to decreases in appropriations shares across the sample of AAU, research, and

non-research universities.


                                                    <Include Figure 3>


         The quantitative link between total tuition revenues and appropriations changes is strong at all

public research universities, ranging from an elasticity of -3.1 at the AAU institutions to the more modest

-1.8 at the general set of research universities, when estimated in a regression with year fixed effects and

controls for enrollment and cohort size (Table 2). Outside the research sector, however, public colleges

and universities display an elasticity that is less than half the size than that at AAUs, showing somewhat

limited capacity in replacing lost funding with higher tuition revenues.


                                                     <Include Table 2>


         These changes in tuition revenue are-- by construction--the combination of price changes and

changes in relative quantities. Focusing on the undergraduate level, the relative importance of price and



12
  Other sources of revenue not shown in this figure, but that we examine later, include private gifts, grants, and
earnings from investments or endowments

                                                                                                                     13
quantity changes differs for in-state and out-of-state students. For in-state students, price effects dominate,

with in-state charges responding markedly to changes in appropriations. As shown in Table A2, the

elasticity of in-state price response is -0.265 for the AAU institutions, -0.164 for research universities, and

-0.187 for non-research universities. 13 This result is consistent with much of the literature that indicates

that appropriation changes have a significant impact on tuition decisions (Baum et al. 2018). Not only is

the elasticity somewhat larger at the AAU universities, but the greater baseline levels of in-state tuition

for the research-oriented places produce greater changes in the absolute level of in-state tuition at the

research universities. A 10% decrease in state appropriations is associated with an $840 increase in tuition

at an AAU research university, relative to an increase of about $340 at a broad-access non-research

institution. 14 Note that these differences in price responses may well reflect differences in the price

elasticity of demand in the respective student markets, as the research universities draw more affluent

students who are likely to be less price elastic than students at the broad-access non-research institutions.


         Yet, even as in-state charges adjust markedly, out-of-state charges do not move to a significant

degree in response to changes in tuition. We interpret this as consistent with a greater price elasticity of

demand of out-of-state students who typically have choices which include other out-of-state options of

similar quality (both public and private), along with a discounted home-state university option. For public

research universities, we also see some adjustments in the composition of students. In the most recent

decade, there has been a strong shift to foreign students, particularly among those institutions that are

nationally strong but not ranked among the most competitive, while a small number of nationally ranked

universities are able to attract domestic out-of-state students. Indeed, this is the focus of Bound, Braga,

Khanna, and Turner (2018), who show that public research universities that were disproportionately hurt

by state funding declines were more likely to turn to full-fee paying students from abroad. Leveraging




13
   Bound, Braga, Khanna and Turner (2018) also go to considerable lengths to investigate the timing of the changes
in tuition relative to appropriations and are able to demonstrate that the timing aligns with appropriations changes
impacting tuition levels, rather than the reverse.
14
   Webber (2017) also finds evidence that declining public funding leads to increases in attendance costs to students.

                                                                                                                   14
variation in state budgetary cycles, the paper examines the sharp rise in undergraduate enrollment, mostly

from China, over the period between 1996 and 2012. Instrumental variable estimates highlight that a 10%

decrease in state funding was associated with a 16% rise in foreign enrollment at public research

universities, with little change in the enrollment mix outside the research sector.


         A natural question that follows from the large increases in in-state tuition at the public research

universities is whether these institutions have become less affordable to low-income students, particularly

from within the state. Evidence from Cook and Turner (2018) points to a substantial response in

institutional financial aid, which is concentrated among the more research- (and resource-) intensive

universities. Indeed, by 2015, the average net tuition defined as `tuition and fees less grant aid' was lower

at the flagship than at broad-access public colleges for the lowest-income students (families with income

less than $30,000). Moreover, changes in sticker price translate about dollar for dollar to increases in net

price for low-income students at broad-access institutions, but changes in net price are small, if not zero,

at many research universities for such students. 15


         The overall increase in in-state tuition levels and the increased stratification in pricing structures

among public colleges and universities has increased unmet need--that is, cost of attendance not covered

by grants or expected family resources--markedly among moderate-income students as well as low-

income students. Comparing students entering public four-year colleges and universities between 2004

and 2016, data from the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS) show that unmet need

increased by about $6,800 for dependent students from families in the $48,000­$75,000 income range,

with increases of about $5,000 for those with lower incomes. The net effect in the short run is increased




15
   With little change in net price, it should be unsurprising that there is little link between the changes in posted
tuition and the level of enrollment of in-state, low-income students. For public research universities, these discounts
are generally regarded as institutional investments, as they represent forgone expenditures in other areas. Note that,
in addition to expanding need-based aid, there is some indication that public research universities are also increasing
merit aid awards in order to keep the highest achieving students, many of whom would be eligible for need or merit
awards from private universities (Bowen and McPherson, 2016; Cook and Turner, 2018).

                                                                                                                    15
borrowing, while recent evidence from Chakrabarti, Gorton, and Lovenheim (2018) suggests that declines

in state appropriations have longer-term effects on student debt, car ownership, and homeownership.


        Other Sources of Financial Support

        Beyond tuition revenues and state appropriations, other sources of support for colleges and

universities are local grants, federal support for research activities, earnings from investments and

endowments, and private philanthropic support, which may include "current" spendable gifts or

endowment funds. While a meaningful source of funds for AAU institutions, such funding is largely

unavailable to universities outside the research sector. Resourceful university administrators may instead

be able to raise private funding when faced with decline subsidies.


        In Table 3, we examine the impact of appropriations on the revenues from private gifts, grants,

contracts, and earnings from investments and endowments. At AAU universities, there is a strong

relationship indicating that a 10% reduction in appropriations is associated with a 12% increase in private

funds. Even among other research universities, the elasticity is a meaningful -0.64, but outside the

research sector, there is no detectable relationship, highlighting the limited capacity of non-research

colleges in raising such funds.


                                                <Include Table 3>


Section 4: Educational Outcomes


        Changes in state appropriations potentially impact enrollment and attainment on a number of

margins. Declining appropriations could induce universities to admit fewer students, or, as discussed

above, change the composition of the students they admit. Rising tuition and declining resources per

student could affect student demand, though this is complicated by the fact that resource-rich universities

are increasingly offering both need-based and merit aid. In Table 4, we report estimates of the effect of




                                                                                                            16
appropriations on in-state undergraduate enrollment. 16 Both our OLS and IV estimates suggest modest

and statistically insignificant effects of appropriation in first-year enrollment, but with somewhat larger

and statistically significant effects on total undergraduate enrollment, with IV estimates suggesting a 10%

drop in appropriation would reduce in-state undergraduate enrollment by about 1.7% at research

universities.


                                               <Include Table 4>


        In Table 5, we turn our attention to degree attainment, distinguishing between undergraduate and

graduate degrees, which may respond to funding not just via the margin of enrollment but also given the

ease of completion when resources are high (Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner 2010). Since degree

attainment will likely be affected by appropriations over previous years, we average log appropriations

over the previous six years for bachelor's and doctorate degrees and over the previous three years for

master's degrees. Our results are not sensitive to the choice of years or to simply not averaging across

years as in earlier specifications. Focusing on the IV results, our estimates suggest quite a substantial

effect of appropriations on degree attainment. These estimates suggest that a 10% drop in state

appropriations would induce a 3.6% drop in bachelor's degree attainment at both research universities.

Estimated effects on doctorate degrees are somewhat larger, suggesting that a 10% drop in state

appropriations would induce a 7.2% drop in PhD degrees at research universities. We redid this analysis

restricting ourselves to master's and PhDs in STEM fields. If anything, these results suggest somewhat

larger effects. Focusing on the results for research universities, our IV estimates suggest that a 10%

reduction in appropriations would reduce STEM master's granted by 5.0% (2.1) and STEM PhDs by

10.2% (3.3). 17 Deming and Walters (2018), using somewhat different samples and specifications than us,

also find significant effects of appropriations on enrollment and degree completion at both two- and four-



16
   The OLS specification used in Table 4 for first-year in-state enrollment is replicates Bound, Braga, Khanna, and
Turner (2018). The IV speciation diverges somewhat from this study because we use total state appropriation rather
than total state appropriations net of an institution's own appropriations as the instrumental variable.
17
   We do not report these results in the table, but they are available under request.

                                                                                                                 17
year institutions. Interestingly, they present evidence suggesting that the effect of appropriations on

enrollments is primarily not being mediated by the effect of appropriations in tuitions.


                                                 <Include Table 5>


         We have little evidence of the quality of education college students receive. One way universities

can accommodate declines in appropriations per FTE is to substitute lecturers for tenure track professors;

however, it is unclear what effects this might have on academic achievement. The little available evidence

we have suggests that the increased use of instructors has negatively affected graduation rates (Ehrenberg

and Zang, 2005), and some evidence suggests that instructors are less likely to motivate students to

continue in a field, though these effects are small and may vary across fields. (Bettinger and Long 2004).


         Declines in state appropriations that impact institutional quality, capacity, and tuition price might

be expected to impact college choice on different margins for different groups of students. First, for non-

traditional students, and for those who are likely to have close attachments to local markets, one might

expect to see shifts from the public four-year sector to the community college sector. Some of these

students may be on the extensive margin, forgoing enrollment altogether. For students from relatively

affluent families and those with high levels of academic preparation, loss of resources and increased

prices in the public sector may shift student enrollment decisions to the private sector. The hypothesis that

declines in state appropriations, and thus declines in subsidies going to students at four-year public

institution, induce students to attend private institutions is supported by evidence that the quality of public

colleges in a state affects student application behavior (McDuff, 2007). While selectivity among public

universities has increased among the small number of colleges and universities that compete for students

in the national market, overall selectivity has been stagnant or declining in much of the public sector

(Hoxby, 2009, Bound, Hershbein, and Long, 2009). 18



19
  Because of the potential spillover effects that research universities have on local economies, state legislatures have
some incentive to subsidize research. Golden and Katz (1999) emphasize this was true historically, Aghion et al.
(2009) find evidence that this is still true.

                                                                                                                     18
Section 5. Research Productivity

         Declines in state appropriations may affect the research output of public research universities.

While we have seen evidence that the top public research universities have been able to replace much of

their lost revenue, the source of this revenue is largely in terms of tuition, and those paying this tuition

might want to see their dollars spent on the educational, rather than the research mission of the

university. 19 At the same time, the impact of budget cuts on research output is likely to work with long

lags.


Faculty Salaries between Public and Private Universities

         Presumably the most important inputs to research are talented researchers themselves. With tight

budgets, it is hard for public research universities to offer competitive salaries or, perhaps more

importantly in the sciences, generous start-up packages. Previous researchers have found evidence that

salaries for tenure track faculty at public universities have not kept pace with those at private universities

and that recessionary forces have long-lasting effects on faculty hiring at public universities (Turner,

2014). Using data from the American Association of University Professors (1973­94), Zoghi (2003) finds

substantial declines in the salaries of public university professors relative to their private university

counterparts. Using IPEDS data, Kane, Orszag, and Apostolov (2005) find a similar pattern for research

universities. Stratifying by rank, they find that as of the mid 1970s, salaries at public and private research

universities were roughly comparable. By 1998, full professors at public research universities were, on

average, being paid 82 percent of what their counterparts at private research universities were being paid.


         Using IPEDS data, we investigate the relationship between state appropriations and average

salaries of professors at public universities (Table 6). Since we expect effects to work with some lags, we

average appropriations over the three previous years. Point estimates using longer lags are similar, though

estimated with less precision. The estimates in Table 6 suggest significant effects of appropriations on


19
  Because of the potential spillover effects that research universities have on local economies, state legislatures have
some incentive to subsidize research. Golden and Katz (1999) emphasize this was true historically, Aghion et al.
(2009) find evidence that this is still true.

                                                                                                                     19
faculty salaries. Overall, we find that appropriation cuts are related to lower salaries for professors in all

levels at research and non-research universities, with elasticities varying from 0.08 to 0.16.


        It is challenging to translate these impacts on wages into estimates of potential research

productivity. Faculty are not that mobile, and universities will typically try to hold on to star researchers

by matching outside offers. Still, there are limits on the extent to which universities can shield research

faculties from budgetary pressures. Budgets are limited, and, with salaries typically in the public domain

at public universities, there are plausible limits in the degree to which universities can engage in

compensation practices that produce substantial discrimination in salaries (Card et al., 2012). It seems

likely that a more sustained loss in compensation packages to faculty at public colleges and universities

would contribute to a flight of talent to private colleges and universities.


                                             <Include Table 6>


Changes in Academic Rankings

        Since 2003, the Shanghai Ranking Consultancy has been annually presenting the Academic

Ranking of World Universities (ARWU), which is a list of the top 500 universities in the world.

Universities are ranked by an academic score based on several indicators of research performance

(including alumni and staff winning Nobel Prizes and Fields Medals), highly cited researchers, papers

published in Nature and Science, papers indexed in major citation indices, and the per capita academic

performance of an institution.


        We investigate the relationship between appropriations and the aggregate score used by the

Shanghai Ranking Consultancy to rank universities (Table A4). We also look at the three specific

components of the score: HiCi score is based on the number of highly cited researchers in 21 broad

subject categories; N&S score is based on the number of papers published in Nature and Science; and

PUB score depends on the number of papers indexed in the Science Citation Index and Social Science

Citation Index.



                                                                                                              20
         Overall, regressions of aggregate scores and components on the log of appropriations show

positive effects, but with modest magnitudes. Even at its largest, seen in the IV specification for the AAU

sample, a 10% decrease in appropriations lowers the overall score by only 0.8 points, off of a baseline

mean of 30 points. 20 Indeed, comparisons of the distribution of scores and ranks for both public and

private research universities show little movement between 2003 and 2018. While 14 of the top 30 U.S.

universities were public in 2003, 13 public universities were among the top 30 in 2018.


Federal Support for Science and Patenting

         To examine whether federal support responds to state funding, we obtain university-by-year level

data on federal support for science from the NSF Survey of Federal Science and Engineering Support to

Universities, Colleges, and Nonprofit Institutions. We find little association between state appropriations

and federal funding support for research. Indeed, the share of federal dollars received by public research

universities has remained virtually constant since 1970.


         Last, we obtain data from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to examine how

funding declines are associated with patenting activity. Regressions of the log of the number of patents on

log appropriations show sizable, though imprecise, effects: 0.8 for AAU universities and 0.9 for research

universities (Table 7). Between the late 1990s and the most recent period, the share of patents taken out

by universities going to public universities fell from a bit over 60% to just under 50%.


                                                     <Include Table 7>

Summary of Impacts on Research Productivity


         The direct evidence we have assembled on the effect of the decline in state appropriations to

public research universities on research output is mixed. Perhaps our most comprehensive measure

involves the Shanghai Rankings, which show only modest effects; however, these rankings span a short



20
 To put these numbers into context: an effect of 0.8 points is small relative to the difference in scores between
University of California, Berkeley (70 points), San Diego (48 points), and Davis (31 points).

                                                                                                                    21
period of time. Data on federal research dollars cover a substantially longer time series and show no

effects, though this measure reflects expenditures on inputs, not outputs, and one can imagine some

endogenous response to budget cuts, with budget cuts at public research universities inducing researchers

to increase efforts to secure federal funding. In contrast to the federal dollars awarded for research, the

patent data suggest negative effects of appropriation cuts, but not all fields file patents. Last, we have seen

evidence of an effect of appropriations on salaries which suggests reason for concern, though, again, these

are measures on expenditures on inputs, not output. While the direct evidence we have is quite mixed, and

it would be difficult, if not impossible, to estimate long run effects of the decline in state appropriations

on research output, it seems very likely that such effects exist. Declining resources will make it harder for

universities to attract talented researchers or to provide them with the resources to conduct research. In

addition, as tuition makes up an increasing share of public university budgets, it seems likely that public

universities, including research universities, will put more emphasis on their teaching missions.


Section 6: Discussion


        The long-standing state-based system for funding public higher education is coming

under real strain and may be poorly positioned to respond to changes in the nature of the U.S.

economy to increase the supply of college-educated workers. Economic forces are working

against the old model of higher education funding in which state appropriations covered the

majority of instructional expenses across all public institutions, and also provided subsidies to

cover research infrastructure at flagship universities. The economic return to investments in

higher education may be less likely to accrue to the state as a whole than in prior decades:

college graduates are mobile in a national market while the benefits from research

infrastructure may be concentrated in the university communities while also benefiting broader

markets.




                                                                                                                22
        Writing a bit over a decade ago in an article titled "The Perfect Storm and the Privatization of

Public Higher Education," Ehrenberg (2006a) raised concerns that the decline in state support for public

higher education would increase the stratification between the research universities and the broad access

public institutions, ultimately eroding the research capacity at the former and educational resources for

students at the latter. The evidence we have assembled in this paper suggests that high-research public

universities have started to resemble their private counterparts, as they increasingly depend on tuition

revenues and private grants and gifts, while state funding now accounts for a minority share of resources.

Our evidence suggests that declining state support for higher education has real effects which have long-

term implications for economic productivity and the supply of high-skilled workers in the labor market.

First, our estimates, consistent with the evidence in Deming and Walters (2018), indicate that declines in

state support have had substantial effects on degree attainment at the bachelors and post-baccalaureate

levels. Secondly, our results, together with results reported in Aghion et al. (2009), suggest that declining

state support for higher education is also likely to have an effect on the research output of public

universities.


        Our current and past work suggests that expanding full fee­paying student enrollment at the

undergraduate level is an important channel through which selective public research universities buffer

changes in state appropriations. Research universities also have the capacity to raise gift and endowment

funding to complement tuition revenues. Despite the decline in appropriations, public research

universities remain some of the most highly ranked research universities in the world and can still provide

a substantial amount of aid to their students. On the other hand, public universities outside the research

sector had fewer options to replace lost or stagnating state appropriations, requiring moderated

expenditures, increased in-state tuition, and decreases in grant aid. The evidence we have compiled in this

paper suggest that such actions might have effects on education attainment and on the quality of education

students receive.




                                                                                                             23
         While our work does not find support for the notion that declining public support for higher

education has overwhelmed the public higher education sector, there is reason for some concern. First,

public research universities may be unable to continue to replace lost revenue, especially if states continue

to cut appropriations, and U.S. education becomes less attractive to full fee­paying international students.

Second, non-research universities are not successful at insulating lower and moderate-income students

from tuition increases, which may represent a change in the population that can be served by these public

institutions.




                                                                                                          24
                                              References
Aghion, P., Boustan, L., Hoxby, C., and Vandenbussche, J. 2009. "The Causal Impact of Education on
         Economic Growth: Evidence from US," mimeo Harvard.
Autor, David. 2014. "Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality Among the `Other 99
         Percent.'" Science, 23 May 2014: 344 (6186), 843­51.
Baum, S., McPhearson, M.S., Braga, B., and Minton, S. 2018. Tuitions and State Appropriations: Using
         Evidence and Logic to Gain Perspective. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Barr, Andrew, and Turner, Sarah, 2013. "Expanding enrollments and contracting state budgets: The effect
         of the Great Recession on higher education." The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political
         and Social Science, 650(1), 168-193.
Bell, J. 2008. "The nuts and bolts of the higher education legislative appropriations process" (Policy
         Briefs: Getting what you pay for). Retrieved from WICHE website.
Bettinger, Eric and Long, Bridget Terry. 2004. "Do College Instructors Matter? The Effects of Adjuncts
         and Graduate Assistants on Students' Interests and Success." NBER Working Paper No. 10370.
Bound, J. and Holzer, H.J., 2000. "Demand shifts, population adjustments, and labor market outcomes
         during the 1980s." Journal of Labor Economics, 18(1), 20­54.
Bound, J. Jeffrey Groen, Gábor Kézdi, & Sarah Turner, 2004. "Trade in university training: cross-state
         variation in the production and stock of college-educated labor," Journal of Econometrics, vol
         121(1­2), 143­173.
Bound, J. and S. Turner. 2007. "Cohort crowding: How resources affect collegiate attainment," Journal of
         Public Economics, Elsevier, vol. 91(5­6): 877­99.
Bound, John, Brad Hershbein, and Bridget Terry Long. 2009. "Playing the Admissions Game: Student
         Reactions to Increasing College Competition," Journal of Economic Perspectives, American
         Economic Association, vol. 23(4), 119­46.
Bound, John, Michael. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2010. "Why Have College Completion Rates
         Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources," American
         Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Association, vol. 2(3), 129­57.
Bound, John, Breno Braga, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner. 2018. "A Passage to America: University
         Funding and International Students." forthcoming in American Economic Journal: Economic
         Policy.
Bowen, William and M. McPherson. 2016. Lesson Plan. Princeton University Press.
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. "Inequality at Work: The Effect
         of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction," American Economic Review, vol. 102(6), 2981­3003.
Chakrabarti, Rajashri, Nicole Gorton, and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2018. "The Effect of State Funding for
         Postsecondary Education on Long-Run Student Outcomes." Working Paper.
Cheit, E. 1971. The New Depression in Higher Education: A Study of Financial Conditions at 41
         Colleges and Universities. Berkeley: Carnegie Commission on Higher Education.
Cook, Emily and Sarah Turner. 2018. "Pricing Public Higher Education: Responses to Appropriations
         Changes in a Market Context" Working Paper.
Deming, D. and C. Walters. 2017. "The Impacts of Price and Spending Subsidies on U.S. Postsecondary
         Attainment." https://eml.berkeley.edu//~crwalters/papers/deming_walters.pdf
Ehrenberg, R. 2006.a "The Perfect Storm and the Privatization of Public Higher Education," Change,
         (January/February 2006).
Ehrenberg, R. 2006.b. "Introduction" in What's Happening to Public Higher Education? Wiley: NY.
Ehrenberg, R.; Rizzo, M., and Jakubson, G. 2007. "Who Bears the Growing Cost of Science at
         Universities" in R. Ehrenberg and P Stephan eds. Science and the University (pp 19-35) Madison,
         WI: University of Wisconsin Press.

                                                                                                     25
Ehrenberg, R.G. and Zhang, L. 2005. "Do tenured and tenure-track faculty matter?" Journal of Human
        Resources 40(3): 647­659.
Goldin, C. and L. Katz. 1999. "The Shaping of Higher Education: The Formative Years in the United
        States, 1890 to 1940." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(1): 37­62.
Hoxby, C. 2009. "The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
        23(4): 95­118.
Kane, Thomas; Peter Orszag and Emil Apostolov. 2005. "Higher Education Appropriations and Public
        Universities: Role of Medicaid and the Business Cycle," Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban
        Affairs, 99­146.
Labaree, David F. 2017. A Perfect Mess: The Unlikely Ascendancy of American Higher Education.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McDuff, DeForest. 2007. "Quality, Tuition, and Applications to In-State Public Colleges." Economics of
        Education Review, 26(4): 433­49.
Moretti, E., 2013. "Real wage inequality." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1): 65­
        103.
National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Statistics, 2006. U.S. Doctorates in the 20th
        Century, NSF 06-319, Lori Thurgood, Mary J. Golladay, and Susan T. Hill (Arlington, VA
        2006).
Shanghai Ranking, Consultancy. 2018. "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2018." viewed
        December 7, 2018. http://www.shanghairanking.com/ARWU2018.html.
State Higher Education Executive Officers (SHEEO). 2018. State Higher Education Finance (SHEF) FY
        2017.
Turner, Sarah E. 2014. The Impact of the Financial Crisis on Faculty Labor Markets. Chapter in NBER
        book How the Financial Crisis and Great Recession Affected Higher Education, Jeffrey R.
        Brown and Caroline M. Hoxby, editors p. 175­207.
U.S. News and World Report (2018). "Best Colleges" viewed December 7, 2018.
        https://www.usnews.com/best-colleges.
Zoghi, Cindy. 2003, "Why have public university professors done do badly?" Economics of Education
        Review 22: 45­57.
Webber, D.A. 2017. "State divestment and tuition at public institutions." Economics of Education Review,
        60: 1­4.
Winston, Gordon C. 2000. Economic Stratification and Hierarchy in U.S. Colleges and Universities,"
        (November) DP-58. https://sites.williams.edu/wpehe/files/2011/06/DP-58.pdf.




                                                                                                     26
Figure 1: Constant Dollar Higher Education Appropriations relative to Enrollment and State and Local
Tax General Revenues 1980-2016

          $10,000                                                                               4.5%
           $9,500
           $9,000                                                                               4.0%

           $8,500
                                                                                                3.5%
           $8,000
           $7,500
                                                                                                3.0%
           $7,000
           $6,500                                                                               2.5%
           $6,000
           $5,500                                                                               2.0%



                              Appropriations per FTE Enrollment (left axis)
                              Appropriations per Local and State General Revenue (right axis)




Note: Higher education appropriations are local and state appropriations net of special-purpose, research,
and medical (RAM) appropriations measured in 2017 dollars. We use HECA (Higher Education Cost
Adjustment ) deflator. FTE is the full-time equivalent enrollment net of medical students. Years in the x-
axis are fiscal years. Source: State Higher Education Finance (SHEF) and Tax Policy Center.




                                                                                                        27
Figure 2 ­ Constant Dollar Appropriations per FTE 1989-2017 ­ Selected States
Panel A ­ States with Declining Appropriations

           $11,000

           $10,000

            $9,000

            $8,000

            $7,000

            $6,000

            $5,000

            $4,000

            $3,000
                      1989
                      1990
                      1991
                      1992
                      1993
                      1994
                      1995
                      1996
                      1997
                      1998
                      1999
                      2000
                      2001
                      2002
                      2003
                      2004
                      2005
                      2006
                      2007
                      2008
                      2009
                      2010
                      2011
                      2012
                      2013
                      2014
                      2015
                      2016
                      2017
                                  Pennsylvania        Wisconsin          Michigan


Panel B ­ States with Stable Appropriations

            $15,000


            $13,000


            $11,000


             $9,000


             $7,000


             $5,000


             $3,000
                      1989
                      1990
                      1991
                      1992
                      1993
                      1994
                      1995
                      1996
                      1997
                      1998
                      1999
                      2000
                      2001
                      2002
                      2003
                      2004
                      2005
                      2006
                      2007
                      2008
                      2009
                      2010
                      2011
                      2012
                      2013
                      2014
                      2015
                      2016
                      2017




                                     New York          Texas         California


Note: Appropirations by FTE is total appropriations to higher education in the a state divided by full-time
equivalent enrollment net of medical students. All measures are in 2017 dollars using the HECA index.
Years are fiscal years. Source: State Higher Education Finance (SHEF)




                                                                                                         28
Figure 3: Changes in Appropriations and Tuition Revenue Relative to Expenditures 1997-2012

                                                           AAU
                      0.40
                                  0.30
                      0.30                                  0.25                            0.25
                                                                   0.21
                                           0.19
                      0.20                                                          0.16

                      0.10

                      0.00
                                     1997                      2007                       2012

                                         Appropriations (as a fraction of expenditures)
                                         Tuition Revenue (as a fraction of expenditures)



                                                        Research
                      0.40        0.34
                                                            0.30                            0.28
                      0.30                                         0.23
                                           0.20                                     0.21
                      0.20

                      0.10

                      0.00
                                     1997                      2007                       2012

                                         Appropriations (as a fraction of expenditures)
                                         Tuition Revenue (as a fraction of expenditures)



                                                    Non-Research
                      0.50        0.43
                                                            0.39
                      0.40                                                                   0.36
                                                                   0.32
                                           0.27                                     0.28
                      0.30
                      0.20
                      0.10
                      0.00
                                     1997                      2007                       2012

                                         Appropriations (as a fraction of expenditures)
                                         Tuition Revenue (as a fraction of expenditures)


Notes: Sample of Public 4+ year degree granting universities. AAU represents members of the American
Association of Universities. Research sample is of doctoral universities with high or very high research activity
(Carnegie classification). Non-Research is sample of master's universities or Doctoral universities with low research
activity. Source: Appropriations, total educational expenditures and tuition revenue data from IPEDS (1997 to 2012)


                                                                                                                  29
Table 1. Effects of Appropriations on Expenditures per FTE, by Type of Public University 1996-2012

       Panel A, Dep. Variable: Log(Total ed & general exp)             AAU          Research    Non-Research


       Log(State Appropriations)                                       0.014          0.156        0.301
                                                                      (0.051)        (0.095)      (0.031)
       Panel B, Dep. Variable: Log(Institutional support exp.)         AAU          Research    Non-Research


       Log(State Appropriations)                                       0.239          0.338        0.392
                                                                      (0.121)        (0.101)      (0.064)
       Panel C, Dep. Variable: Log(Exp for research)                   AAU          Research    Non-Research


       Log(State Appropriations)                                       -0.015         0.012        0.050
                                                                      (0.135)        (0.170)      (0.181)
       Panel D, Dep. Variable: Log(Exp. for instruction )               AAU         Research    Non-Research


       Log(State Appropriations)                                        -0.008      0.142           0.293
                                                                       (0.068)     (0.091)         (0.035)
       Observations                                                      505        1,969           4,036
       Universities                                                       32         126             262
Notes: All models are estimated using linear least squares. All regressions include year and university fixed effects,
a control for the size of the cohort aged 18, and the unemployment rate. Regressions weighted by baseline (1996)
enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the university level. Source: Enrollment data from IPEDS includes both
graduate and undergraduate students (1996 to 2012).




Table 2: Effects of Appropriations on Total Tuition Revenues, by Type of Public University 1996-2012

 Dependent Variable                                               Log Tuition Revenue
                                              AAU                         Research                 Non-Research


 Log(State Appropriations)                   -0.311                        -0.190                      -0.117
                                             (0.075)                      (0.047)                      (0.046)
 Log(FTE Undergrad)                          0.457                         0.557                        0.685
                                             (0.190)                      (0.092)                      (0.084)
 Log(FTE Grad)                               0.230                         0.216                        0.059
                                             (0.081)                      (0.047)                      (0.020)
 Observations                                 538                          2,221                        4,763
 Number of Universities                        34                           137                         293
Notes: All models are estimated using linear least squares. All regressions include year and university fixed effects,
and a control for the size of the cohort aged 18. Regressions weighted by baseline (1996) enrollment. Standard
errors clustered at the university level. Source: Enrollment data from IPEDS includes both graduate and
undergraduate students. Revenue data from IPEDS (1996 to 2012).


                                                                                                                    30
Table 3 - Effects of Appropriations on Log (Private gifts and Endowment) 1996-2012

 Dependent Variable                                       Log (Private gifts and Endowment)
                                      Research                   AAU                       Non-Research


 Log(State Appropriations)             -0.641                   -1.229                        0.068
                                       (0.202)                  (0.345)                      (0.165)


 Observations                           1,919                    488                          3,399
 Number of Universities                 126                     32                               266
Notes: All regressions include year and university fixed effects, and a control for the size of the cohort aged 18.
Regressions weighted by baseline (1996) enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the university level. Source: Gifts
and Endowments data from IPEDS (1996 to 2012)



Table 4 ­ Effect of Appropriations on In-State Enrollment 1996-2012
Panel A

 Dependent Variable                                           Log(In-State UG Freshmen Enrollment)
                                              AAU                         Research                 Non-Research
                                     OLS               IV            OLS          IV                 OLS              IV
 Log(State Appropriations)           0.053           -0.074          0.098       0.139               0.116           0.058
                                    (0.059)         (0.085)         (0.052)     (0.091)             (0.050)         (0.092)


 Observations                         547            547            2,121        2,121                3,162          3,162
 Number of Universities                34             34             136          136                  285           2835
 Partial R-squared                                  0.284                        0.270                               0.283
 F- Statistic                                       26.66                        65.59                               65.99


 Panel B
 Dependent Variable                                            Log(In-State UG Total Enrollment)
                                            AAU                           Research                       Non-Research
                                    OLS             IV               OLS           IV                OLS             IV
 Log(State Appropriations)          0.136          0.151             0.147        0.172              0.157          0.151
                                   (0.069)        (0.129)           (0.042)      (0.061)            (0.043)        (0.052)


 Observations                        495            495                1,929      1,929               3,174         3,171
 Number of Universities               34             34                 136        136                 288           285
  Partial R-squared                                0.309                           0.283                             0.271
  F- Statistic                                     32.18                           66.30                             55.88
Notes: Overall state appropriations to higher education used as an instrument are used as an instrument for
institution-level state appropriations in the IV regressions. All regressions include year and university fixed effects,
and a control for the size of the cohort aged 18. Regressions weighted by baseline (1996) enrollment. Standard
errors clustered at the university level. Source: Enrollment data from IPEDS (1996 to 2012).


                                                                                                                     31
Table 5 ­ The Effect of Appropriations on Degrees Awarded 1996-2012

                                                Dependent Variable: Log(Bachelor Degrees)
                                         AAU                            Research                                  Non-Research
                                OLS              IV                 OLS              IV                   OLS                      IV
 Log(State Appropriations)      0.385           0.089               0.262           0.361                 0.205                   0.060
                               (0.118)         (0.226)             (0.060)         (0.092)               (0.044)                 (0.138)
 Observations                    546             546                2,177           2,177                 4,742                   4,742
 Number of Universities           34              34                 136             136                   292                     292


                                                 Dependent Variable: Log(Master Degrees)
                                         AAU                            Research                                  Non-Research
                                OLS              IV                 OLS              IV                   OLS                      IV
 Log(State Appropriations)      0.428           0.575               0.248           0.301                 0.157                   0.296
                               (0.140)         (0.182)             (0.065)         (0.152)               (0.086)                 (0.189)
 Observations                    558            558                2,219            2,219                 4,775                  4,775
 Number of Universities           34             34                 136              136                   294                    294


                                                  Dependent Variable: Log(PhD Degrees)
                                         AAU                            Research                                  Non-Research
                                OLS              IV                 OLS              IV                   OLS                      IV
 Log(State Appropriations)      0.386           0.590               0.532           0.719                 1.088                   2.306
                               (0.126)         (0.226)             (0.117)         (0.223)               (0.483)                 (0.725)
 Observations                    546             546                2,176           2,176                 1,313                   1,313
 Number of Universities           34              34                 136             136                   116                     116
 Partial R-squared                             0.218                                0.249                                        0.264
 F- Statistic                                  9.197                                35.78                                        34.95
Notes: Overall state appropriations to higher education used as an instrument are used as an instrument for institution-level state appropriations in
the IV regressions. We average log appropriation over the previous six years Bachelors and Doctorate degrees and over the previous three years
for Masters degrees. All regressions include year and university fixed effects, and a control for the size of the cohort aged 18. Regressions
weighted by baseline (1996) enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the university level. Source: Degree data from IPEDS (1996 to 2012) via the
Urban Institute Data Portal.


                                                                                                                                                   32
Table 6- Effect of Appropriations on Faculty Salaries 1996-2012

                                                    Dependent Variable: Log(Assist Prof Salary)
                                                   AAU                                        Research                          Non-Research
                                   OLS                     IV                           OLS                IV                OLS             IV
 Log(State Appropriations)         0.017                  0.138                         0.025             0.081              0.047          0.103
                                  (0.041)                (0.067)                       (0.020)           (0.031)            (0.018)        (0.044)
 Observations                       390                    390                          1,714             1,714              3,528          3,528
 Number of Universities              32                     32                           131               131                273            273


                                                   Dependent Variable: Log(Associate Prof Salary)
                                                   AAU                                        Research                          Non-Research
                                   OLS                     IV                           OLS                IV                OLS             IV
 Log(State Appropriations)         0.056                  0.191                         0.060             0.109              0.062          0.115
                                  (0.037)                (0.071)                       (0.019)           (0.033)            (0.015)        (0.048)
 Observations                       390                    390                          1,714             1,714              3,528          3,528
 Number of Universities              32                     32                           131               131                273            273


                                                     Dependent Variable: Log(Full Prof Salary)
                                                   AAU                                        Research                          Non-Research
                                   OLS                     IV                           OLS                IV                OLS             IV
 Log(State Appropriations)         0.033                  0.156                         0.075             0.135              0.086          0.113
                                  (0.034)                (0.079)                       (0.021)           (0.036)            (0.017)        (0.053)
 Observations                       390                    390                          1,714             1,714              3,528          3,528
 Number of Universities              32                     32                           131               131                273            273
 Partial R-squared                                       0.262                                           0.325                              0.249
 F- Statistic                                            12.97                                           46.72                              42.85


Notes: Overall state appropriations to higher education used as an instrument are used as an instrument for institution-level state appropriations in
the IV regressions. We average log appropriation over the previous three years. All regressions include year and university fixed effects, a control
for the size of the cohort aged 18, and the unemployment rate. Regressions weighted by baseline (1996) enrollment. Standard errors clustered at
the university level. Source: Salary data from IPEDS includes both graduate and undergraduate students (1996 to 2012).

                                                                                                                                                     33
Table 7 - Effect of Appropriations on Patents 1996-2012

                      Dependent Variable                        Log(Patents)
                                                         AAU                   Research
                                                   OLS        IV         OLS          IV
                      Log(State Appropriations)    0.437     0.841       0.367       0.910
                                                  (0.335)   (0.383)     (0.236)     (0.585)

                      Observations                 559         559       2,228      2,228
                      Number of Universities        34          34        136        136
                      Partial R-squared                     0.319                   0.301
                      F- Statistic                          50.40                   17.18


Notes: Dependent variable is inverse hyperbolic sine of number of patents granted to a university in a
year. : Overall state appropriations to higher education used as an instrument are used as an instrument for
institution-level state appropriations in the IV regressions. We average log appropriation over the
previous three years. All regressions include year and university fixed effects, and a control for the size of
the cohort aged 18. Regressions weighted by baseline (1996) enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the
university level. Source: Patenting data from National Science Foundation (1996 to 2012), United States
Patent and Trademark Office, University Patent Count & Expenditures.




                                                                                                           34
Appendix

Data Sources and Preparation

Sources

The data assembled for this project are organized at the university and academic year and draw on
multiple sources including the Department of Education's IPEDS survey modules, the American Survey
of Colleges assembled by the College Board, the National Science Foundation, the United States Patent
and Trademark Office, and the Shanghai Ranking. In addition, we assembled annual state-level data on
state revenues, higher education appropriations, demographics and economic conditions from many
sources.

We use the 2010 Carnegie Classification to form groups of public universities. The Carnegie
Classification taxonomy classifies institutions by the highest level of degrees awarded and research
intensity, measured by factors such as research expenditures, doctorates awarded, and number of
research-focused faculty. Among institutions awarding doctorate degrees, there are three categories: (1)
Very high research activity, (2) High research activity, and (3) Doctoral universities. In all, there are 177
public doctorate-granting universities across eighteen years (1997 to 2014) of which 138 universities are
in the first two categories. There are an additional 265 Master's institutions. We focus our analysis on
"Research Universities" defined as the combination of (1) and (2) and create a comparison group of
"Non-Research" institutions as the aggregate of (3) and the Master's institutions.

1- University Level Data

Finance Variables and University Characteristics

The "Finance" module of the IPEDS data collection contains detailed financial information on revenues
and expenditures by source and use. These data are the source of our measures of total tuition revenue,
expenditures by purpose and state appropriations measures. For 2010 and prior, we employ the
harmonized files assembled as part of the Delta Cost Project and add the subsequent years from the
annual IPEDS files. The "Institutional Characteristics" module contains data on in-state and out-of-state
tuition charges. We do not use data on University of Texas' tuition prior to 2004 because the Texas
Legislature had the regulatory authority to set tuition rates, generally mandating that the same statutory
and designated tuition rate be charged across the state. 21



21
  In 2004, the 78th Legislature passed House Bill (HB) 3015, amending Texas Education Code §54.0513 to allow
governing boards of public universities to set different designated tuition rates. Tuition deregulation became

                                                                                                             35
Private gifts, grants and contracts (from IPEDS) includes revenues from private (non-governmental)
entities including revenue from research or training projects and similar activities and all contributions
(including contributed services) except those from affiliated entities, which are included in contributions
from affiliated entities. We use the sum of the restricted (subject to limitations by a donor-imposed
restriction) and unrestricted amounts.

Salary data are from IPEDS. IPEDS distinguishes salary by academic rank (assistant professor, associate
professor, full professor, lecturer, instructor, etc.), and by contract length. We use data on the equated 9-
month contract. We use data on non-medical full time instructional staff only. Instruction/research staff
employed full time (as defined by the institution) whose major regular assignment is instruction,
including those with released time for research. For the Faculty Salaries survey, this group includes
faculty designated as "primarily instruction" and "instruction, combined with research and public
service." We use the average across all workers (men and women).

All the monetary variables (including state appropriations, tuitions and expenditures) are deflated by the
Higher Education Price Index (HEPI). Since most of our regression formulations include the logged
monetary variable and fixed effects, the method of deflation for these regressions is inconsequential, and
the deflation only affects the figures and levels regressions.

Test Scores

Test score data are from the American Survey of Colleges. ASC report the 25th and 75th percentile of
tests scores for the incoming freshmen class. These data are available for SAT and ACT tests separately,
and by each component of the test: we report the SAT Verbal 75th percentile of incoming freshmen, SAT
Math 75th percentile of incoming freshmen, and the ACT Comprehensive score's 75th percentile of
incoming freshmen.

Academic Outcomes

Academic score data (2003 to 2018) comes from the Academic Ranking of World Universities provided
by the Shanghai Ranking in the website. The academic score is based on several indicators of research
performance (including alumni and staff winning Nobel Prizes and Fields Medals), highly cited
researchers, papers published in Nature and Science, papers indexed in major citation indices, and the per
capita academic performance of an institution. We also look at the 3 specific components of the score:
HiCi score is based on the number of highly cited researchers in 21 broad subject categories; N&S score



effective September 1, 2003, and universities began increasing designated tuition in spring 2004. More information
can be found at the Overview: Tuition Deregulation and Tuition Set Asides Report.

                                                                                                                36
is based on the number of papers published in Nature and Science; and PUB score depends on the number
of papers indexed in the Science Citation Index and Social Science Citation Index.

Patents

Patenting data are from the National Science Foundation (1996 to 2012), and the University Patent Count
& Expenditures. These sources compile patenting information from the United States Patent and
Trademark Office (USPTO). (see this website for an easy to access version of the data). We harmonize
university names in the data and match it to the rest of our data.

2- State Level data

Higher Education Appropriations

State level data on total appropriations comes from the State Higher Education Finance report (SHEF)
provided by the State Higher Education Executive Officers' (SHEEO) in the website. We use
appropriations net of special purpose research dollars and full time equivalent enrollment net of medical
students.

State-Level Demographic and Labor Market Variables

In order to control for changes to the local economy, we compile historical Census estimates of the
population at age 18 by state, and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data on the state unemployment rate.
State General Revenue is from the Tax Policy Center. Medicaid Expenditure from the Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Services. State population, personal income, and indicator whether the governor
is Democrat is from the University of Kentucky Poverty Center.

3- Missing Data

When data elements related to tuition and finances were missing from standard institutional surveys, we
attempted to locate the missing elements from the universities' Common Data Sets (CDS) available on
their Institutional Research webpages and the University of California System available at
<http://universityofcalifornia.edu/uc-system>. In addition, we consulted the annual university financial
statements (Annual Financial Reports) to locate institutional data on appropriations and revenues when
missing from IPEDS. By using the complementary data on enrollment and state appropriations, we add
139 observations (at the level of the year-university) to the Research University sample, 84 to the
Flagship, 49 to the AAU and 4 to the Non-Research. Our main results are robust to excluding the hand-
coded data.



                                                                                                           37
Additional Figures and Tables
Figure A1. Changes in Higher Education Appropriations per FTE between 2001 and 2017 by State

                                              Wyoming
                                                 Illinois
                                                 Hawaii
                                          North Dakota
                                              Nebraska
                                              New York
                                                 Alaska
                                              Montana
                                             Tennessee
                                          South Dakota
                                           New Mexico
                                              California
                                                  Texas
                                              Arkansas
                                            Washington
                                               Vermont
                                               Alabama
                                                    Utah
                                                Nevada
                                                Oregon
                                         South Carolina
                                                Indiana
                                              Maryland
                                          West Virginia
                                              Louisiana
                                         North Carolina
                                              Colorado
                                                 Maine
                                             Mississippi
                                        New Hampshire
                                                    Ohio
                                                 Florida
                                                  Idaho
                                             Oklahoma
                                                Virginia
                                              Delaware
                                             Minnesota
                                           Rhode Island
                                                Arizona
                                             Wisconsin
                                            Connecticut
                                                 Kansas
                                              Kentucky
                                            New Jersey
                                                Georgia
                                                    Iowa
                                              Michigan
                                               Missouri
                                         Massachusetts
                                          Pennsylvania

  -$6,000         -$4,000          -$2,000                  $0     $2,000           $4,000          $6,000


Note: Appropirations by FTE is total appropriations in the a state divided by full-time equivalent
enrollment net of medical students. All measures are in 2017 dollars using the HECA index. Years are
fiscal years. For Illinois, a $1.25 billion back payment in FY 17 to their historically underfunded higher
education pension program resulted in past legacy pension funds accounting for 37.8 percent of all
educational appropriations. Source: State Higher Education Finance (SHEF).

                                                                                                             38
Figure A2. Changes Appropriations per FTE between 1998 and 2012 by University type




Note: We create real appropriations (IPEDS data) per full-time equivalent student for each university after
deflating by the higher education price index (HEPI) and dividing by the number of undergraduates
enrolled. We then create the mean value by type of university, and normalize the values to the 1996 level.




                                                                                                        39
Table A1 ­ Determinates of State Appropriations 1996-2012

  Dependent Variable                                    State Appropriations per capita


  State General Revenue per Capita                      0.013                     0.014
                                                       (0.002)                    (0.002)
  Medicaid Expenditure per Capita                       -0.026                    -0.026
                                                       (0.014)                    (0.014)
  Personal Income (Thousands) per Capita                2.596                     1.963
                                                       (1.058)                    (1.092)
  Governor is Democrat                                  -1.326                    -1.842
                                                       (3.132)                    (3.040)
  Lag Unemployment Rate                                                           -4.922
                                                                                  (1.399)


  Observations                                          1,750                     1,750
Notes: All regressions include year and state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level.
Source: State Appropriations is from State Higher Education Finance (1980-2014). State General
Revenue is from the Tax Policy Center. Medicaid Expenditure from the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services. State population, personal income, and indicator whether the governor is Democrat is
from the University of Kentucky Poverty Center. State unemployment rate is from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.




                                                                                                        40
Table A2. Effects of Appropriations on Log (Tuition and Fees Rate) by category and Type of Public University 1996-2012

                                             Dependent Variable: Log (In State Tuition and Fees Rate)
                                           AAU                                  Research                                   Non-Research
                                   OLS                 IV                  OLS                 IV                       OLS                  IV
 Log(State Appropriations)        -0.265             -0.338                -0.164             -0.157                    -0.187              -0.124
                                 (0.087)            (0.156)               (0.052)            (0.100)                   (0.047)             (0.172)

 Observations                      541                548                  2,151              2,172                    4,602               4,630
 Number of Universities             34                 34                   136                136                      293                 293


                                            Dependent Variable: Log (Out of State Tuition and Fees Rate)
                                           AAU                                   Research                                  Non-Research
                                  OLS                 IV                   OLS                 IV                       OLS                  IV

 Log(State Appropriations)        -0.014             0.405                 -0.027             0.193                     0.018               0.130
                                 (0.069)            (0.227)               (0.043)            (0.134)                   (0.033)             (0.141)

 Observations                      548                548                  2,172              2,172                    4,599               4,630
 Number of Universities             34                 34                   136                136                      293                 293
 Partial R-squared                                   0.267                                    0.227                                        0.185
 F- Statistic                                        46.16                                    76.16                                        50.64
Notes: Overall state appropriations to higher education used as an instrument are used as an instrument for institution-level state appropriations in
the IV regressions. All regressions include year and university fixed effects, a control for the size of the cohort aged 18, and the unemployment
rate. Regressions weighted by baseline (1996) enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the university level. Source: Tuition and fee charges from
American Survey of Colleges (ASC) 1996-2012.




                                                                                                                                                     41
Table A3 - Effects of Appropriations on Test Scores 1996-2012

                                          Dependent Variable: Log(SAT Verb 75)
                                       AAU                        Research              Non-Research
                              OLS              IV            OLS            IV       OLS                IV
 Log(State Appropriations)    0.029           0.032           0.003        0.008     -0.002         0.001
                             (0.014)         (0.047)        (0.007)       (0.019)   (0.011)        (0.021)
 Log(FTE)                     0.056           0.055          -0.002        -0.004    -0.011         -0.014
                             (0.036)         (0.035)        (0.010)       (0.011)   (0.019)        (0.028)


                                          Dependent Variable: Log(SAT Math 75)
                                       AAU                        Research              Non-Research
                              OLS              IV            OLS            IV       OLS                IV
 Log(State Appropriations)    -0.011          -0.045         -0.011        -0.012    0.007          0.023
                             (0.015)         (0.052)        (0.008)       (0.023)   (0.010)        (0.015)
 Log(FTE)                     0.053            0.059         -0.000        0.000     0.002          -0.007
                             (0.045)         (0.040)        (0.011)       (0.009)   (0.017)        (0.017)


                                          Dependent Variable: Log(ACT Comp 75)
 Log(Full Prof Salary)                 AAU                         Research             Non-Research
                              OLS              IV            OLS            IV       OLS                IV
 Log(State Appropriations)    0.029           0.042           0.008        0.024     0.015          0.021
                             (0.021)         (0.061)        (0.011)       (0.026)   (0.011)        (0.020)
 Log(FTE)                     0.020           0.018          -0.005        -0.011    0.015          0.012
                             (0.061)         (0.053)        (0.017)       (0.023)   (0.019)        (0.031)

 Observations                  419            418            1,634         1,630    2,154              2,141
 Number of Universities         29             28             122           118      227                213
 Partial R-squared                           0.335                         0.303                       0.275
 F- Statistic                                39.93                         59.98                       56.76


                                                                                                               42
Notes: Overall state appropriations to higher education used as an instrument are used as an instrument for institution-level state appropriations in
the IV regressions. All regressions include year and university fixed effects, and control for Log(population at age 18). Regressions weighted by
baseline (1996) enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the university level. Source: Test score data from ASC (1996 to 2012).




                                                                                                                                                   43
Table A3 - Effects of Appropriations on Academic Rankings 2003-2017

 Sample: AAU                                                                                        Components of the Score
 Dependent Variable                   Aggregate Score                              HiCi                           N&S                     PUB
                                   OLS               IV                   OLS               IV           OLS            IV       OLS             IV
 Log(State Appropriations)         2.916            8.051                 5.797            5.833         0.399       9.192       1.871       6.971
                                  (2.831)          (2.621)               (2.821)          (2.510)       (4.341)     (6.067)     (2.196)     (4.901)

 Observations                       336              336                  336              336            336           336      336            336
 Number of Universities              34               34                   34               34             34            34       34             34
 Partial R-squared                                  0.355                                 0.355                     0.355                       0.355
 F- Statistic                                       26.24                                 26.24                     26.24                       26.24

 Sample: Research
                                                                                                    Components of the Score
 Universities
 Dependent Variable                   Aggregate Score                              HiCi                           N&S                     PUB
                                   OLS               IV                   OLS               IV           OLS            IV       OLS             IV
 Log(State Appropriations)         1.564            2.125                 1.907            2.261         3.159       5.767       1.596       4.797
                                  (1.483)          (1.342)               (1.597)          (1.791)       (2.541)     (2.868)     (1.933)     (2.178)

 Observations                       892              892                  892              892            892           892      892            892
 Number of Universities             104              104                  104              104            104           104      104            104
 Partial R-squared                                  0.401                                 0.401                     0.401                       0.401
 F- Statistic                                       90.31                                 90.31                     90.31                       90.31


Notes: Overall state appropriations to higher education used as an instrument are used as an instrument for institution-level state appropriations in
the IV regressions. All regressions include year and university fixed effects, a control for the size of the cohort aged 18, and the unemployment
rate. Source: Academic score data from Shanghai Ranking (2003 to 2017). Aggregated score is used to create the Academic Ranking of World
Universities. HiCi score is based on the number of highly cited researchers in 21 broad subject categories; N&S score is based on the number of
papers published in Nature and Science; and PUB score is based number of papers indexed in Science Citation Index-expanded and Social Science
Citation Index.
                                                                                                                                                        44
