                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       RUNOFF ELECTIONS IN THE LABORATORY

                                      Laurent Bouton
                                       Jorge Gallego
                                    Aniol Llorente-Saguer
                                      Rebecca Morton

                                     Working Paper 25949
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25949


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




We thank participants of the PEPS Chile 2017, Theem 2018, ESA 2018 and seminar participants
at Carlos III, CERGE-EI, Nanyang Technological University, National University of Singapore,
Universidad del Rosario, University of Cyprus, University of Edinburgh, University of Padua and
Paris School of Economics. We extend particular thanks to Micael Castanheira Jon Woon for
insightful comments. We would also like to thank Mateo Vasquez and Taylor Mattia for their
excellent assistance with running the experiments. This project has received funding from the
European Research Council (Laurent Bouton) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (grant agreement No 637662). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Laurent Bouton, Jorge Gallego, Aniol Llorente-Saguer, and Rebecca Morton. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Runoff Elections in the Laboratory
Laurent Bouton, Jorge Gallego, Aniol Llorente-Saguer, and Rebecca Morton
NBER Working Paper No. 25949
June 2019
JEL No. C92,D7

                                          ABSTRACT

We study experimentally the properties of the majority runoff system and compare them to the
ones of plurality rule, in the setup of a divided majority. Our focus is on Duverger's famous
predictions that the plurality rule leads to a higher coordination of votes on a limited number of
candidates than the majority runoff rule. Our experiments show that, in contradiction with
Duverger's predictions, coordination forces are strong in majority runoff elections. We indeed
observe similar levels of coordination under both rules, even when sincere voting is an
equilibrium only under majority runoff. Our results suggest that the apparent desire to coordinate,
and not vote sincerely, under the majority runoff rule is to some extent not rational. Finally, we
find insignificant differences between runoff and plurality systems in terms of both electoral
outcomes and welfare. This is so exactly because coordination forces are strong under both rules.
But, this does not mean that the two rules are equally socially desirable. Majority runoff rule
entails an additional cost: second rounds that take place frequently.

Laurent Bouton                                   Aniol Llorente-Saguer
Georgetown University                            School of Economics and Finance
Department of Economics                          Queen Mary, University of London
37th & O Streets, NW                             Mile End Road, London E1 4NS
Washington,DC 20057                              United Kingdom
and CEPR                                         a.llorente-saguer@qmul.ac.uk
and also NBER
boutonllj@gmail.com                              Rebecca Morton
                                                 New York University
Jorge Gallego                                    19 West 4th St. 2nd Floor
Universidad del Rosario                          New York, NY 10012
Department of Economics                          rebecca.morton@nyu.edu
jagallegod@gmail.com
1       Introduction

With the spread of democracy worldwide since the end of World War II, there has been an
increase in the use of majority requirements in which a candidate cannot secure election
unless he or she has received a majority of the votes (see Figure 1). When no candidate re-
ceives a majority, then the requirements result in a second round between the top two vote
receivers to determine which candidate wins. This electoral rule is refered to as the ma-
jority runo¤ rule. In contrast, in a plurality rule or ...rst-past-the-post election, whichever
candidate receives the most votes is declared the winner. Majority runo¤ elections are not
new: they appear to have existed as long as plurality rule elections in western countries,
and were reportedly used in the Ancient regime in France.1 They have traditionally been
used for French presidential elections, legislative elections in Australia, and in many may-
oral, legislative, and state-wide contests in the United States.2 More recently, it has been
adopted during the democratic transition in Eastern Europe, Africa, and to a lesser extent
Latin America. Majority runo¤ rules are also often used when committees or legislatures
are selecting leaders and there are more than two candidates.3




Figure 1: Electoral systems used in the world. Majority runo¤ elections are reported under
"Absolute Majority". Source: Bormann and Golder (2013, Figure 7)



    Nevertheless, many elections continue to be conducted under plurality rule. The most
    1
      See Colomer (2007) for a history of use of majority requirements from the French Revolution; he
records their use at various points in the 1800s by Belgium, France, Greece, Honduras, the Netherlands,
Spain, and Switzerland.
    2
      The electoral college system used to select US presidents has a majority requirement as well, although
the second stage of the system is decided by a di¤erent set of voters than in the ...rst stage.
    3
      For example, in 2016 three members of the Louisiana House of Representatives vied to be Louisiana
House Speaker and a second round was held between the two top candidates when none received a majority
in the ...rst round of voting. See Ballard (2016).


                                                     2
obvious reason for not adopting majority requirements4 are the costs involved in a two-
stage election process which increases (i) expenses paid by government agencies to conduct
elections (doubling the variable expenses),5 (ii) voting costs since voters have to go to the
polls twice,6 and (iii) campaign costs because of the longer election process.7 Clearly some
have concluded that any advantages from runo¤ rules are not worth these costs.
    But, what are the advantages? In this paper we focus on one in particular:8 the
perception that in majority runo¤ elections, voters in the ...rst round can express their
preferences more "sincerely", i.e., vote for their favorite candidate, than in a plurality rule
contest and thus voters' preferences can be more accurately observed and understood.
That is, in a plurality election, if a voter believes that her favorite candidate does not
have enough support to defeat the other candidates, she will ...nd it desirable to abandon
her favorite candidate and instead vote strategically for a less-preferred one. This reasoning
leads to a concentration of votes on two candidates­the so-called Duverger's Law (Duverger
1959, Riker 1982, Palfrey 1989). In a runo¤ system, voters are arguably less concerned
about whether their favorite candidate can defeat the rest of the ...eld in the ...rst stage, but
whether the candidate can at least make it to the second round. Thus voters are believed to
be more likely to vote sincerely for their favorite candidate in the ...rst round­the so-called
Duverger's Hypothesis (Duverger 1959, Riker 1982, Martinelli 2002).9
    As we discuss in the next section, the recent theoretical literature has cast doubt on
the extent that voters vote (more) sincerely in the ...rst round of a majority runo¤ election,
   4
       Other drawbacks associated with the use of runo¤ rules include party fragmentation (Shugart and
Carey 1994), the existence of a potential harmful strategic behavior by voters in the ...rst round called
"push-over" (Smith 1973, Cox 1997, Saari 2003), and an increase in the risk that the median candidate is
"squeezed" out of the second round (Solow 2019, and Van Der Straeten et al. 2012).
     5
       In the 2013 NYC election for Public Advocate the 2nd round cost $13 million to conduct, although the
o¢ ce has an annual budget of only $2.3 million. Therefore the government spent more conducting the 2nd
round than the candidates will have control over during their 4 years in o¢ ce (https://nyti.ms/2VDya1h).
     6
       These costs are far from trivial: Stewart and Ansolabehere (2015, page 48) report that long lines
at ballot places alone had "an estimated economic cost of $544.4 million in election line-waiting in 2012,
which is about one-...fth the budget of local election o¢ ces in 2012 [...]"
     7
       An extreme case of potential negative consequences is mentioned by Perez-Linan (2006, p. 136):
"[...] additional ...nancial needs created by the Colombian runo¤ campaign in 1994 led Ernesto Samper'    s
operatives to accept contributions from the Cali drug cartel (Medina Serna, 1997)."
     8
       Some of the advantages not addressed in this paper include: (i) Candidates elected through majority
runo¤ elections are assured of having received at least majority support in the election and thus can
contend that they have a mandate of democratic legitimacy (see the discussions in Perez-Linan 2006 and
McClintock 2018); (ii) Candidates have incentives to cater to the interests of a broad coalition of voters
(see, e.g., Lizzeri and Persico 2005); (iii) Voters can more easily transmit information about their policy
preferences to candidates (Piketty 2000, Castanheira 2003, Blais 2004a,b).
     9
       See Riker (1982) for a discussion of the history of thought concerning these two relationships. See
also our review of the literature in the next section.


                                                    3
demonstrating that the forces toward coordination are also present in those elections (see
Bouton 2013, Bouton and Graton 2015, and Bouton and Ogden 2017). These forces can
be so strong as to prevent the existence of an equilibrium in which voters vote sincerely.
These new theoretical results provide a possible explanation for the mixed observational
empirical evidence about the di¤erent strengths of Duvergerian forces in plurality versus
runo¤ systems (which we also review in the next section). However, these observational
studies provide only indirect evidence of the e¤ects of majority requirements on voter
behavior.
   In this paper, we investigate the e¤ects of majority requirements on preference reve-
lation using laboratory experiments. We ...nd that, under the majority runo¤ rule, there
are strong coordination forces which lead to insincere voting. In fact, the voting behavior
under the majority runo¤ rule is similar to that observed under plurality rule. Under both
systems, we ...nd little support for the sincere voting equilibrium. Furthermore, our results
suggest that the apparent desire to coordinate, and not vote sincerely, is to some extent
not rational. It appears to reect an excessive and irrational focus on the ...rst round. Our
results imply that in terms of voting behavior there are few institutional di¤erences be-
tween plurality and majority runo¤ elections. In the laboratory, majority runo¤ elections
are not more conducive to preference revelation than plurality elections.
   However, similar voting behavior does not necessarily mean similar electoral outcomes.
Runo¤ and plurality systems can map votes into outcomes di¤erently. While theoretically
possible, this di¤erence does not appear in our laboratory experiments. We ...nd insigni...-
cant di¤erences between runo¤ and plurality systems in terms of both electoral outcomes
and welfare. This lack of di¤erence occurs because voters coordinate behind two alterna-
tives under both types of elections. But, that does not mean that the two rules are equally
socially desirable. One important di¤erence our experiments highlight is that the runo¤
rule entails an additional cost for society: second rounds, which are costly and take place
frequently. And, both in real-life and in our laboratory experiments, many of those second
rounds prove "useless": the election's winner corresponds to the ...rst-round winner (e.g.,
Engstrom and Engstrom 2008 ...nd that, in US primaries, this occurs approximately 70%
of the times).
   Our experimental approach is particularly well-suited to explore the causal impact of



                                             4
an electoral system on voting behavior. It indeed does not face a number of important
challenges that observational studies have to overcome to produce reliable estimates. First,
as Acemoglu (2005) notes, institutions are endogenous themselves. For instance, the
majority runo¤ rule may be more likely to be adopted where and when voters have a
tendency to vote sincerely. Second, electoral systems a¤ect not only voters'behavior but
also candidates and parties behavior, which makes it di¢ cult to determine if observed
di¤erences are due to voter behavioral responses or candidate choices (see, e.g., Palfrey
1984, Osborne and Slivinski, and Callander 2005 for analyses of candidate entry behavior
under plurality and majority runo¤ rules). Third, when comparing electoral systems one
must, most of the time, control for many important di¤erences between countries in other
dimensions such as culture and institutions that can profoundly a¤ect electoral choices
and voters behavior.10 The obvious drawback of our approach is the potential lack of
external validity. We thus see the di¤erent approaches as complementary.


2        Review of the Literature

The idea that runo¤ elections lead to sincere voting and the viability of more than two
electoral choices (either candidates or parties) was expressed as far back as the mid nine-
teenth century. Riker (1982) traces the ...rst statement that plurality rule leads to two
parties and strategic voting to Henry Droop, writing in 1869. Nevertheless, it is usually
associated with Duverger (1959). As Riker (1982) notes, the ...rst e¤ect, that plurality rule
leads to a domination of the top two choices is known as Duverger's Law. The second
e¤ect, that runo¤ systems lead to more sincere voting and thus more than two viable
choices, was considered more of a hypothesis than a law by Duverger, hence Riker labels
it as Duverger's Hypothesis. Duverger argued that there were two sources for the e¤ects,
one source is a "mechanical e¤ect" of parties not entering or forming coalitions of larger
parties in anticipation of the di¢ culty of achieving enough votes to win. The other is
a "psychological e¤ect", that in a ...rst-past-the-post election, voters abandon their ...rst
choice if it is unlikely to contend for victory, and instead vote strategically for their fa-
vorite contender. Duverger's Hypothesis, likewise rests on the argument that in majority

    10
     This last challenge is not relevant for recent within country studies that rely on RDD (see, e.g.,
Fujiwara 2011, Bordignon et al. 2015).


                                                  5
runo¤ elections, in the ...rst round, both e¤ects are less present, with more, smaller parties
entering competition and voters not so attracted to abandon favorite choices when they
are trailing behind. Our focus in this paper is on Duverger's Hypothesis and the extent
that the psychological e¤ect is less prevalent from the ...rst round of voting in a majority
runo¤ election than in a plurality election. Hence, we consider voter behavior holding
candidate and party behavior ...xed.11
    The more recent, game-theoretic, literature re...nes Duverger's predictions and our
understanding of voters' behavior under plurality and majority runo¤.12 In plurality
elections, there are always multiple Duverger's Law equilibria, in which only two candidates
receive votes, and the sincere voting equilibrium does not exist generically (see, e.g, Palfrey
1989, Myerson and Weber 1993, and Cox 1997).13 By contrast, in the ...rst round of
majority runo¤ elections, the sincere voting equilibrium, or an equilibrium in which more
than two candidates receive a positive share of the votes, exists for a broad range of
situations, but Duverger's law equilibria exist only if, in the ...rst round, there is su¢ cient
uncertainty about the outcome of the second round (Bouton 2013, Bouton and Gratton
2015, and Bouton and Ogden 2017). Our paper contributes to this literature in two
ways. First, we extend some of those theoretical results to a case with a small number of
voters. Second, and more importantly, we explore in the laboratory the strength of the
coordination forces under plurality and majority runo¤.
    Empirical evidence on Duverger's Hypothesis is mixed. There are many observational
empirical cases where runo¤ systems exist with less than three viable or e¤ective candidates
(see Wright and Riker 1989 and Shugart and Taagepera 1994). Large n empirical analyses
using observational data provides no conclusive evidence. For instance, using Brazilian
data and a regression discontinuity design, Fujiwara (2011) ...nds a strong negative e¤ect
of the majority runo¤ on the vote share of the top-two candidates (in line with Duverger'
                                                                                        s

   11
      See Osborne and Slivinski (1996) and Callander (2005) for studies that examine the mechanical e¤ect.
   12
      See, e.g., Palfrey 1989, Myerson and Weber (1993), Cox (1997), Fey (1997), Piketty (2000), Myatt
(2007), Martinelli (2002), Bouton (2013), Bouton and Gratton (2015), and Bouton and Ogden (2017).
   13
      This statement requires two important clari...cations. First, with aggregate uncertainty, (i) the sincere
voting equilibrium exists for a broader set of distributions, and (ii) Duverger's law equilibria exist as long
as the amount of aggregate uncertainty is not excessive (see Myatt 2007 and Bouton, Castanheira, and
Llorente-Saguer 2017). Second, the literature also show the existence of an equilibrium in mixed strategy
in which more than two candidates receive a positive fraction of the votes (Myerson and Weber 1993, Fey
1997, Bouton, Castanheira and Llorente-Saguer 2017). The key condition of existence of that equilibrium is
that both majority alternatives are equally strong contender of the minority alternative. Without aggregate
uncertainty, this equilibrium is unstable and often deemed unreasonable (see, e.g., Fey 1997).


                                                      6
predictions). He also ...nds suggestive evidence that this result is driven by the strategic
behavior of voters. By contrast, using Italian data and a similar regression discontinuity
design, Bordignon et al. (2016) ...nds no e¤ect of the electoral system on the vote share of
the top-two candidates.14
     As noted in the Introduction, the observational studies su¤er from a number of serious
handicaps in that party and candidate behavior is endogenous as well as the electoral insti-
tutions themselves. There have been a few experimental studies of majority requirements
which provide better control over possible confounding factors in observational studies
(Morton and Rietz 2007, Van Der Straeten et al. 2010, 2016). However, in these stud-
ies, voters have complete information as to the distribution of voter preferences, which is
both empirically unrealistic and fails to capture the importance of uncertainty about the
outcome in the second round highlighted by the aforementioned theoretical literature.


3        The Model

This section presents a modi...ed, simpli...ed, version of the model in Bouton (2013). Some
elements are borrowed from Bouton and Gratton (2015). There are two main di¤erences.
First, we assume that the size of the electorate is ...xed at n; instead of being randomly
distributed according to a Poisson distribution. The main reason for this modi...cation
is that it is not practical to have a random and potentially in...nite number of voters in
the laboratory. Second, we consider any electorate size, which contrasts with most of the
literature's focus on large electorates.
     We consider the typical case of a divided majority,15 with three alternatives, fA; B; C g ;
and three types of voters: t 2 T = ftA ; tB ; tC g : The electorate is split in two groups:
majority and minority voters. Majority voters have a common view that C is the worst
alternative. Yet, they disagree on which alternative is best: types-tA prefer A over B
whereas types-tB prefer B over A: Minority voters are assumed to prefer C and, for the

    14
       See also Jones (1999), Golder (2006), and Eggers (2015) for evidence of signi...cant di¤erences in voting
behavior under plurality and majority runo¤, and Cox (1997), and Engstrom and Engstrom (2008) for
nonsigni...cant ones.
    15
       The divided majority setting is tractable but still captures some of the fundamental coordination
problems that voters face in multicandidate elections. As a consequence, this setting is common in the
literature on strategic voting in multicandidate elections. See, e.g., Myerson and Weber (1993), Cox
(1997), Fey (1997), Piketty (2000), Myerson (2002), Dewan and Myatt (2007), Myatt (2007), Bouton and
Castanheira (2012), and Bouton (2013).


                                                       7
sake of simplicity, to be indi¤erent between A and B ; hence their (weakly) dominant
strategy is to vote for C .
    Formally, the utilities of the di¤erent types are:


                              U (AjtA ) > U (B jtA ) > U (C jtA ) ;

                             U (B jtB ) > U (AjtB ) > U (C jtB ) ; and                                     (1)

                              U (C jtC ) > U (AjtC ) = U (B jtC ) ;


where U (W jt) denotes the utility of a type-t voter when W is the winning alternative.
   Each voter is assigned a type t by i.i.d. draws. The probability that a voter is assigned
                      P
type t is r (t) ; with t2T r (t) = 1: These probabilities are common knowledge. In the
case of the divided majority, we have:

                                                              1
                                     r (tA ) + r (tB ) >        > r (tC ) :
                                                              2

Alternative C is thus the (expected) Condorcet loser.16 We focus on the case in which
alternative C is a serious threat to the victory of a majority alternative when majority
voters divide their votes: r (tC ) > 1=3.
    By convention, we focus on the case in which the "more abundant" type among ma-
jority voters is tA :
                                              r (tA )       r (tB ) :

Alternative A is thus the (expected) Condorcet winner.
    We consider two electoral systems: S 2 fP; Rg; where P refers to plurality and R to
majority runo¤. Under plurality, the election is as follows. There is one round of voting.
Each voter casts a ballot in favor of one of the alternatives. The alternative that obtains
the largest number of votes wins.17 Under majority runo¤, the election works as follows.
In the ...rst round, each voter casts a ballot in favor of one of the alternatives. If the
alternative who ranks ...rst obtains (strictly) more than 50% of the votes, it wins outright
and there is no second round. Otherwise, a second round with the two alternatives that
   16
      That is, in pairwise contests with the other two candidates, C is the loser. A Condorcet winner has
the optimistic property.
   17
      For the sake of notational simplicity, ties are resolved by alphabetical order. Results hold if we assume
that ties are resolved by the toss of a fair coin.


                                                        8
received the most votes in the ...rst round (called the top-two alternatives) is held. In
this round, each voter casts a ballot in favor of one of the top-two alternatives and the
alternative that obtains the most votes wins the election.18
    From Bouton (2013), we know that what happens in the second round of a majority
runo¤ election inuences dramatically the behavior of voters in the ...rst round. In partic-
ular, a crucial element is the risk of an upset victory in that round. The way we model
the second round is thus a sensitive matter. For the sake of expositional clarity, we follow
Bouton and Gratton (2015) and work under the assumption that, at the time of the ...rst
round, the probabilities of victory of all possible second rounds are given, positive, and
constant.19 In particular, we denote by Pr (ijij ), i; j 2 fA; B; C g the probability that al-
ternative i wins a second round opposing alternatives i and j:20 The focus under majority
runo¤ is thus on the behavior of voters in the ...rst round.
    Both in a plurality election and in the ...rst round of a majority runo¤ election, each
voter may vote for one of the three alternatives who compete for election. The action set
is thus the same under both rules:             = fA; B; C g :21
    A strategy under electoral system S is a mapping              S   : T ! 4 ( ), the set of probability
distributions over the action set.         S   ( ) denotes the probability that a voter with type t
                                           t

plays action      2     under electoral system S . Note the focus on symmetric strategies (i.e.
voters with the same type and signal vote in the same way): this assumption is common
in voting games which re   ects the idea that voters are anonymous. Given a strategy                        S,

                                               S =
                                                     P S
the expected vote share of an action is                 t t ( ) r (t).
    For the voting game under electoral system S; we analyze the set of symmetric Bayesian
Nash equilibria in which voters do not play weakly dominated strategies.22 This assump-
tion directly implies that, in the equilibria we are considering, tC -voters necessarily vote

   18
      Again, ties are resolved by alphabetical order.
   19
      This includes (but is not limited to) any "realistic" restriction (e.g. the front-runner or the candidate
with the largest (expected) number of supporters being more likely to win in the second round).
   20
      For the sake of simplicity, we work under the assumption that Pr (AjAC ) = Pr(B jBC ): It is a natural
assumption in the sense that it is satis...ed when we formally include the second round in the model and
assume that there is a new draw of voters before the second round (see discussion in Bouton 2013 and
Bouton and Gratton 2015).
   21
      Given that abstaining is weakly dominated, including the possibility of abstention would not a¤ect
our results.
   22
      The purpose of this assumption is to eliminate unreasonable equilibria in which all voters vote for the
same alternative. These are equilibria because, for those strategy pro...les, the probability that one ballot
changes the outcome of the election is exactly zero. Voters are then indi¤erent about which alternative to
support, even the one they like least.


                                                      9
for C; whereas tA - and tB -voters do not vote for C .


4     Equilibrium Analysis

In this section, we analyze the behavior of voters under both plurality and majority runo¤
for any electorate size, including small ones. Our objective is to show that the incentives
that shape voting behavior are the same as in the case with a large electorate, which is
discussed in the Appendix.
    There are three main issues that complicate the analysis of voting behavior in small
electorates. First, the various pivotal events a¤ect the behavior of voters in more multi-
faceted ways than with large electorates. The complexity arises because the behavior of
voters is not driven by only one of those events as it is with large electorates. Second, the
pivot probabilities are cumbersome mathematical objects, that are not easy to manipu-
late, excluding when the electorate is large. Third, cardinal utilities must be accounted for.
With large electorates, cardinal utilities are dwarfed by the enormous di¤erences across
pivot probabilities. For these reasons, we rely on numerical simulations for some results.
    We focus on the pure strategy equilibria under both systems because it is su¢ cient to
formally frame the debate about Duverger's Law and sincere voting. There are two types
of pure strategy equilibria:

De...nition 1 The sincere voting equilibrium is such that all voters vote for their most
preferred candidate:   S    (A) =   S    (B ) = 1.
                       tA           tB


De...nition 2 A Duverger'
                        s Law equilibrium is such that only two candidates obtain a
positive fraction of the votes: either      S   (A) = 1 or   S   (B ) = 1 8t 2 ftA ; tB g:
                                            t                t



4.1   Preliminaries

Since voters are instrumental, their behavior depends on the probability that a ballot
a¤ects the ...nal outcome of the elections, i.e. its probability of being pivotal. The pivotal
events and their probabilities given a strategy are di¤erent under the two systems. In this
paper, we abstract from the formal de...nition of those pivotal events and the computation
of their probabilities. Yet, we use those objects to explain the intuition of the di¤erent



                                                     10
results. Therefore, it is important to understand the di¤erent types of pivotal events under
plurality and runo¤.
   As discussed in Myerson (2002), there is only one type of pivotal event under plurality:
when a speci...c ballot changes the outcome of the election from a victory of alternative i
to a victory of alternative j: In contrast, in the ...rst round of a majority runo¤ election
there are two types of pivotal events. First, a ballot can be threshold pivotal i=ij . This
occurs when alternative i lacks one vote to obtain a strict majority of the votes in the
...rst round. Thus, without an additional vote in favor of i, a second round opposing i to
j is held. Second, a ballot may a¤ect the ...nal outcome if it changes the identity of the
two alternatives participating in the second round. In particular, a ballot is second-rank
pivotal ki=kj when alternative k ranks ...rst (but does not obtain an absolute majority of
the votes), and alternatives i and j (almost) tie for second place. An additional vote in
favor of alternative i allows it, instead of j , to participate in the second round with k .


4.2   Duverger'
              s Law Equilibria

We can show that Duverger'
                         s Law equilibria exist under both systems even when the
electorate is small (see Appendix for proof):

Proposition 1 If there are strictly more than 4 voters:
(i) Under Plurality, the two Duverger's Law equilibria always exist;
(ii) Under Majority Runo¤ , the two Duverger's Law equilibria exist.

   The intuition is exactly the same as for large electorates. Under plurality, supporters
of the alternative expected to receive (almost) no votes, do not want to waste their ballot
on their most-preferred alternative which is extremely unlikely to tie for ...rst place, and
instead prefer to vote for their second-preferred alternative in order to defeat their least
preferred one. Under majority runo¤, supporters of the alternative expected to receive
no votes, do not want to waste their ballot on their most-preferred alternative (which has
no path to victory). They prefer to vote for their second-preferred alternative in order
to prevent the risk of an upset victory of their least-preferred alternative in the second
round.
   The existence of the Duverger'
                                s law equilibria is not an artifact of one of the alter-
natives having a zero expected vote share. In most situations, majority voters indeed

                                              11
Figure 2: Existence of "A"Duverger'      s Law equilibrium under Runo¤ elections for any combination
of the size of the nimority (r (tC )) and the level of agreement (r (tA ) =(r (tA ) + r (tB ))), for dif-
ferent sizes of the electorate and for sincere trembling frequencies by tB -voters " 2 f0:1; 0:2; 0:5g.



have strict incentives to abandon their most-preferred alternative even if the probability
that other majority voters vote for it is not exactly zero. We illustrate these incentives
in Figure 2. This ...gure shows whether the duverger'
                                                    s law equilibria when all majority
voters vote for A exist when tB -voters "tremble"by voting sincerely for B with probability
" 2 f0:1; 0:2; 0:5g, for any combination of the size of the minority (r (tC )) and the level of
agreement (r (tA ) =(r (tA ) + r (tB ))) and for di¤erent sizes of the electorate.23 The ...gure
shows that (i) Duverger's Law equilibria exist with small electorates even with large trem-
bles, (ii) the area for which Duverger'
                                      s law equilibria do not exist shrinks with ", (iii) the
area for which Duverger's law equilibria do not exist shrinks with n.


4.3     Sincere Voting Equilibrium

We now discuss the existence of the sincere voting equilibrium under plurality and majority
runo¤. Figure 3 is quite enlightening about the conditions under which the sincere voting
equilibrium exists. This ...gure shows whether the sincere voting equilibrium exists under
plurality and majority runo¤ for any combination of the size of the minority (r (tC )) and
the level of agreement (r (tA ) =(r (tA ) + r (tB ))) and for di¤erent sizes of the electorate. It

   23
     The utilitiy values assumed for these simulations are 1 for the top-ranked candidate, 0 for the lowest-
ranked candidate and 0.7 for the second-ranked candidate in the case of the majority voters. The same
values are assumed for the other simulations presented.


                                                    12
Figure 3: Existence of sincere voting equilibria under both Runo¤ and Plurality election for any
combination of the size of the nimority (rC ) and the level of agreement (rA =(rA + rB )) and for
di¤erent sizes of the electorate.



conveys several messages. First, if the sincere voting equilibrium exists under plurality, it
also necessarily exists under majority runo¤, but the converse is not true. This result holds
for any size of the electorate. Second, the set of parameter values for which the sincere
voting equilibrium exists under plurality shrinks quite rapidly when the electorate grows
large. The same is not true under majority runo¤. Finally, if the level of agreement in the
majority is high enough, the sincere voting equilibrium exists neither under plurality nor
under majority runo¤. By contrast, it can exist when the minority is expected to be quite
large when the level of agreement among majority voters is su¢ ciently low.


4.4    Electoral Outcomes

Electoral outcomes can be substantially di¤erent under plurality and runo¤ systems. An
obvious case is when voters coordinate on di¤erent equilibria under the two systems. But
di¤erences in outcomes can also emerge when voters coordinate on the same equilibrium
under the two systems. In particular, there are di¤erences when voters vote sincerely under
the two systems, but no di¤erences when they coordinate on the same Duverger's Law
equilibrium. To illustrate more concretely the di¤erences in outcomes between plurality
and majority runo¤, we consider some numerical examples. In particular, we focus on the
parameter values of the Baseline and Low Disagreement treatments from our laboratory



                                               13
experiments (see Table 1 for the values of the parameters). The overall message is that, in
comparison to plurality, majority runo¤ improves the selection between the two majority
alternatives, A and B . But, this comes at the cost of increasing the risk of a victory of
the minority alternative, C:
    Under plurality, only the Duverger's law equilibria exist (in both cases). In those
equilibria, one majority alternative, say A; is supported by all majority voters. It is thus
very likely to win: 76:3% in both plurality treatments. Alternative C wins with the
remaining probability (and B never wins). The issue with those equilibria is that there is
no possibility of selection between the majority alternatives: only A can win, even if all
majority voters prefer B over A: If we assume that the realized distribution of preferences of
voters is the true one, then although the minority alternative is defeated when it should be,
the plurality system deprives majority voters of the possibility of selecting the alternative
with more support.
    Under majority runo¤, the Duverger's law equilibria may coexist with the sincere
voting equilibrium. This is the case in the Baseline con...guration but not the Low Dis-
agreement one. When voters coordinate on a Duverger's law equilibrium, the alternative
receiving the support of all majority voters is again very likely to win. The probabilities
are similar to those under plurality.24 Thus, the two systems are similar. By contrast,
when voters coordinate on the sincere voting equilibrium, the probability that A wins is
sharply lower (49:91%), while the probabilities that B and C wins are higher (13:03%
and 37:05% respectively). If we assume that the realized distribution in the ...rst round is
the true distribution of preferences (or closer to the true distribution than in the second
round) then the higher probability of B winning is a desirable feature of the majority
runo¤ system. By incentivizing voters to reveal their preferences, majority runo¤ systems
lead to a better selection between the majority alternatives. Now, B has a chance to win,
and it does when there are more majority voters who prefer B than A: This desirable fea-
ture comes at a cost: an increase in the probability that C wins either the ...rst round or in
the second. If there is a second round, which only happens when there is not a majority of
voters supporting C in the ...rst round, then there is a risk of an upset victory of C in the

   24
     The di¤erence is entirely driven by the case in which A and C receive 6 votes each. Due to the
alphabetical tie-breaking rule, A wins in that case under plurality. By contrast, under runo¤, no alternative
wins outright. In the second round, both A and C win with positive probability.


                                                     14
second round. Such victories of C; which we view as socially undesirable, happens 13:01%
of the time: when C participate in the second round and wins. This is to be compared to
the higher probability of a victory of B , which increases from 0% to 13:03% of the time.25


5        Experimental Design and Procedures

To test our theoretical predictions, and in particular, to determine if preference revelation
di¤ers as a function of the type of electoral system, we conducted controlled laboratory
experiments. Subjects played a game with the same structure as presented in Section 3.
We manipulated the relative support of each group of voters and the voting rule in a
between-subjects design. In particular, we manipulated the level of agreement in the
majority, the size of the minority, and the type of electoral system.
Design. In all treatments, participants interacted in the same group of 12 voters and
played the game for 60 rounds.26 Alternatives A, B , and C were labeled Green, Purple
and Yellow, respectively. Thus, Green and Purple were the two majority candidates and
Yellow was the (expected) Condorcet loser.27 In the beginning of each round, participants
were assigned a type by drawing (with replacement) a ball from a hypothetical urn which
contained a commonly known composition of green, purple and yellow balls (and the color
of the ball indicates the most preferred choice of the voter). The particular composition
of balls was one of the treatment variables in our experiments. In the Baseline (B) set of
parameters, the urn consisted of 34 Green (tA ), 22 Purple (tB ), and 44 Yellow (tC ) balls.
In the Low Disagreement (LD) set we kept the (expected) size of the minority ...xed, and
increased the agreement between majority voters, by having 43 Green (tA ) balls and 13
Purple (tB ) ones. For the sake of expositional clarity, in the remainder of the paper, we
use the same wording as in the theory section when referring to alternatives (A, B , and
C ) and types of voters (tA , tB , and tC ).

    25
      In order to compare the social desirability of plurality outcomes with majority rule outcomes, we
assume that the revealed preferences in the ...rst stage of a majority rule election are equivalent to those
in a plurality rule election
   26
      Repeated game e¤ects are unlikely in our setup since types are redrawn in every period and payment
is made for only a few randomly drawn periods. We used ...xed matchings in order to allow voters to
better learn the strategies of others and coordinate. For example, Forsythe et al. (1993, 1996) observe
that Duverger'  s Law equilibria emerge more easily among voters with a common history ­ see also Rietz
(2008) and Bouton et al. (2016).
   27
      Since the realized distribution of voter preferences was subject to randomness, Yellow is the Condorcet
loser in expectation, not necessarily in actuality.


                                                     15
 Treat.        Parameters            Rule       ra    rb   rc    pAB     pAC      pBC     Groups     Sinc    Duv
 R_B        Baseline (B)           Runo¤        34    22   44     78      76       76       6         X       X
 P_B        Baseline (B)           Plurality    34    22   44      -       -        -       5                 X
 R_LD       Low Disagr. (LD)       Runo¤        43    13   44     96      76       76       5                 X
 P_LD       Low Disagr. (LD)       Plurality    43    13   44      -       -        -       5                 X

                                  Table 1: Main treatments overview.


    The second variable that we varied across treatments was the electoral system : either
plurality or majority runo¤. Under either voting rule, after learning their type, partici-
pants voted for one of the three alternatives. Under Plurality (P), the alternative with the
most votes won the election, with ties broken alphabetically. Under Runo¤ (R) elections,
one of the alternatives won if it received strictly more than 50% of the votes. In case no
alternative won in the ...rst round, the two alternatives with the most votes advanced to
the second round which, in line with the theoretical setup, was computerized. Participants
knew beforehand the probabilities of victory of each alternative in the second round under
all possible scenarios. These probabilities were computed as if there was a new draw of
12 individuals from the same distribution as that of the initial urn, with all participants
playing their dominant strategy (and type tC abstaining when A and B proceeded to the
second round).28
    The payo¤s were the same in all treatments: tA and tB -voters received $11 if their
top choice was elected, $8 if their second-preferred alternative was elected, and $1 if their
least-preferred was elected. tC -voters received $11 if their top choice was elected, and $1
otherwise.
    Table 1 summarizes the main treatments and indicates the number of groups of 12 used
for each one. It also indicates which types of (pure strategy) equilibria exist: while Du-
verger'
      s Law equilibria exist in all treatments, the sincere voting equilibrium exists only in
the R_B treatment-- i.e. under the runo¤ rule with the baseline parameter con...guration.


   28
      We chose to computerize the second stage for two reasons. First, in a pilot session using an alternative
design with an additional group of 12 subjects who only voted in the second round, we found that the
dominant strategy of voting for the preferred choice was played more than 95% of the time. Therefore,
our design reduced the cost with respect to the alterantive design while conserving the properties of the
seocnd round. Second, a non-computerized second round might have induced subjects to converge to the
Duverger' s Law equilibria in order to minimize the length of the experiment. Our design has additional
interesting and useful features. In particular,  exibility on the realized probabilities in the second round
allowed us to vary the second round probabilities without changing the instructions for the ...rst round.
We explore this possibility in some of the alternative treatments, discussed in the next sections.


                                                     16
Procedures. Experimental sessions for all treatments were conducted at New York Uni-
versity'
       s Center for Experimental Social Science (CESS) between October 2017 and April
2018. We conducted a total of 38 sessions, with either 12 or 24 subjects. No subject par-
ticipated in more than one session. Subjects were recruited through the online recruitment
software h-root (Bock, Nicklisch, and Baetge, 2012), and the experiment was programmed
and conducted using the software z-Tree (Fischbacher, 2007). All sessions were organized
under the same procedure: subjects received detailed written instructions, which an ex-
perimenter read aloud (see Appendix A3). Before starting the experiment, subjects were
asked to answer a questionnaire to con...rm their full understanding of the experimental
design. After the questionnaire, subjects began to play. At the end of each round, each
subject received the following information: (i) the group decision, (ii) the number of votes
for each alternative, and (iii) her payo¤ for that period.
     To determine the payment at the end of the experiment, the computer randomly
selected three periods and subjects were paid the total sum earned in these three periods.
In total, subjects earned an average of $35:03, a minimum of $10, and a maximum of $40.
All these ...gures include a show-up fee of $7.


6        Experimental Results

This section summarizes the voting behavior observed in the laboratory. The bottom line
is that coordination forces appear to be strong both under plurality and majority runo¤.
Voters indeed (partially) coordinate on the Duverger'
                                                    s Law A equilibrium under both
systems. Yet, some voters appear to always vote sincerely, and others to always voter
Duvergerian.
     Note that we report parametric tests of di¤erences in choices and outcomes based on
regression analysis summarized in Tables 8-13 in Appendix A4. These regressions cluster
standard errors at the matching group level, and in some speci...cations, we control for
individual voter characteristics.29 If they lead to di¤erent conclusions, we also report
non-parametric tests, using averages at the group level as their unit of analysis.

    29
     The vector of covariates includes subjects'gender, age, years in school, a level of risk, a level of trust,
and dummies for experience participating in experiments and interest in politics. Additional speci...cations
control for whether the minority alternative (C ) won the previous election or a count variable indicating
the number of elections previously won by the minority alternative.


                                                      17
                                             Baseline                        Low disagreement
                                   %A         %B             %C          %A        %B       %C
        Plurality       tA         99.1       0.41            0.49       98.17     1.57     0.26
                        tB         75.25      24.14           0.62       71.49    27.92      0.59
                        tC         1.47       0.89           97.64        2.82     1.22     95.97
        Runo¤           tA         97.21       2.38           0.41       97.34     2.14      0.52
                        tB         58.72      40.26           1.01       70.55     28.6      0.85
                        tC         1.34       0.97           97.69        1.58     0.69     97.73

                           Table 2: Aggregate behavior in main treatments.


Aggregate voting behavior. Table 2 summarizes aggregate voting behavior in the
four treatments. Two clear patterns emerge in all treatments. First, and in line with
the theoretical predictions, tC -voters overwhelmingly play their weakly dominant strategy
to vote for alternative C . The frequency of playing this strategy is above 95% in all
the treatments and there are no signi...cant di¤erences across electoral systems (p-value
= 0:829 for B treatments and p-value = 0:121 for LD treatments).30 Second, tA -voters
massively choose alternative A: the frequency is above 97% in all the main treatments
and there are no signi...cant di¤erences across electoral systems (p-value = 0:137 for B
treatments and p-value = 0:615 for LD treatments). As a consequence, it is clear that
there is no convergence to the Duverger's Law equilibrium in which all majority voters
choose alternative B . If there is convergence to a Duverger's Law equilibrium it will be
to the one in which majority voters coordinate on alternative A.31 This depends on the
behavior of tB -voters.
    Under plurality, if tB -voters correctly anticipate the behavior of tA - and tC -voters,
then they face no trade-o¤: they should abandon their favorite alternative and vote for
alternative A. This is true even if all other tB -voters vote sincerely for B . And indeed, we
...nd that tB -voters play this best response a bit more than 70% of the time. Nevertheless,
the frequency with which they vote for their favorite alternative is non-negligible: 24:14%
in P_B treatments and 27:92% in P_LD treatments. However, this di¤erence is not
   30
      In order to test for signi...cant di¤erences, we regress the probability of voting sincerely by tA -voters
in the B treatments with a dummy variable indicating if the voting rule is runo¤ (controlling for a number
of observables), and we test whether this coe¢ cient is signi...cantly di¤erent from zero or not. We use a
similar procedure to test for di¤erences in behavior across treatments for tB - and tC -voters. In every case,
random e¤ects models are estimated, to exploit the temporal nature of the data.
   31
      Given the co-existence of two Duverger'   s law equilibria, it is somehow surprising that majority voters
always coordinate behind alternative A. One potential explanation is that the status of A as the majority
alternative with the higher (expected) support in the electorate, i.e., r(tA ) > r(tB ), may makes the
Duverger'  s law equilibrium A the focal equilibrium.


                                                        18
Figure 4: Treatment e¤ects of the voting rule on the probability of strategic voting by
tB -voters. 90% and 95% con...dence intervals are drawn from regression in Appendix A4.



signi...cantly di¤erent from 0 (p-value = 0:294).
    In treatment R_LD, if they correctly anticipate the behavior of tA - and tC -voters, the
incentives for tB -voters to vote sincerely under runo¤ are similar to those under plurality:
the sincere voting equilibrium does not exist. In this treatment, tB -voters vote sincerely
only 28:6% of the time. Figure 4 displays the treatment e¤ects of the voting rule on behav-
ior of tB -voters (in order to save space, it also includes the coe¢ cient for two additional
treatments, SM and NU, which we describe in Section 7). As the ...gure shows, in the LD
treatments, the frequency of sincere voting by tB -voters under runo¤ is not signi...cantly
di¤erent than under plurality (p-value = 0:727). Furthermore, as Figure 5 shows, the
amount of sincere voting decreases over time in all groups.32
    Unlike in the other treatments, in treatment R_B, the sincere voting equilibrium and
the Duverger'
            s law equilibria coexist. Taking as given the behavior of tA -voters (who
almost always vote for A), this means that there are two equilibria in pure strategies: one
in which tB -voters all vote for A, and another one in which they all vote for B . In this
treatment, tB -voters voted for their favorite candidate 40:26% of the time, which contrasts
with the 24:14% observed under plurality. Despite the size of the di¤erence, it is not
signi...cant with non-parametric tests (Wilcoxon, p-value = 0.144). But, as Figure 4 shows,
we ...nd a signi...cant e¤ect at the 10% con...dence level in the regression analysis. Table 8 in

   32
     In the R_LD treatment, sincerity of tB -voters in group 1, for instance, decreases from 71% on average
during the ...rst ...ve periods, to 33% over the last ...ve; for group 2 it goes from 57% to 40%; from 62% to
29% for group 3; from 33% to 14% for group 4; and from 29% to 10%.


                                                     19
                                                              Runoff - Baseline                                     Runoff - Low Disagreement




                                           1
        Frequency Sincere Voting B types

                                           .8
                                           .6
                                           .4
                                           .2
                                           0




                                                0   10   20          30           40   50       60   0         10    20        30       40      50   60

                                                                                       Group of five periods




Figure 5: Temporal evolution of sincere voting by tB -voters in R_B and R_LD treatments.



the Appendix shows that the runo¤ treatment always has a positive and signi...cant e¤ect,
of about 18 percentage points, on the sincerity of tB -voters. Overall, it seems that there
is only weak evidence that, in the B treatments, runo¤ elections favor sincere voting by
tB voters. But we remain far from the level predicted in case of convergence to the sincere
voting equilibrium.
    Given the multiplicity of equilibria, it could be that some groups coordinate on the
sincere voting equilibrium while others coordinate on the Duverger's Law A equilibrium.
We ...nd that this is not the case, although there is some heterogeneity. The average
percentages of sincere voting among tB -voters in the 6 groups are 20:22, 21:34, 40:63, 43:58,
58:23 and 61:90. Sincere voting is a best response when the other tB -voters vote sincerely
at least 58:45% of the time.33 Therefore, in most groups, the best response of tB -voters was
to not vote sincerely and vote for A instead (again assuming they anticipate correctly the
behavior of other voters, including other tB -voters). Moreover, these incentives increased
over time since the frequency of sincere voting decreased in the later periods: the frequency
of sincere voting was 54:00% in the ...rst 10 periods and 27:10% in the last 10 periods.
Despite some heterogeneity on the levels and rates of convergence, we ...nd that the amount
of sincere voting decreases over time in most groups (i.e., 4 out of 6). Figure 5 illustrates
this result. Note that, even in the two groups in which sincere voting does not decrease
over time, the average frequency of sincere voting among tB -voters in the second part of
   33
    Figure 13 in the Appendix displays the utilities of tB -voters from voting either A or B, for all treat-
ments.


                                                                                            20
the experiment (or even the last 10 or 20 periods) is below 58:45%: sincere voting is thus
not a best response for tB -voters.34
    Overall, the analysis of aggregate voting behavior highlights a convergence to the
Duverger'
        s law equilibrium A under both plurality and runo¤. Yet, this convergence is
only partial. Analyzing the voting behavior at the individual level allows for a better
understanding of this phenomenon.

Individual Behavior. Figure 6 displays a representation of individual behavior, focusing
on behavior of tB -voters. The horizontal (vertical) axis reports the frequency of sincere
voting in the ...rst (second) half of the experiment. The diameter of each hollow circle
in the graph corresponds to the number of subjects who played at those frequencies: the
larger this number, the larger the diameter.
    Figure 6 shows several interesting patterns. First, most `bubbles' are below the 45
degree line, indicating that the frequency of sincere voting decreased for most subjects.
The frequencies of subjects who strictly (weakly) decrease the percentage of sincere voting
in the second half are 35% (95%), 33% (88%), 51% (86%), 43% (92%) in treatments P_B,
R_B, P_LD and R_LD respectively. Second, we observe two opposite clusters along the
45 degree line: voters who played (almost) always sincerely (upper right corner) and voters
who (almost) always chose A (lower left corner). In the second half of the experiment,
in the P_B treatment, 15:0% of the tB voters vote sincerely in all periods, and 45:0%
vote for A (Duvergerian) in all periods. For the R_B treatment, these percentages are
8:3% and 23:6% respectively, or 22:2% and 41:7% if we relax the condition to playing the
respective strategies at least 80% of the time. Similar patterns hold for the P_LD and
R_LD treatments, but with smaller fractions of "always Duvergerian"in the former, and
larger in the latter.
    This duality is relevant for the emergence of Duverger's law equilibria. On the one
hand, the existence of always sincere voters should weigh against the emergence of a Du-
verger'
      s law equilibrium, and in favor of the sincere voting equilibrium. Yet, the Duverger'
                                                                                          s
law equilibrium A exists under plurality (P_B treatment) regardless of the fraction of tB -
voters that always vote sincere, and exists under runo¤ (R_B treatment) when at most
   34
     This threshold is based on the assumption of risk neutrality. However, laboratory participants typically
exhibit moderate risk aversion. As Figure 12 (in Appendix A5) indicates, the threshold of 58:45% increases
with risk aversion.


                                                     21
                                                        Plurality - Baseline                                                                             Runoff - Baseline
Frequency of Voting for B Second Half




                                                                                                  Frequency of Voting for B Second Half
                                        1




                                                                                                                                          1
                                        .8




                                                                                                                                          .8
                                        .6




                                                                                                                                          .6
                                        .4




                                                                                                                                          .4
                                        .2




                                                                                                                                          .2
                                        0




                                                                                                                                          0




                                             0     .2        .4        .6         .8     1                                                     0    .2         .4        .6         .8     1

                                                  Frequency of Voting for B First Half                                                              Frequency of Voting for B First Half




                                                 Plurality - Low Disagreement                                                                      Runoff - Low Disagreement
Frequency of Voting for B Second Half




                                                                                                  Frequency of Voting for B Second Half
                                        1




                                                                                                                                          1
                                        .8




                                                                                                                                          .8
                                        .6




                                                                                                                                          .6
                                        .4




                                                                                                                                          .4
                                        .2




                                                                                                                                          .2
                                        0




                                                                                                                                          0




                                             0     .2        .4        .6         .8     1                                                     0    .2         .4        .6         .8     1

                                                  Frequency of Voting for B First Half                                                              Frequency of Voting for B First Half




                                                        Figure 6: Individual behavior in the main treatments.




                                                                                             22
63:64% of tB -voters always vote sincere. On the other hand, the existence of "always
Duvergerian"voters should weigh against the emergence of the sincere voting equilibrium,
and in favor of the Duverger's law equilibrium A: And indeed, with runo¤ (R_B treat-
ment), sincere voting is not a best response for tB -voters when at least 42% of the tB -voters
vote for A no matter what. Thus, the presence of "always Duvergerian" voters appears
key to explain the predominance of Duverger'
                                           s law equilibria in runo¤. And the presence
of "always sincere" voters explains why the convergence to Duverger'
                                                                   s law equilibria is
only partial.
   The obvious next step is to understand the reasons why some voters always vote sin-
cerely or Duvergerian. One possible reason for the always Duvergerian behavior is a high
level of risk aversion. Indeed, as Figure 12 (in Appendix A5) shows, the sincere voting
equilibrium exists in none of the treatments if voters are su¢ ciently risk averse. While the
aggregate level of risk aversion that prevents the existence of the sincere voting equilibrium
seems unreasonably high, it can still be that some tB -voters are su¢ ciently risk averse to
prefer voting for A even when all other voters choose sincerely. To explore this possibility,
for tB -voters, we estimated a linear regression where the outcome is a dummy indicating
if the subject always voted for A, and as regressors we used a battery of self-declared
individual-level traits, including: age, gender, years in college, measures of risk aversion
and trust, experience participating in experiments and interest in politics. The ...rst panel
of Figure 7 shows the coe¢ cients of that regression. Risk aversion does not seems to dis-
tinguish always Duvergerian voters from other voters. In fact, our measure of risk aversion
is distributed quite similarly for always Duvergerian voters and the entire population of
tB -voters. The only distinguishing individual characteristic of always Duvergerian voters
is gender: women are under-represented in that group. The proportion of women among
always Duvergerian voters is 31:67% (while the percentage of women in these treatments
is 45:31%).
   Another possible explanation for the always Duvergerian behavior is that some voters
simply misunderstand the inuence of their ballot on the outcome of the election. Incen-
tives to coordinate behind the stronger majority candidate are indeed high for voters who
wrongly believe that they can prevent an outright victory of C in the ...rst round (as in
plurality). But, if C obtains 7 or more votes, then a vote for A or B cannot prevent C 's



                                              23
                        (i) Always Duvergerian                                        (ii) Always Sincere

              gender                                                  gender


                 age                                                     age


                year                                                    year


                 risk                                                    risk


                trust                                                   trust


   experiments_high                                        experiments_high


        politics_high                                           politics_high

                        -.4      -.2       0     .2                             -.2       -.1    0     .1   .2   .3




  Figure 7: Individual characteristics and "always Duverger" and "always sincere" behavior.


victory. The only e¤ect of coordination in the ...rst round on C 's probability of victory
is through the decreased likelihood that a second round takes place, in which an upset
victory of C can occur. The additionnal treatments summarized in Section 7 give some
credence to this possible explanation: even when the risk of an upset victory of C in the
second round is essentially null, some majority voters continue to vote always Duvergerian.
   We now explore possible reasons for the always sincere behavior. The second panel
of Figure 7 shows the coe¢ cients of a linear regression where the outcome is a dummy
indicating if the subject always voted for B , and as regressors we used the same individual-
level traits as above. Note that risk aversion does not signi...cantly distinguish always
sincere voters from others. Again, the only distinguishing individual characteristic of
always sincere voters is gender: women are over-represented in that group. The proportion
of women among always sincere voters is 64:41% (compared to an average of 45:31%).
   Beyond (a lack of) risk aversion, we see, at least, two other possible reasons for the al-
ways sincere behavior. First, it might be explained by an expressive motive (see Schuessler
2000). That is, subjects might have preferences for expressing their true preferences rather
than being guided by instrumental incentives. An alternative explanation is lack of so-
phistication (the so-called "naive" voters in the literature who face cognitive limitations,
see Bendor, et al. 2011) and focal strategies. That is, subjects might have cognitive
di¢ culties in calculating the expected payo¤s of voting for di¤erent alternatives and use
the focal strategy of voting sincerely. Unfortunately, we do not have measures for such
individual characteristics. Nevertheless, there are reasons to believe those explanations do


                                                      24
                                                                 Baseline             Low Disaggr.
                                                          %A       %B %C            %A %B %C
      Plurality       Realized        All periods         68.0     0.0 32.0         70.5 0.0 29.5
                                      Second Half         70.5     0.0 29.5         70.7 0.0 29.3
                      Theory          Duv. Eq.            76.3     0.0 23.7         76.3 0.0 23.7
      Runo¤           Realized        All periods         64.9     1.8 33.2         69.5 0.1 30.4
                                      Second Half         65.9     1.2 32.9         69.3 0.0 30.7
                       Theory         Duv. Eq.            70.8     0.0 29.2         71.2 0.0 28.8
                                      Sincere             49.7    13.0 37.2          -       -      -

Table 3: Simulated outcomes in main treatments. All periods uses the average frequencies for
each while Second Half uses the averages only for the second half. The equilibrium benchmarks
are based on the simulated data.


not explain fully the behavior of always sincere voters. Indeed, the fact that the size of
the groups of always sincere voters varies across treatments suggests that at least some of
these voters react to their electoral environment when deciding how to vote. Moreover,
these variations in size are in line with the predictions of the model: more always sincere
voters in the R_LD and the R_B treatments.

Outcomes. As we explained in Section 4.4, electoral outcomes can be substantially
di¤erent under plurality and runo¤. Yet, di¤erences should not arise when voters play the
same Duverger's Law equilibrium under both systems. Given the (partial) convergence
to a Duverger'
             s Law equilibrium A under both systems, it is not surprising that we ...nd
essentially no di¤erences in outcomes across treatments.
    In order to produce comparable numbers between treatments and institutions, we
present the result of simulations on outcomes based on individual average behavior. That
is, for each group, we simulate 10,000 decisions for each group based on the individual
behavior of each voter.35 Table 3 presents both the theoretically and the simulated prob-
abilities of victory of the di¤erent alternatives under our treatments.
    As Table 3 shows, outcomes do not di¤er much between electoral systems and sets of
parameters. The realized probabilities of victory are actually close to the theoretical prob-
abilities. Regression analysis also highlights small di¤erences across treatments. Table 14

   35
      We ran the simulations as follows. First, we computed individual voting frequencies for each subject
(for the whole experiment or the second half). Then, for each of the 10,000 decisions, we (i) randomly
assigned a type to each voter, (ii) simulated a vote for each voter given their voting frequencies given their
type, and (iii) aggregated the vote. We ran this process independently for each group and then aggregated
for each di¤erent treatment.


                                                     25
in the Appendix reports the results of random e¤ects regressions, in which we regress the
probability of victory of each candidate on a runo¤ indicator and for the di¤erent para-
meter con...gurations.36 Columns 1-3 show that in the B treatments, the electoral system
has no e¤ect on the probability that A wins. In contrast, a victory of B is 1 percentage
point more likely (signi...cant at the 5% level) in runo¤ elections, while C wins with a
probability of 5 percentage points lower (signi...cant at the 10% level) in runo¤s. For the
LD treatments, the probabilities of A and C winning do not vary signi...cantly under the
two electoral systems.37
     The previous discussion highlights that, in our laboratory experiments, runo¤ elections
do not di¤er signi...cantly from plurality elections in terms of outcomes (and hence welfare).
Yet, this conclusion overlooks one important di¤erence between the two systems: voters
may have to turn out twice in a runo¤ election. And indeed, we ...nd that a second
round was necessary 47:78% of the time in the R_B treatment, and 33% of the time in
the R_LB treatment. As Figure 8 shows, under the R_B treatment, the frequency of a
second round decreased over time (in concert with the decrease in sincere voting by tB -
voters). Thus, while the coordination on the Duverger's Law equilibrium is su¢ cient to
prevent di¤erences in outcomes (and, in particular, the victory of alternative B when there
are many tB -voters in the electorate), it is not su¢ cient to ensure a systematic outright
victory of either A or C . This conclusion does not fare well for the runo¤ electoral system.
Indeed, our results suggests that the extra costs it requires are not justi...ed by a better
aggregation of preferences.


7        Additional Treatments

The results of the experiments summarized in the previous section highlights small insti-
tutional di¤erences between plurality and runo¤ elections. The main reason is that, under
both electoral systems, voters converge (partially) to the same Duverger'
                                                                        s Law equilib-
rium. The fact that sincere voting is not more focal under runo¤ is somehow puzzling.
It has indeed been shown in previous experiments that sincere voting is quite prominent
(see, for example, Morton and Rietz, 2007). Moreover, in the ...rst period of our runo¤
    36
     As before, standard errors are clustered at the group level.
    37
     We cannot estimate analogous models for the probability of B winning the election, because under
the LD treatment, B never wins an election.


                                                 26
                                                 Runoff - Baseline                                                                      Runoff - Low Disaggreement

                         1




                                                                                                                       1
                         .8




                                                                                                                       .8
   Frequency 2nd Round




                                                                                                 Frequency 2nd Round
                         .6




                                                                                                                       .6
                         .4




                                                                                                                       .4
                         .2




                                                                                                                       .2
                         0




                                                                                                                       0
                              1 - 10   11 - 20    21 - 30    31 - 40    41 - 50   51 - 60                                   1 - 10   11 - 20    21 - 30    31 - 40    41 - 50   51 - 60

                                                 Groups of 10 periods                                                                          Groups of 10 periods




Figure 8: Probability of reaching the second round over time. The upper (lower) gray dashed line
indicates the theoretical probability of reaching the second round in the sincere voting (Duverger'
                                                                                                  s
Law) equilibrium.


treatments, the amount of sincere voting among tB -voters was 67%. This means that
sincere voting was a best response for all tB -voters.
   In this section, we summarize additional treatments designed to explore the robustness
of the ...nding that coordination forces are strong under runo¤ elections. We do so by
increasing the incentives to play the sincere voting equilibrium. We ...nd that, although
the frequency of sincere voting increases, there is a non-negligible fraction of voters who
always vote Duvergerian. We ...nd suggestive evidence that those voters behave in such a
way because they fail to understand the e¤ect of their ballot in the ...rst round of a runo¤
election.


7.1                       Experimental Design

We designed two additional treatments with (i) the same basic structure and procedures
as the ones described in section 5, and (ii) sets of parameters that are related to those
of the baseline treatment. In those treatments, described in Table 4, the incentives of
majority voters to vote sincerely are stronger than in the baseline treatment.
   In the Small Minority (SM) treatment, we reduced the size of the minority, r (tC ) ; by
5 percentage points, to 39%. We also increased r (tA ) and r (tB ) as close as possible to
proportionality, given the constraint of using integer numbers with the subjects, to 37%
and 24%, respectively. The decrease in the expected size of the minority increases the
incentives of majority voters to vote sincerely in two ways. First, when majority voters
vote sincerely, it is more likely that the second round opposes A and B; the two majority

                                                                                            27
 Treat.     Parameters          Rule      ra   rb   rc   pAB   pAC     pBC    Groups    Sinc   Duv
 R_SM     Small Min. (SM)     Runo¤       37   24   39    78    86      86      5        X      X
 P_SM     Small Min. (SM)     Plurality   37   24   39     -     -       -      5        X      X
 R_NU     No Upset (NU)       Runo¤       34   22   44    78    99      99      5        X      X

                         Table 4: Overview of additional treatments.


candidates. Second, the probability of an upset victory of C; the minority candidate, in
the second round is lower. As a result, the incentives to vote sincerely are stronger than in
the baseline model: if tA and tC -voters vote sincerely, the minimal percentage of sincere
voting by tB -voters that makes sincere voting a best response for those voters is 47:87%,
compared to a threshold of 58:45% in the baseline treatment. We conducted sessions
with these parameters under both plurality and runo¤ elections. Unlike the previous
treatments, in this case sincere voting is also an equilibrium under plurality.
   In the No Upset (NU) treatment, we reduced drastically the probability of an upset
victory of C in the second round, by setting Pr (AjAC ) = Pr (B jBC ) = 99%. All other
parameters remain at the baseline level. As a result, the incentives to vote sincerely
are very strong: if tA and tC -voters vote sincerely, sincere voting is the best response
for those voters as long as other tB -voters vote sincerely with a probability of at least
17:56%. We conducted sessions with these parameters only under runo¤ elections, because
the comparable case under plurality is the baseline treatment. Beyond increasing the
incentives to vote sincerely, this treatment allows us to explore the validity of our conjecture
that some voters do not understand that the decision to vote for either A or B does not
a¤ect di¤erentially the likelihood that C wins in the ...rst round outright. For rational
voters, a key determinant of the decision to abandon one'
                                                        s preferred candidate is the
risk of an upset victory in the second round. If some voters continue to vote always
Duvergerian, it would suggest that they do not understand well the inuence of their vote
in the ...rst round of a majority runo¤ election.


7.2   Experimental Results

Aggregate voting behavior. Voting behavior in the new treatments is summarized in
Table 5. In line with the previous treatments, tA - and tC -voters vote overwhelmingly for
their preferred alternative, and therefore, we focus on the behavior of tB -voters.



                                               28
                                     Small Minority                        No Upset
                                %A        %B        %C             %A        %B         %C
       Plurality      tA        96.59     1.59      1.81             -         -           -
                      tB        66.08    33.33      0.58             -         -           -
                      tC        3.00      0.66     96.34             -         -           -
       Runo¤          tA        97.17     1.96      0.87           92.34     5.58        2.08
                      tB        43.02    54.19      2.79           31.92    67.14        0.94
                      tC        2.05      1.47     96.48           2.13      1.35       96.52

                    Table 5: Aggregate behavior in the additional treatments.


    Do we observe a higher frequency of sincere voting under runo¤ in the SM treatments
than in the baseline? Under R_SM, sincere voting equals 54:19%, as opposed to 40:26%
observed in the R_B treatment. However, Table 12 shows that this di¤erence is not sig-
ni...cant for the random e¤ects model (p-value=0.194 in the model with controls, clustered
at the group level). Hence, these results suggest that even if voters seem to react to the
change in incentives implied by the reduction in the proportion of tC -voters, insincere
voting still equals almost 50% of decisions. Coordination forces remain strong, implying
that the fraction of Duvergerian tB -voters is non-negligible under this treatment and that
the levels of sincere voting are still far away from full convergence to the sincere voting
equilibrium.38
    There is substantial heterogeneity across groups under R_SM: the percentages of sin-
cere voting in the di¤erent groups were 15:25%, 50:64%, 56:15%, 68:51%, and 82:39%.
As already mentionned, in this treatment, the minimal percentage of sincere voting by
tB -voters that makes sincere voting a best response is 47:87%. Therefore, sincere voting
is the best response in all but one of the groups. Nevertheless, the groups with high
initial frequency of sincere voting do not display an increase in sincerity over time. The
right-panel of Figure 9 shows, indeed, that groups either exhibit no temporal trend or a
decreasing one.
    The R_NU treatment, features even stronger incentives to vote sincerely: sincere
voting is the best response as long as other tB -voters vote sincerely with a probability of
at least 17:56%. And indeed, we observe a signi...cantly higher amount of sincere voting
   38
      In line with what we observed with the Baseline parameters, there is a signi¢ cant di¤erence of
about 23 percentage points of sincere voting between runo¤ and plurality under the SM con...guration
(p-value=0.028, see Table 10 in the Appendix). Under SM plurality, we observe 33:33% of sincere voting
as opposed to the 24:14% observed in the baseline. This di¤erence is signi...cant under a random e¤ects
model similar to that used previously (p-value=0.034).


                                                  29
                                                              Runoff - No Upset                                     Runoff - Small Minority




                                           1
        Frequency Sincere Voting B types

                                           .8
                                           .6
                                           .4
                                           .2
                                           0




                                                0   10   20          30           40   50       60   0         10   20        30         40   50   60

                                                                                       Group of five periods




Figure 9: Temporal evolution of sincere voting by tB -voters in R_NU and R_SM treat-
ments.



than in all other runo¤ treatments: 67:14%. Table 13 shows that using random e¤ects
regressions, and compared to the R_B treatment, tB -voters are 28 percentage points more
likely to vote sincerely (p-value=0.018).39 Consequently, when the threat of an upset
victory of the minority candidate in the second round vanishes, sincere voting among tB -
voters is larger. Nonetheless, we ...nd it striking that a non-negligible fraction of these
voters continue to abandon their most-preferred candidate.
    As with the other treatments, R_NU also displays some heterogeneity across groups,
as shown in the left-panel of Figure 9. There are two sets of groups. One the one hand,
three groups feature behavior in line with the sincere voting equilibrium. The frequency
of sincere voting in these groups is over 80%. On the other hand, two groups feature no
convergence to either the sincere or to the Duverger's law equilibrium. In these groups,
tB -voters vote for B around 40% of the time, which means that the best response to
observed behavior is unambiguously to vote sincerely.

Individual Behavior. Figure 10 represents individual behavior of tB -voters under the
SM (plurality and runo¤) and NU (runo¤) con...gurations. Consistent with the results
in the main treatments, there are two prominent clusters of voters: those who always
vote sincerely and those who always vote Duvergerian. But the relative size of these two
  39
     The di¤erence is even larger when compared to the R_LD case: 39 percentage points (p-value=0.000).
Additionally, taking P_B as the reference for plurality, Table 11 in the Appendix shows that the di¤erence
of about 49 percentage points of sincere voting between runo¤ and plurality is highly signi...cant, in the
random-e¤ects model that includes subject-level covariates.


                                                                                            30
                                                    Plurality - Small Minority                                                                   Runoff - Small Minority                                                                         Runoff - No Upset
   Frequency of Voting for B Second Half




                                                                                               Frequency of Voting for B Second Half




                                                                                                                                                                                           Frequency of Voting for B Second Half
                                           1




                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                           .8




                                                                                                                                       .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                           .6




                                                                                                                                       .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                           .4




                                                                                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                           .2




                                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                           0




                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                0   .2        .4        .6         .8      1                                                0   .2        .4        .6         .8      1                                                0   .2        .4        .6         .8      1
                                                    Frequency of Voting for B First Half                                                        Frequency of Voting for B First Half                                                        Frequency of Voting for B First Half




                                                                      Figure 10: Individual behavior in the new treatments.


clusters varies across electoral rules. The percentage of always sincere voters is smaller
under plurality than under both runo¤ treatments. In P_SM, 15% of voters always
vote sincerely, while this percentage is 38% under both R_SM and R_NU. There are also
signi...cantly more voters of this kind under these new runo¤ treatments, compared to R_B,
where the proportion of always-sincere voters was just 8:3%. The percentage of always
Duvergerian voters are 28%, 23% and 13% in P_SM, R_SM and R_NU, respectively.
This compares to 23:6% of always Duvergerian voters in the R_B treatment. We ...nd it
striking that 13% of voters always vote Duvergerian even if the risk of upset victory of C
in the second round is almost null. We interpret this result as suggestive evidence that a
substantial fraction of voters misunderstand the inuence of their ballot in the ...rst round
of a runo¤ election.
         Di¤erences in the numbers of always sincere and always Duvergerian voters explain
heterogeneity in behavior across groups. As Figure 9 shows, in the NU treatment, there
are two individual groups that clearly converged to the sincere voting equilibrium. The
percentage of always Duvergerian voters in these two groups are 0% in both cases, while
such proportions for the remaining three groups are 33:3%, 8:3%, and 25% repectively. A
similar pattern exists in SM treatments: groups that coordinate more behind one of the
majority candidates are the ones with the largest proportions of always Duvergerian voters.
The group exhibiting the highest frequency of sincere voting has 0% of always Duvergerian
voters, the three intermediate groups have proportions of 33:3%, 8:3%, and 8:3%, while
for the group with less sincere voting 58:3% of its tB -voters are always Duvergerian.

         After this analysis of individual behavior, the obvious next step is to understand why


                                                                                                                                                31
                                                         Small Minority                    No Upset
                                                       %A     %B      %C            %A       %B     %C
  Plurality        Realized        All periods        76.23 0.32 23.46               -         -     -
                                   Second Half        78.70 0.04 21.26               -         -     -
                    Theory         Duv. Eq.           86.19 0.00 13.81               -         -     -
                                   Sincere            48.19 11.33 40.48              -         -     -
  Runo¤            Realized        All periods        75.26 5.19 19.55             67.41     9.87 22.72
                                   Second Half        75.16 3.79 21.05             67.93     9.45 22.62
                    Theory         Duv. Eq.           82.80 0.00 17.21             77.68     0.00 22.32
                                   Sincere            61.96 16.52 21.52            59.34    16.16 24.50

Table 6: Simulated outcomes in the new treatments. All periods uses the average frequencies for
each while Second Half uses the averages only for the second half. The equilibrium benchmarks
are based on the simulated data.


some voters always vote for B (always sincere), while others always vote for B (always
Duvergerian), as we examined in behavior above. As in the main treatments, the only
characteristic that appears to play a role is gender: female participants are less likely to
be always Duvergerian and more likely to be always sincere. See Figure 14 (in Appendix
A7).

Outcomes. We turn to the realized electoral outcomes for the SM and NU treatments.
The change of behavior observed in these new treatments begs two important questions:
(i) are there di¤erences under runo¤ compared to the baseline treatment? and (ii) are
there bigger institutional di¤erences than the ones observed in section 6? Table 6 presents
both the theoretically and the simulated probabilities of victory of the di¤erent alterna-
tives based on individual average behavior for the new treatments.40 The analysis clearly
suggests that the answer to both questions is positive. These answers make sense given
the increase in sincere voting in the new treatment. But, are the di¤erences statistically
signi...cant?
    Let us ...rst focus on the di¤erences in outcomes under majority runo¤ rule across
treatments. For this purpose, we compare the probability of victory of each alternative
under the new treatments versus the baseline treatment. We estimate random e¤ects
regressions, where we regress the probability of victory of each candidate on a treatment
indicator (Small Minority or No Upset), using the runo¤ baseline group as the benchmark.


  40
       The simulations were produced exactly as in the previous section (see footnote 33 for details).


                                                     32
The results of these regressions are reported in Table 15 in the Appendix.41 Columns 1-
3 show that in the case of Small Minority, the reduction in the expected proportion of
tC -voters has a negative e¤ect on the probability that C wins the election. In fact, the
reduction in this probability is about the same as the combined increase in the likelihood
that either A or B wins the election (although the coe¢ cients for these two outcomes,
despite being positive, are not individually signi...cant). For the No Upset treatment,
there is a sharp and signi...cant higher probability that B wins the election (of about 12
percentage points), while the probability that C wins diminishes in 6.6 percentage points.
Alternative A also exhibits a reduction in its probability of victory, albeit not statistically
signi...cant. Hence, making almost 100% likely a defeat of C in the second round, notably
increases the chances of victory of B .
   Let us now analyze the di¤erences in outcomes for the new runo¤ treatments compared
to their plurality counterparts. For the Small Minority treatment, we compare R_SM with
P_SM, while in the case of No Upset, R_NU is compared against P_B. As before, we
estimate random e¤ects models, where the probability of victory of each candidate is
regressed on a treatment indicator. Table 16 in the Appendix reports the results of these
regressions. Columns 1-3 show that under the Small Minority condition, the existence of
runo¤ elections increases B 's chances of victory in 4.3 percentage points (p-value = 0.074),
at the expense of A and C . In the case of the No Upset treatment, columns 4-6 show that
the increase in the probability that B wins the election is even higher (13 percentage points
and p-value = 0.014) and is explained by a decrease in C 's winning probability.
   The bene...ts of better preference revelation and aggregation discussed previously bring
a potential cost for voters: an increase in the likelihood of having a second round. Re-
member that the frequency of a second round in the R_B treatment was 47:78%. Under
R_SM, we observed only a marignal and not signi...cant increase to 49:33% (p-value =
0.895). Under R_NU, however, there was a signi...cant increase to 62:00% (p-value =
0.054). As Figure 11 shows, there is no strong temporal change over time. The ...gure also
shows that, while under R_SM, the probability of a second round lies between the predic-
tions of the sincere voting and Duverger'
                                        s law equilibria, the frequency of a second round
under R_NU is close to the prediction under the sincere voting equilibrium. These results


  41
       Again, standard errors are clustered at the group level.


                                                      33
                                                  Runoff - Small Minority                                                                          Runoff - No Upset

                          1




                                                                                                                           1
                          .8




                                                                                                                           .8
    Frequency 2nd Round




                                                                                                     Frequency 2nd Round
                          .6




                                                                                                                           .6
                          .4




                                                                                                                           .4
                          .2




                                                                                                                           .2
                          0




                                                                                                                           0
                               1 - 10   11 - 20       21 - 30   31 - 40     41 - 50   51 - 60                                   1 - 10   11 - 20    21 - 30    31 - 40    41 - 50   51 - 60

                                                    Groups of 10 periods                                                                           Groups of 10 periods




Figure 11: Probability of reaching the second round over time. The upper (lower) gray dashed line
indicates the theoretical probability of reaching the second round in the sincere voting (Duverger'
                                                                                                  s
Law) equilibrium. Note that the theoretical predictions in RS M are the same that in RB .


highlight that the trade-o¤ between preference aggregation and cost of a second round
that underlies the choice between plurality and runo¤ is indeed binding in the laboratory.


8                         Conclusion

One of the believed advantages of runo¤ electoral systems is that, compared to plurality
rule, they favor preference revelation by voters: Duvergerian incentives are supposedly
weaker. Such preference revelation is seen as advantageous: it can lead to the selection of
a better alternatives, and also inform both voters and candidates as to the distribution of
preferences in the electorate.
    However, theoretical analyses show that Duvergerian incentives also exist in runo¤
systems. Voters may vote strategically as they are predicted to do under plurality rule:
some voters abandon their most preferred alternative when it is unlikely to be in contention
for victory. In fact, under some conditions the only equilibria under runo¤ electoral systems
involve such strategic behavior.
    In this paper, we investigate the extent that voting is more sincere in runo¤ systems
than it is in plurality elections using laboratory experiments, testing the theoretical predic-
tions. We ...nd that voters vote strategically in runo¤ elections in comparable numbers to
the levels we observe in plurality rule elections. Moreover, the amount of strategic voting
observed is in some cases above that predicted by theoretical analyses. Hence, we do not
see strong evidence that runo¤ elections are e¤ective in allowing voters to better reveal



                                                                                                34
their preferences.
   The comparable voting behavior under both plurality and runo¤ systems lead to small
di¤erences in terms of outcomes. But in contrast to plurality, even with the observed
high levels of strategic voting, runo¤ elections required a second round in many instances.
Given the substantial additional costs of running a second round, a simple bene...t-cost
analysis casts some doubts on the desirability of such voting system.




                                            35
References

 [1] Acemoglu, D., 2005. Constitutions, politics, and economics: a review essay on Persson
    and Tabellini's The Economic E¤ects of Constitutions. Journal of Economic Litera-
    ture, 43(4), pp.1025-1048.

 [2] Ballard,   M.    2016.      In rarely seen twist,    last-minute candidate Taylor
    Barras selected Louisiana House speaker.            The Advocate, Jan. 14,      2016,
    https://www.theadvocate.com/baton_rouge/news/politics/legislature/article_1e1b57db-
    13d3-5822-b86f-62ed800f1ce3.html, accessed May 19, 2019.

 [3] Bendor, J., Diermeier, D., Siegel, D.A. and Ting, M.M., 2011. A behavioral theory of
    elections. Princeton University Press.

 [4] Blais, A., 2004a. Strategic voting in the 2002 French presidential election. In The
    French Voter: Before and After the 2002 Election (pp. 93-109). Palgrave Macmillan,
    London.

 [5] Blais, A., 2004b. Y a-t-il un vote stratégique en France?. In Le nouveau désordre
    électoral (pp. 279-301). Presses de Sciences Po (PFNSP).

 [6] Bordignon, M., Nannicini, T. and Tabellini, G., 2016. Moderating political extremism:
    single round versus runo¤ elections under plurality rule. American Economic Review,
    106(8), pp.2349-70.

 [7] Bormann, N.-C., and M. Golder. 2013. Democratic Electoral Systems Around the
    World, 1946-2011. Electoral Studies, 32: 360-369.

 [8] Bouton, L., 2013. A theory of strategic voting in runo¤ elections. American Economic
    Review, 103(4), pp.1248-88.

 [9] Bouton, L., and M. Castanheira (2012). One Person, Many Votes: Divided Majority
    and Information Aggregation. Econometrica, 80(1), 43­87.

[10] Bouton, L., Castanheira, M. and Llorente-Saguer, A., 2016. Divided majority and
    information aggregation: Theory and experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 134,
    pp.114-128.


                                             36
[11] Bouton, L., Castanheira, M. and Llorente-Saguer, A., 2017. Multicandidate elections:
    Aggregate uncertainty in the laboratory. Games and Economic Behavior, 101, pp.132-
    150.

[12] Bouton, L. and Gratton, G., 2015. Majority runo¤ elections: strategic voting and
    Duverger'
            s hypothesis. Theoretical Economics, 10(2), pp.283-314.

[13] Bouton, L. and Ogden, B.G., 2017. Group-based Voting in Multicandidate Elections.
    National Bureau of Economic Research, No. w23898.

[14] Callander, S. (2005). Duverger'
                                   s Hypothesis, the Run-O¤ Rule, and Electoral Com-
    petition. Political Analysis, 13, pp. 209-232.

[15] Castanheira, M. (2003). Why Vote for Losers?, Journal of the European Economic
    Association, 1, pp. 1207-1238.

[16] Colomer, Josep M., 2007. On the origins of electoral systems and political parties:
    the role of elections in multi-member districts. Electoral Studies, 26, pp. 262-273.

[17] Cox, G.W., 1997. Making votes count: strategic coordination in the world's electoral
    systems. Cambridge University Press.

[18] Dewan, T. and Myatt, D. (2007). Leading the Party: Coordination, Direction, and
    Communication. American Political Science Review, 101 (4), pp. 825-843.

[19] Duverger, M., 1959. Political parties: Their organization and activity in the modern
    state. Methuen.

[20] Engstrom, R.L. and Engstrom, R.N., 2008. The majority vote rule and runo¤ pri-
    maries in the United States. Electoral Studies, 27(3), pp.407-416.

[21] Fey, M., 1997. Stability and coordination in Duverger's law: A formal model of pre-
    election polls and strategic voting. American Political Science Review, 91(1), pp.135-
    147.

[22] Fischbacher, U., 2007. z-Tree: Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments.
    Experimental economics, 10(2), pp.171-178.



                                            37
[23] Forsythe, R., Myerson, R.B., Rietz, T.A. and Weber, R.J., 1993. An experiment
    on coordination in multi-candidate elections: The importance of polls and election
    histories. Social Choice and Welfare, 10(3), pp.223-247.

[24] Forsythe, R., Rietz, T., Myerson, R. and Weber, R., 1996. An experimental study
    of voting rules and polls in three-candidate elections. International Journal of Game
    Theory, 25(3), pp.355-383.

[25] Fujiwara, T., 2011. A regression discontinuity test of strategic voting and Duverger's
    Law. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 6(3­4), pp.197-233.

[26] Golder, M., 2006. Presidential coattails and legislative fragmentation. American Jour-
    nal of Political Science, 50(1), pp.34-48.

[27] Lizzeri, A., and N. Persico 2005. The Drawbacks of Electoral Competition, Journal
    of the European Economic Association, 3(6), pp. 1318­1348.

[28] Martinelli, C., 2002. Simple plurality versus plurality runo¤ with privately informed
    voters. Social Choice and Welfare, 19(4), pp.901-919.

[29] McClintock, C., 2018. Electoral Rules and Democracy in Latin America, Oxford:
    Oxford University Press.

[30] Morton, R.B. and Rietz, T.A., 2007. Majority requirements and minority representa-
    tion. New York University Annual Survey of American Law,,63, p.691.

[31] Myatt, D.P., 2007. On the theory of strategic voting. The Review of Economic Studies,
    74(1), pp.255-281.

[32] Myerson, R. (2002). Comparison of Scoring Rules in Poisson Voting Games. Journal
    of Economic Theory, 103, pp. 219-251.

[33] Myerson, R. and Weber, R. (1993). A Theory of Voting Equilibria. American Political
    Science Review, 87, pp. 102-114.

[34] Osborne, M. and Slivinski, A. (1996). A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-
    Candidates. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, pp. 65-96.



                                            38
[35] Palfrey, T.R., 1984. Spatial Equilibrium with Entry. Review of Economic Studies,
    51(1), pp. 139-156.

[36] Palfrey, T.R., 1989. A Mathematical Proof of Duverger's Law. In Models of Strategic
    Choice in Politics, ed. Peter C. Ordeshook. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

[37] Perez-Linan, A., 2006. Evaluating Presidential Runo¤ Elections. Electoral Studies,
    25, pp. 129-146.

[38] Piketty, T., 2000. Voting as communicating. The Review of Economic Studies, 67(1),
    pp.169-191.

[39] Riker, W.H., 1982. The two-party system and Duverger's law: an essay on the history
    of political science. American Political Science Review, 76(4), pp.753-766.

[40] Saari, D.G., 2003. Unsettling aspects of voting theory. Economic Theory, 22(3),
    pp.529-555.

[41] Schuessler, A.A., 2000. A logic of expressive choice. Princeton University Press.

[42] Shugart, M.S. and Taagepera, R., 1994. Plurality versus majority election of pres-
    idents: A proposal for a "double complement rule". Comparative Political Studies,
    27(3), pp.323-348.

[43] Smith, J.H., 1973. Aggregation of preferences with variable electorate. Econometrica,
    pp.1027-1041.

[44] Solow, B., 2019. Aggregate Uncertainty in Runo¤ Elections. mimeo.

[45] Stewart, Charles III and Stephen Ansolabehere, 2015. Waiting to vote. Election Law
    Journal, 14(1):47-53.

[46] Van der Straeten, K., Laslier, J.F., Sauger, N. and Blais, A., 2010. Strategic, sincere,
    and heuristic voting under four election rules: an experimental study. Social Choice
    and Welfare, 35(3), pp.435-472.

[47] Van der Straeten, K., Laslier, J.F. and Blais, A., 2016. Patterns of strategic voting
    in run-o¤ elections. In Voting Experiments (pp. 215-236). Springer, Cham.


                                             39
[48] Wright, S.G. and Riker, W.H., 1989. Plurality and runo¤ systems and numbers of
    candidates. Public Choice, 60(2), pp.155-175.




                                          40
Appendix

A1. Proofs of Section 4

Proof of Proposition 1.           Part (i): direct from Proposition 2 in Bouton, Castanheira, and
Llorente-Saguer (2017).

    Part (ii): Let us consider the case with an even number of voters (the proof is similar for an
                                          R
odd number of voters). We prove that      t   (A) = 1 8t 2 ftA ; tB g is an equilibrium. In that case, the

only possible pivotal events under runo¤ (i.e., the only ones that are not zero probability events)

are the threshold pivotability A=AC and C=AC . Indeed, when all majority voters are voting for
                                                                                                 n
A; and minority voters are voting for C; either one alternative obtains strictly more than       2   with a

lead of two votes or more, or the two alternatives tie. Thus, from the standpoint of a given voter,

the only situation in which a ballot can change the ...nal outcome is when either A is lacking one

vote to win outright or C does. Majority voters of both types thus strictly prefer voting for A

because that eliminates the risk of an upset victory of C in the second round.


A2. Large Electorate

In this Appendix, we analyze the strategic behavior of voters under plurality and majority
runo¤ when the electorate grows large.42 The advantage of focusing on large electorate
is that it greatly facilitates the equilibrium analysis, and allows for general results. This
explains why this approach is widespread in the literature, The main drawback for our
purpose is that we cannot reproduce such a large electorate in the laboratory. This is why
we analyzed the behavior of voters under both plurality and runo¤ when the electorate is
small in Section 4 .
    Working under the assumption of a ...xed number of voters does not prevent us from
relying on the results in Bouton (2013) and Bouton and Gratton (2015), or in other papers
assuming a Poisson distribution. As argued in Bouton (2013) and Bouton and Gratton
(2015), large electorate results under a Poisson distribution of voters readily extend to the
case of an electorate of ...xed size.43

  42
      This Appendix borrows heavily from Bouton (2013), Bouton and Gratton (2015), and Bouton, Cas-
tanheira, and Llorente-Saguer (2016).
   43
      As explained in Bouton and Gratton (2015, p. 287): "Myerson (2000, p. 24) shows that, for large
n, in a setup with a ...xed number of voters whose preferences follow a multinomial distribution, pivot
probabilities are a monotonic transformation of their Poisson equivalent. In other words, the magnitude
ratios for multinomial distributions behave similarly as under Poisson distributions." As a consequence,


                                                    41
Plurality

In large electorate, we can fully characterize the set of pure strategy equilibria under
plurality:

Proposition 2 Under plurality:
(i) the two Duverger's Law equilibria always exist;
(ii) the sincere voting equilibrium exists if and only if r (tA ) = r (tB ) :

Proof of Proposition 2. Part (i): special case of Proposition 1 in Myerson (2002).
    Part (ii): the proof of the necessary condition follows exactly the argument in the the proof of

part (i). The proof of the su¢ cient condition follows directly from noticing that (n; nC ) !n!1 0

in Proposition 2 in Bouton, Castanheira, and Llorente-Saguer (2017).

    The intuition for the existence of the Duverger's Law equilibria is as follows. When
a majority alternative's expected vote share is too low, the probability of being pivotal
for that alternative becomes extremely small. To avoid wasting their ballot, supporters of
that alternative prefer to vote for the other majority alternative.
    Now, the intuition for the condition necessary for the existence of the sincere voting
becomes obvious. Majority voters do not want to coordinate behind the strongest majority
alternative only if both alternatives have the same expected support in the electorate.
Obviously, this is a very demanding condition: the sincere voting equilibrium is knife-edge
(see, e.g., Palfrey 1989, Myerson and Weber 1993, and Fey 1997).44


Majority Runo¤

The following proposition shows that Duverger's Law forces also exist under majority
runo¤:

Proposition 3 Under majority runo¤ , in the ...rst round, the two Duverger's Law equi-
libria always exist.


their characterization of equilibria for large electorates extend to a setup with a ...xed number of voters
whose preferences follow a multinomial distribution, which is what we assume in this paper.
   44
      An implicit assumption of our setting is the absence of aggregate uncertainty. The result on the
Duverger' s equilibrium holds with and without aggregate uncertainty, except for extremely high level of
aggregate uncertainty. However, with aggregate uncertainty, the sincere voting equilibrium exists for a
broader set of distributions (see Myatt 2007 and Bouton, Castanheira, and Llorente-Saguer 2017).


                                                    42
Proof of Proposition 3. Special case of Proposition 1 in Bouton and Gratton (2015).
    The intuition behind this result is as follows. Consider a voter that expects two
alternatives to receive (almost) all the votes, say A and C: As the expected number of voters
grows large, his vote can only be decisive in determining which of these two candidates
will be elected outright in the ...rst round (the magnitudes of two of the threshold pivotal
events, pivA=AC and pivC=CA , are larger than the magnitudes of any other event). That is
because, if only two alternatives receive any vote, then one of them must receive a majority
of the votes, except when candidates split the votes equally.
    Even if they exist in the ...rst round of a majority runo¤ election, Duverger's Law forces
are weaker than under plurality. As a consequence, there are more situations in which
all voters feel free to express their preferences and vote for their most-preferred candidate
than under plurality. But, Duverger's law forces are still su¢ ciently strong to prevent the
existence of the sincere voting equilibrium in some situations:45

Proposition 4 Under majority runo¤ , in the ...rst round, there are "1 ; "2 > 0 such that:
(i) the sincere voting equilibrium exists if r(tA )          r(tB )    "1 , r (tA ) < r (tC );
(ii) the sincere voting equilibrium does not exist if r (tB ) < "2

Proof of Proposition 4. Direct from the proof of Theorem 2 in Bouton (2013).
    The intuition for the existence of the sincere voting equilibrium is as follows. Condi-
tional on being pivotal, majority voters choose which majority alternative participates in
the second round with C . The second-rank pivotability CA=CB is most likely when A and
B are, in expectations, relatively close to tying for second place (i.e., there is substantial
disagreement among majority voters) and C is expected not to pass the threshold (i.e.,
the minority is not too large). Since the probability of defeating C in the second round
is the same for both majority alternatives, majority voters vote for their most preferred
alternative: tA -voters vote A and tB -voters vote B:
    Conversely, Proposition 4 also identi...es when Duverger's law forces prevent the ex-
istence of the sincere voting equilibrium. There are situations in which some majority
voters prefer to vote for their second-best alternative in the ...rst round in order to avoid
   45
     Bouton and Gratton (2015) show that the sincere voting equilibrium does not exist when the set of
voter types is su¢ ciently rich. However, they also show the existence of a Duverger's hypothesis equilibrium
in which more than two alternatives are expected to receive a positive vote share. In that equilibrium,
only one type of voters does not vote for their most-preferred alternative.


                                                     43
the risk of an upset victory in the second round (i.e. they are threshold pivotal in favor of
a majority alternative). This happens when there is little disagreement among majority
voters: one majority alternative has (many) more supporters than the other. Then, con-
ditional on being pivotal, the election essentially boils down to a contest between one of
the majority alternatives and C: Supporters of the weak majority alternative then prefer
to abandon their most-preferred alternative in order to ensure an outright victory of the
other majority alternative in the ...rst round.




                                             44
A3. Questionnaire Data

In this section we describe the data collected in the questionnaire at the end of the exper-
iment. Variables Party and Religion were not included in the regressions in Appendix A4
since there was no obvious way to aggregate them.

 Variable          Description

 Gender            Female = 1; Male = 0:
 Age               Age in years.
 Year              Years of studies.
 Risk              Tendency to take risks. Likert scalefrom 1 to 5.
 Trust             Tendency to trust people. Likert scale from 1 to 5.
 Experiments       = 1 if the subject has participated in 4 or more experiments. Origi-
                   nally, this was a categorical variable about participation in previous
                   experiments: "Never"   , "1-3", "4-6", and "More than 6"  .
 Politics          = 1 if politics is very important or extremely important in the
                   subject's life. Originally Likert scale from 1 to 4.
 Religiosity       Degree of religiosity. Likert scale from 1 to 4. Not included in
                   the regressions.
 Religion          Categorical variable: Christian (22.69%), Hinduist (41.44%),
                   Judaism (2.55%), Muslim (4.17%), No religion (18.98%), Other
                   Religion (5.79%), Prefer not to answer (4.40%). Not included in the
                   regressions.
 Major             Categorical variable with the options:
                   "Law" (0.93%), "Economics" (12.96%),
                   "Literature" (0.69%), "Physics/Chemistry/Biology" (5.79%),
                   "Engineering" (37.50%), "History" (0.93%), "Politics" (3.01%),
                   "Mathematics" (0.28%), "Others" (34.49%).
                   Not included in the regressions.
 Party             Categorical variable: Democrat (43.75%), Republican (7.18%),
                   Other (10.65%), NA (38.43%). Not included in the regressions.
 Siblings          Number of siblings. Not included in the regressions.

                 Table 7: Description of variables in the questionnaire data.




                                             45
A4. Regression Analysis

This section presents the basic regression analysis of the experiment. For this purpose,
a panel dataset at the subject/period level was constructed. Random e¤ects regression
models are estimated for B voters and the outcome of interest is whether the subject votes
sincerely or not (i.e. votes for candidate B). In every case, standard errors are clustered at
the group level. Throughout Tables 8-11, we compare the e¤ect of having the runo¤ rule
on the probability of voting sincerely. Table 8 compares runo¤ and plurality under the
baseline con...guration; Table 9 corresponds to the low disagreement case; Table 10 does
the same but under the small minority con...guration; while Table 11 compares runo¤ and
plurality under the No Upset rule.
   For each treatment con...guration, six di¤erent models are estimated. In each table,
column 1 corresponds to a model in which we do not control for subject-level covariates.
Column 2 corresponds to models with covariates, which include subjects' gender, age,
years in school, level of risk, level of trust, and dummies for experience participating in
experiments and interest in politics. Column 3 includes a dummy indicating whether the
minority candidate (C) won the previous election or not. Column 4 includes a count vari-
able indicating the number of elections previously won by the minority candidate. Column
5 includes the interaction between the runo¤ condition and the indicator of whether C
won the previous election, to test for heterogeneous e¤ects at such level. Column 6 does
the same, but for the the number of previous elections won by C.
   Tables 12 and 13 compare the di¤erent runo¤ con...gurations. On Table 12 we compare
the basic runo¤ treatments across each other. Columns 1 and 2 compare the small minority
and baseline conditions; columns 3 and 4 the low disagreement and baseline treatments;
while columns 5 and 6 compare our small minority and low disagreement con...gurations.
Table 13, on the other hand, compares each of these treatments with the new con...guration,
the No Upset con...guration. Finally, Tables 14-16 compare the election outcomes across
the di¤erent treatment con...gurations.




                                             46
             Table 8: Runo¤ Elections and B-Voters'Sincerity under Baseline

                                       (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)          (6)
                                     Vote B       Vote B       Vote B        Vote B         Vote B        Vote B
Runo¤                                0.164        0.180        0.180         0.152           0.168        0.209
                                    (0.0964)     (0.0890)     (0.0891)      (0.0900)       (0.0872)      (0.0905)
Lag C Victory                                                 -0.00526                      -0.0288
                                                              (0.0210)                     (0.0201)
No. of C Victories                                                         -0.0174                      -0.0145
                                                                           (0.00288)                    (0.00376)
Runo¤ Lag C Victory                                                                         0.0435
                                                                                           (0.0385)
Runo¤ No. of C Victories                                                                                 -0.00635
                                                                                                        (0.00505)
Constant                            0.239          -0.419       -0.418        -0.221        -0.412         -0.242
                                    (0.0700)      (0.337)      (0.337)       (0.354)       (0.339)        (0.363)
Subject-level Covariates               N             Y            Y             Y             Y              Y
N                                     1798          1798         1798          1798          1798           1798
Notes: Standard errors clustered at group level in parentheses. V ote B indicates if the subject votes for candidate
B or not. Runof f indicates whether the treatment corresponds to R_B or P _B . Lag C V ictory indicates if C
won the previous election. N o: of C V ictories is the number of previous victories of C . Subject-level covariates
include: gender, age, years in school, level of risk, level of trust, and dummies for experience participating in
experiments and interest in politics. * is signi...cant at the 10% level, ** is signi...cant at the 5% level, *** is
signi...cant at the 1% level.




                                                    47
      Table 9: Runo¤ Elections and B-Voters'Sincerity under Low Disagreement

                                       (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)
                                     Vote B        Vote B       Vote B         Vote B        Vote B          Vote B
Runo¤                               -0.00597       0.0174       0.0173         0.0360        0.0492          0.0217
                                    (0.0568)      (0.0497)     (0.0502)       (0.0544)      (0.0564)        (0.0608)
Lag C Victory                                                  0.000705                     0.0596
                                                               (0.0312)                     (0.0171)
No. of C Victories                                                           -0.0152                       -0.0161
                                                                             (0.00150)                     (0.00233)
Runo¤ Lag C Victory                                                                          -0.117
                                                                                             (0.0481)
Runo¤ No. of C Victories                                                                                    0.00173
                                                                                                           (0.00290)
Constant                            0.293         -0.562       -0.562         -0.510         -0.568         -0.505
                                    (0.0317)       (0.256)      (0.256)        (0.257)        (0.259)       (0.258)
Subject-level Covariates                N             Y            Y              Y              Y             Y
N                                      977           977          977            977            977           977
Notes: Standard errors clustered at group level in parentheses. V ote B indicates if the subject votes for candidate
B or not. Runof f indicates whether the treatment corresponds to R_LD or P _LD. Lag C V ictory indicates if
C won the previous election. N o: of C V ictories is the number of previous victories of C . Subject-level covariates
include: gender, age, years in school, level of risk, level of trust, and dummies for experience participating in
experiments and interest in politics. * is signi...cant at the 10% level, ** is signi...cant at the 5% level, *** is
signi...cant at the 1% level.




                                                    48
        Table 10: Runo¤ Elections and B-Voters'Sincerity under Small Minority

                                       (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
                                     Vote B       Vote B         Vote B        Vote B         Vote B         Vote B
Runo¤                                0.226        0.231          0.232         0.202          0.231          0.0876
                                     (0.128)      (0.105)        (0.105)       (0.106)        (0.109)        (0.102)
Lag C Victory                                                    0.0270                       0.0251
                                                                (0.0278)                     (0.0492)
No. of C Victories                                                           -0.0160                       -0.0251
                                                                             (0.00522)                     (0.00593)
Runo¤ Lag C Victory                                                                          0.00398
                                                                                             (0.0536)
Runo¤ No. of C Victories                                                                                    0.0192
                                                                                                           (0.00805)
Constant                            0.325        -1.145        -1.146         -1.068         -1.146        -0.995
                                    (0.0769)      (0.186)       (0.186)        (0.186)        (0.186)        (0.181)
Subject-level Covariates               N             Y             Y              Y              Y              Y
N                                     1715         1715          1715           1715           1715           1715
Notes: Standard errors clustered at group level in parentheses. V ote B indicates if the subject votes for candidate
B or not. Runof f indicates whether the treatment corresponds to R_SM or P _SM . Lag C V ictory indicates if
C won the previous election. N o: of C V ictories is the number of previous victories of C . Subject-level covariates
include: gender, age, years in school, level of risk, level of trust, and dummies for experience participating in
experiments and interest in politics. * is signi...cant at the 10% level, ** is signi...cant at the 5% level, *** is
signi...cant at the 1% level.




                                                    49
            Table 11: Runo¤ Elections and B-Voters'Sincerity under No Upset

                                        (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)               (6)
                                     Vote B        Vote B        Vote B         Vote B        Vote B           Vote B
Runo¤                                0.423        0.485         0.486          0.448         0.468             0.352
                                     (0.131)      (0.0941)      (0.0933)       (0.0942)      (0.0977)          (0.103)
Lag C Victory                                                   0.00363                       -0.0286
                                                                (0.0198)                     (0.0203)
No. of C Victories                                                           -0.0109                       -0.0146
                                                                             (0.00324)                     (0.00378)
Runo¤ Lag C Victory                                                                          0.0712
                                                                                             (0.0329)
Runo¤ No. of C Victories                                                                                    0.0132
                                                                                                           (0.00554)
Constant                             0.239         -0.0885       -0.0893       0.0352         -0.0829        0.0529
                                     (0.0703)      (0.355)       (0.355)       (0.375)        (0.356)        (0.376)
Subject-level Covariates                N             Y             Y             Y              Y              Y
N                                      1661         1661          1661          1661           1661           1661
Notes: Standard errors clustered at group level in parentheses. V ote B indicates if the subject votes for candidate
B or not. Runof f indicates whether the treatment corresponds to R_N U or P _B . Lag C V ictory indicates if C
won the previous election. N o: of C V ictories is the number of previous victories of C . Subject-level covariates
include: gender, age, years in school, level of risk, level of trust, and dummies for experience participating in
experiments and interest in politics. * is signi...cant at the 10% level, ** is signi...cant at the 5% level, *** is
signi...cant at the 1% level.




                   Table 12: Comparison of Runo¤ Treatments
                       (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)        (5)                                  (6)
                     Vote B    Vote B    Vote B   Vote B    Vote B                                Vote B
  Small Minority      0.148      0.140                      0.264                                0.249
                     (0.121)   (0.108)                      (0.112)                              (0.0898)
  Low Disagreement                       -0.116   -0.122
                                        (0.0812) (0.0915)
  Constant          0.403       -0.658  0.403     -0.181    0.287                                -1.019
                    (0.0662) (0.475) (0.0663) (0.455) (0.0472)                                    (0.276)
  Control Group     Baseline Baseline Baseline Baseline Low Dis                                  Low Dis
  Covariates            N          Y        N        Y          N                                    Y
  N                   1846       1846     1458     1458       1332                                 1332
  Notes: Standard errors clustered at group level in parentheses. V ote B indicates if the subject votes
  for candidate B or not. Subject-level covariates include: gender, age, years in school, level of risk,
  level of trust, and dummies for experience participating in experiments and interest in politics. *
  is signi...cant at the 10% level, ** is signi...cant at the 5% level, *** is signi...cant at the 1% level.




                                                     50
             Table 13: Comparison of Runo¤ Treatments vs. No Upset
                        (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)                                  (6)
                      Vote B   Vote B   Vote B Vote B      Vote B                                Vote B
  Baseline           -0.258   -0.279
                      (0.129)  (0.118)
  Small Minority                         -0.111   -0.107
                                        (0.151) (0.127)
  Low Disagreement                                        -0.375                                -0.392
                                                           (0.121)                               (0.106)
  Constant           0.662      0.487   0.662    -0.0948 0.662                                    0.546
                      (0.110)  (0.400)  (0.111) (0.464)    (0.111)                               (0.478)
  Control Group       R_NU     R_NU     R_NU R_NU          R_NU                                  R_NU
  Covariates             N        Y         N        Y        N                                     Y
  N                    1835     1835      1709     1709     1321                                  1321
  Notes: Standard errors clustered at group level in parentheses. V ote B indicates if the subject votes
  for candidate B or not. Subject-level covariates include: gender, age, years in school, level of risk,
  level of trust, and dummies for experience participating in experiments and interest in politics. *
  is signi...cant at the 10% level, ** is signi...cant at the 5% level, *** is signi...cant at the 1% level.




Table 14: Runo¤ Condition and Election Outcomes (Baseline and Low Disagreement)

                              (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
                          A Victory       B Victory       C Victory       A Victory      B Victory       C Victory
Baseline                    0.0433         0.0111          -0.0544
                           (0.0334)       (0.00532)        (0.0328)
Low Disagreement                                                            -0.0267           .             0.0267
                                                                           (0.0306)           .            (0.0306)
Control Group                P_B             P_B             P_B            P_LD            P_LD            P_LD
N                            660             660             660              600            600              600
Notes: Standard errors clustered at group level in parentheses. A V ictory , B V ictory , and C V ictory
indicate if A, B , or C win the election. Baseline indicates if the treatment is R_B . Low Disagreement
indicates if the treatment is R_LD. * is signi...cant at the 10% level, ** is signi...cant at the 5% level, *** is
signi...cant at the 1% level.




                                                     51
  Table 15: Election Outcomes in Small Minority and No Upset vs. Runo¤ Baseline

                          (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)
                      A Victory       B Victory       C Victory      A Victory       B Victory        C Victory
Small Minority          0.0567          0.0356        -0.0922
                       (0.0424)        (0.0245)        (0.0287)
No Upset                                                                -0.0533         0.119          -0.0656
                                                                       (0.0592)        (0.0530)        (0.0346)
Control Group            R_B             R_B              R_B            R_B             R_B             R_B
N                        660             660              660             660             660             660
Notes: Standard errors clustered at group level in parentheses. A V ictory , B V ictory , and C V ictory
indicate if A, B , or C win the election. Small M inority indicates if the treatment is R_SM . N o U pset
indicates if the treatment is R_N U . * is signi...cant at the 10% level, ** is signi...cant at the 5% level, *** is
signi...cant at the 1% level.




 Table 16: Runo¤ Condition and Election Outcomes (Small Minority and No Upset)

                          (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)
                      A Victory       B Victory       C Victory      A Victory       B Victory        C Victory
Small Minority         -0.00667        0.0433*          -0.0367
                       (0.0436)        (0.0243)        (0.0300)
No Upset                                                               -0.01000        0.130**        -0.120***
                                                                       (0.0623)        (0.0530)        (0.0398)
Control Group           P_SM            P_SM            P_SM             P_B             P_B             P_B
N                        600             600             600              600             600             600
Notes: Standard errors clustered at group level in parentheses. A V ictory , B V ictory , and C V ictory
indicate if A, B , or C win the election. Small M inority indicates if the treatment is R_SM . N o U pset
indicates if the treatment is R_N U . * is signi...cant at the 10% level, ** is signi...cant at the 5% level, *** is
signi...cant at the 1% level.




                                                     52
A5. Indi¤erence Threshold with Risk Aversion




                                                        1
                                                        .8
                          Indifference Mixing Utility

                                                        .6
                                                        .4
                                                        .2
                                                        0



                                                             0   2            4            6        8        10
                                                                          Risk Averison Parameter


                                                                     LD           B            SM       NU




Figure 12: Probability of sincere voting of other tB -voters that makes a tB -voters indi¤erent be-
tween voting sincerely and voting strategically, as a function of the CRRA risk aversion parameter.
We assume that tA -voters and tC -voters vote sincerely.The threshold equal to one indicates either
indi¤erence when all tB -voters vote sincerely or that sincere voting is never a best response.




                                                                              53
A6. Utilities of tB voters


                                                     Runoff - Baseline                     Runoff - Low Disagreement




                                      .65
                                      .6
               Utility of tB-voters

                                      .55
                                      .5


                                                Runoff - Small Minority                           Runoff - No Upset
                                      .65
                                      .6
                                      .55
                                      .5




                                            0   .2       .4     .6       .8        1   0     .2       .4     .6       .8   1

                                                        Probability with which other tB-voters vote A

                                                                              Utility if voting A
                                                                              Utility of voting B



Figure 13: Utilities of tB-voters depending on the action they take and the mixing prob-
abilities of the other tB-voters. In order to compute these utilities, we assume that tA-
and tC voters vote their preferred option with probability one.




                                                                              54
A7. Figure Additional Treatments

                       (i) Always Duvergerian                                        (ii) Always Sincere

             gender                                                  gender


                age                                                     age


               year                                                    year


                risk                                                    risk


               trust                                                   trust


  experiments_high                                        experiments_high


       politics_high                                           politics_high

                       -.4       -.2       0    .2                             -.4         -.2     0       .2   .4




 Figure 14: Individual characteristics and "always Duverger" and "always sincere" behavior.




                                                     55
A8. Instructions
These are the instructions for the Baseline treatments. Instructions for the other treatments were
exactly the same except for parameters in blue, which determine probabilities of types and winners
in the second round.

    General Indications. Hello and welcome to the experiment. We appreciate your time and
disposition for participating in this academic exercise. We would like to remind you that your
answers and choices are anonymous, con...dential, and that they will be used strictly for academic
purposes. Also, remember that in addition to the show-up fee, at the end of the experiment you
will be paid according to your performance in the experiment. Throughout the exercise we will
use dollars to express the bene...ts you obtain from your decisions.
    Please feel free to ask any questions about the experiment'  s instructions before we start. Re-
member that during the experiment you cannot talk or communicate with any other subject in
this room, unless otherwise stated. In your desk you will ...nd a consent form and a pen. Please
read and sign the consent form before we begin. You will also ...nd a piece of paper, which can be
used during the experiment in case you need to do any calculations. Any other things, such as cell
phones or other devices, cannot be used during the experiment.
     Experiment'   s Instructions. The experiment is composed of 60 periods. The rules are the
same for all periods. At the beginning of the experiment, you will be randomly assigned to a group
of 12 (including yourself). However, you will not know the identity of them, and they will not
know your identity. You will belong to the same group throughout the whole experiment.
     Your earnings will depend partly on your decisions, partly on the decisions of the other par-
ticipants in your group and partly on chance. After each period, you will earn certain amount of
dollars. At the end of the experiment, the computer will randomly select three periods, and you
will earn the sum of dollars you get in these three periods. Each of the 60 periods has the same
chance of being selected. Additionally, you will get a show-up fee of $7.
    Your Role. At the beginning of every period, the ...rst thing the computer will do is to
randomly assign you a role out of three possibilities: you can be a green, a purple, or a yellow
voter. Allocation of roles is as follows: before each period starts, you will see the urn depicted in
the next ...gure.




     This urn contains 100 balls: 34 are green, 22 are purple, and 44 are yellow. After you click OK,
one ball will be selected at random by the computer. If it is a green ball, you will be a green voter;
if it is purple you will be a purple voter; and if it is yellow you will be a yellow voter. Therefore,
you have a 34 percent chance of being a green voter; 22 percent chance of being a
purple voter; and 44 percent chance of being a yellow voter.
    Your decision. After your role is assigned, an election is held between three candidates: the

                                                 56
green, the purple, and the yellow candidates. You have to decide for which candidate you cast
your vote. That is, you have to decide whether to vote for green, vote for purple, or
vote for yellow.
    Winning Candidate [If Runo¤]. When all participants have taken their decision, the votes
of all participants will be added up. The winning candidate will depend on the ...nal amount of
votes that each color receives.
       If the candidate who obtains the largest number of votes in the ...rst round receives 7 votes
or more, this candidate is declared the winner.
       If the candidate with the largest number of votes in the ...rst round obtains less than 7 votes,
then the two top vote receivers face each other in a runo¤ election, which will be called the second
round. If two candidates are tied in the second place, the tie is broken by alphabetical order.
Similarly, if there is a triple tie, green and purple go to the second round.
    The winner of the second round is randomly chosen by the computer by drawing a ball from
an urn that contains 100 balls. The winning candidate is the color of the random ball.
      If the green and the purple candidates face in the second round, the urn contains 78 green
balls and 22 purple balls.
      If the green and the yellow candidates face in the second round, the urn contains 76 green
balls and 24 yellow balls.
       If the purple and the yellow candidates face in the second round, the urn contains 76
purple balls and 24 yellow balls.
    Winning Candidate [If Plurality]. When all participants have taken their decision, the
votes of all participants will be added up. The candidate who obtains the largest number of votes
is declared the winner. If there is a tie for the ...rst place, the tie is broken by alphabetical order.
    Your payo¤. Your ...nal payo¤ for each period depends on your role and on who wins the
election in that period. The next table summarizes the payo¤ that you get depending on your role
and on the winning candidate:
                                                   Winning Candidate
                                                    Green      Purple     Yellow
                                         Green       11          8          1
                      Your Role          Purple       8          11         1
                                         Yellow       1          1          11

    The top part of the table indicates the winner of the election and the left part of the table
indicates your role.
      If you are a green voter and the winning candidate is the green one, your payo¤ is $11.
      ________________________________ purple __, your payo¤ is $8.
      ________________________________ yellow __, your payo¤ is $1.
      If you are a purple voter and the winning candidate is the green one, your payo¤ is $8.
      ________________________________ purple __, your payo¤ is $11.
      ________________________________ yellow __, your payo¤ is $1.
      If you are a yellow voter and the winning candidate is the green one, your payo¤ is $1.
      ________________________________ purple __, your payo¤ is $1.
      ________________________________ yellow __, your payo¤ is $11.

    Information at the end of each Round


                                                  57
    Once you and all the other participants have made your choices, the winning candidate will
be determined and the period will be over. At the end of each round, you will receive information
about the vote shares of candidates on every previous period, whether a second round was necessary
or not, and the winning candidate.
    Control Questions. Before starting the experiment, you will have to answer some control
questions in the computer terminal. Click Ok after you have answered all the questions of a page.
Please feel free to ask any questions about the experiment'  s instructions. Once you and all the
other participants have answered all the control questions, the experiment will start.




                                               58
