                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES WORKPLACE COMPETITION INCREASE LABOR SUPPLY? EVIDENCE
                      FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                       Amalia R. Miller
                                        Ragan Petrie
                                        Carmit Segal

                                      Working Paper 25948
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25948


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2019, Revised June 2019




We thank seminar and conference participants at Cornell, HECER Helsinki, WZB Berlin,
Colorado State University, UCLA, and the American Economic Association Meetings for helpful
comments, and Cailin Slattery and Elliott Isaac for outstanding research assistance. We
acknowledge financial support from the Bankard Fund for Political Economy at the University of
Virginia. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Amalia R. Miller, Ragan Petrie, and Carmit Segal. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Workplace Competition Increase Labor Supply? Evidence from a Field Experiment
Amalia R. Miller, Ragan Petrie, and Carmit Segal
NBER Working Paper No. 25948
June 2019, Revised June 2019
JEL No. J16,J22,J33,J44,M52,M55

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper develops a novel field experiment to test the implicit prediction of tournament
theory that competition increases work time and can therefore contribute to the long work hours
required in elite occupations. A majority of workers in the treatment without explicit financial
incentives worked past the minimum time, but awarding a tournament prize increased work time
and effort by over 80% and lowered costs of effort or output by over a third. Effort was similar
with alternative (piece rate, low-prize tournament) bonuses. Men worked longer than women in
the high-prize tournament, but for the same duration in other treatments.


Amalia R. Miller                               Carmit Segal
Department of Economics                        Department of Business Administration
University of Virginia                         University of Zurich
P. O. Box 400182                               Plattenstrasse 14
Charlottesville, VA 22904                      CH - 8032 Zurich
and NBER                                       Switzerland
armiller@virginia.edu                          carmit.segal@gmail.com

Ragan Petrie
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and The Melbourne Institute
rpetrie@tamu.edu




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25948
1. Introduction
Devoting long hours to work is costly to individuals, who must forgo more and more leisure time
and home production. The costs are especially onerous for workers with time commitments
outside of the labor market, such as workers with family caretaking responsibilities. 1 Yet long
hours are common across a range of occupations and are typically required of workers in elite
professional careers who compete against one another for pay and promotions (Goldin, 2014;
Gicheva, 2013; Lazear, 2018). This paper develops and tests the hypothesis that competition
contributes to long work hours, drawing on the prediction from tournament theory that rewarding
workers based on their relative performance can induce them to supply high effort (Lazear and
Rosen, 1981). Because effort can be increased along the intensive margin, by working harder per
unit time, or along the extensive margin, by working longer, an implicit feature of the theory is
that competition itself can result in long working hours.
       This prediction is intuitive, as it corresponds to popular notions of a "rat race" at work,
but it has not previously been tested. We do this by measuring the effects of workplace
competition on labor supply and firm costs using a field experiment in which workers are
assigned to competitive and non-competitive payment schemes. Our research design enables us
to rule out variation due to productive technology because workers are all hired to perform the
same job under identical conditions. The only difference is compensation, where workers in the
competitive scheme compete for a bonus prize. We also shut the channel of worker self-selection
into competition by assigning workers to schemes and by not informing them in advance of the
possibility of a bonus prize.
       In our implementation, workers were all undergraduate students, offered a fixed ($25)
payment for an hour-long research assistance (RA) work session in which they and other
students tested and benchmarked a tablet-computer program for a professor. After they arrived,
they were assigned to gender-balanced rooms of 4 workers and provided a brief training session.
In it, they were told they only needed to work for 10 minutes and then complete a survey about
the program to be paid the $25 wage. The nature and purpose of the work, including the value to
the employer of the work and of additional effort from workers, were also explained to them.

1
  Women still devote significantly more time to childcare than men do, but paternal time has been
increasing in recent decades; men increasingly describe parenthood as essential to their identities and
report they enjoy spending time with their children (https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2018/06/13/fathers-day-facts/).

                                                  1
Workers were asked to try as hard as they could and to stay for as long as they could, for a
maximum of 40 minutes. In rooms with tournament pay, the bonus scheme was described to
workers at the end of training.
       Relative to the experimental literature on tournaments, the primary innovation of our
design is that we explicitly allow workers to select both the total duration of their job and the
level of effort they exert per unit of time. Previous studies have used a "stated effort" framework
(Bull et al., 1987) or focused on the effort intensity margin, either measuring total output for a
fixed amount of time (Gneezy et al., 2003; Freeman and Gelber, 2010, Dohmen and Falk, 2011)
or speed to complete a fixed task, such as a race (Gneezy and Rustichini, 2004). Non-
experimental studies of competition, such as Ehrenberg and Bognanno (1990) and Bandiera et al.
(2005), have also focused on the intensive margin of effort rather than on work time. 2
       Moreover, our design uses a field experiment with workers performing a real job that is
valuable to the employer (DellaVigna et al., 2016) to incorporate the insights from the recent
behavioral economics literature suggesting that individuals might be motivated to stay longer and
work harder than their minimum or contracted hours when asked to do so by their employer
because of behavioral motivations (for surveys, see Gneezy et al., 2011 and Cooper and Kagel,
2016). Failing to include these motivations in the counterfactual without a bonus could overstate
the real-world value of tournament pay, particularly if financial incentives crowd out non-
financial impulses (Deci, 1971; Gneezy et al., 2011). Therefore, our field experiment includes
several design components meant to trigger those impulses (discussed in Section 2.2). These
efforts appear successful in the data: over 58% of workers in the fixed (no bonus) payment
scheme worked longer than 11 minutes (Figure 1). Nevertheless, effort is costly to our workers:
only 7% worked the full 40 minutes and 30% left within 7 seconds of the minimum time.
       Our main finding is that work time is substantially higher among workers competing for a
tournament prize bonus of $30 to the worker with the highest output in their pre-defined 4-
person work group. In that treatment, 55% worked the full 40 minutes and only 15% worked less
than 11 minutes. Workers in the $30 bonus group also invested more effort per minute of work
than those who were not offered the chance to compete for a bonus. However, this intensive
margin response had a small impact on overall performance relative to the extensive margin


2
 Outside of the literature on competition, a few recent laboratory experiments have used work time as an
outcome (Bracha et al., 2015; Linardi and McConnell, 2011; Abeler et al., 2011).

                                                   2
response. Paying a bonus increased total employer costs per work group. To recover these costs,
we needed total work time to increase by at least 30%. The average induced increase in effort
and performance was greater than 80%. Therefore, our costs per unit of input (work time, effort)
or output (task performance) were significantly lower (over 30%) when we paid a bonus.
        We focus on tournaments in this paper because of their importance in the workplace,
particularly for attaining high-status jobs through promotions, which Lazear (2018) notes
"almost always require relative rankings" (p. 202). Within organizations, relative comparisons
are often used in employees' formal performance reviews that determine their promotions, salary
increases, and layoffs. A prominent example is the practice known of "stacked ranking" or
"forced ranking" in which evaluators must conform to a predetermined structure for the overall
score distribution, such as shares of employees in highest or lowest categories. 3 Workers may
feel further pressure from outside their organizations to invest in work effort; this pressure may
come from external competition in labor markets or product markets.
        Incentive pay based on individual performance, such as a piece rate, is more common in
jobs where individual output is easily measured and closely related to effort, such as
manufacturing. Even though we are primarily interested in elite competitive jobs, because we
can measure individual effort and output in our setting, we also consider an auxiliary treatment in
which all workers are paid a bonus based on their individual performance, with a piece rate value
set to match the average employer cost per unit of output in the tournament scheme. We find that
paying that piece rate significantly increased time worked and overall effort and reduced costs of
effort or output relative to the treatment with no performance-based incentives. In fact, these
outcomes were not different from the ones in the $30 tournament. We also explored the effects of
awarding a small ($15) prize to the tournament winner; we found significantly higher effort
compared to no bonus, but no significant difference in overall effort or costs relative to the
higher-stakes tournament or piece rate.

3
 The increased popularity of personnel practices involving relative comparisons with fixed proportions of
employees promoted or retained has been attributed to Jack Welch's "rank and yank" approach at General
Electric in the 1980s. In recent years, opposition to these schemes has become more prominent, because
of their effects on employee morale (see, e.g., Backstone, 2019, on Facebook's system) and possible
contribution to sex discrimination (see, e.g., Greenfield and Green, 2017, for reporting on lawsuits against
Microsoft, Goldman Sachs and Uber; also see a legal blog on the topic at
https://www.law360.com/articles/778682/when-employee-ranking-systems-become-a-legal-liability).
Some companies have moved away from strict forced ranking, but it is unclear that the replacement
practices are free from any relative comparisons or that they will persist.

                                                     3
          Thus, our results clearly show a strong causal relationship between performance-based
incentive pay and work hours. This implies that the competitive nature of many high-status and
high-pay careers, in which workers compete against their colleagues for bonuses and promotions,
is likely to be part of the explanation for their long work hours. Workers in these jobs are not
typically paid on an hourly basis or for fixed time shifts. Rather, they have flexibility about how
long to work, and can voluntarily provide working hours well beyond the standard workweek in
order improve their performance rank. Since workplaces typically hire workers of similar ability
levels, even the highest ability workers will need to invest long hours to distinguish themselves
from (or not fall behind) their equally capable colleagues.
          Furthermore, our results indicate that competitive compensation schemes can be cost-
effective and therefore profitable for firms. If they generalize, the induced increase in output that
results from the longer working hours (even if only a subset of workers is actively vying for a
promotion or bonus) is enough to justify the costs of providing performance-based incentive pay.
The profitability of competitive pay is the direct result of the labor supply effects we estimate
and can explain its widespread prevalence.
          These findings therefore contribute to the literature exploring the reasons for long work
hours in elite careers. Prior studies have emphasized explanations such as production technology
(Goldin, 2014) or worker signaling of their ability or commitment (Landers et al., 1996, 1997).
To focus on the role of tournament incentives in generating long work hours, a phenomenon that
has not previously been examined, our study therefore eliminates these alterative explanations by
design.
          The theory we consider differs from the model in Goldin (2014), which posits a convex
production technology, in that competition can be profitable even with a linear technology or
diminishing returns to effort. While there are reasons to expect an increasing marginal product of
labor at low work hours (from fixed hiring costs or transition costs into tasks for workers), long
hours must be accompanied by long working days. Therefore, it is also natural to expect
diminishing returns to take effect at some point because of fatigue. 4 The models also differ
starkly in their predictions about the future of work hours. Goldin (2014) expresses optimism
about the potential for innovations in production technology to reduce the convexity (for


4
 See Hsiang et al. (2019) and citations therein for examples of declining medical care quality later in the
day.

                                                    4
example by increasing the substitutability between individual workers) and thereby increase
workplace flexibility and reduce work hours. However, if one source of long work hours is
worker competition, there is no such expectation.
       Our model resembles that in Goldin (2014) in that the additional work hours must be
productive in terms of increasing output for the firm. That distinguishes it from the signaling
theory in Landers et al. (1996, 1997), in which the value to the firm from the long hours is the
information that it provides about workers' types rather than the additional output. Despite this
key difference, our model resembles that in Landers et al. (1996, 1997) in that the primary
motivator for workers to supply long hours is the desire to succeed in promotion competitions
(such as making partner at a law firm, getting tenure in academia or serving in top management
at a company). In fact, the central hypothesis of this paper ­ that incentives from workplace
competition increase work hours ­ can be found in Waldman (1997)'s comment on Landers et al.
(1997): competition is proposed as an alternative to signaling as the source of the positive
association between work hours and pay.
       The idea that competitive incentives increase work hours is also related to Bell and
Freeman's (2001) hypothesis that Americans work longer hours than Germans do because
greater US wage inequality makes them more concerned about gaining promotions and
advancing in the earnings distribution. In that framework, wage inequality increases the value of
winning the workplace tournament and therefore the intensity of competition.
        Our overall findings for all workers have implications for understanding the gender pay
gap. Because women tend to face tighter time constraints from caregiving and home obligations,
they may be less willing (or able) to match their male coworkers' work hours and advance
professionally. Several recent studies have identified long working hours as an impediment to
women's career progress (Bertrand, Goldin, Katz, 2010; Flabbi and Moro, 2012; Gicheva, 2013;
Cortes and Pan, 2016, 2017; Mas and Pallais, 2017; Wasserman, 2018). By increasing the
number of hours required to advance in elite professional occupations, competition may
therefore be contributing indirectly to gender pay gaps by lowering women's representation in
those professions (Blau and Kahn, 2000; Gicheva, 2013) and especially in their highest ranks
(Bertrand and Hallock 2001; Matsa and Miller, 2011; Kunze and Miller, 2017). The role of
workplace competition has previously been examined as a contributor to gender pay gaps (see



                                               5
Niederle 2016 for a for a comprehensive summary), but not through the channel of extended
work hours.
       Finally, motivated by the literature finding gender differences in initial entry decisions
into tournaments, as well as in performance in certain types of tournaments (see Niederle, 2016),
we also examine possible gender differences in the labor supply response to tournament pay. Our
design ensures that all workers are available for more than the maximum time, yet men worked
significantly longer and harder than women did in our main $30 tournament. There were no
significant gender differences in effort under fixed or piece rate pay or in the $15 tournament. To
the extent that the gender difference in effort and persistence we find in the $30 tournament also
applies to high-stakes workplace competitions more generally, it suggests a further channel
through which workplace competition deters women's progress in elite occupations and their
ascension to the top ranks of the earnings distribution.


2. Theory and Design of the Field Experiment
The major advantage of conducting a controlled field experiment to study the effects of
competition is avoiding the fundamental difficulty with observational data that competitive pay
is not randomly distributed across jobs or workers. We do this by having workers perform the
same job in the same environment under alternative treatments that vary only in the opportunity
and rules for earning a bonus payment. We also control the assignment of workers to payment
scheme treatments and offer workers no choice of scheme. In fact, workers assigned to a bonus
scheme are informed about it only after they sit down to start their work session. That means that
bonus group assignment could not possibly affect a person's decision of whether to accept the
job or to show up for work. Our controlled setting also enables us to eliminate alternative sources
of long work time proposed in the prior literature by using a non-convex (linear) production
technology and a single-shot RA position (with no signaling value).
       These aspects of our research design help us isolate and measure the effects of
competition on extensive (time) and intensive (effort per unit time) margins of effort supplied by
workers. The remainder of this section describes and motivates our other design choices about
the work environment, compensation schemes and work task and discusses theoretical
predictions.



                                                 6
2.1 Main Treatments: Tournament versus Fixed Payment
In devising our tournament treatment, we start with the requirements that (1) the payment
scheme includes financial rewards based on relative performance, (2) performance is a function
of effort, along both extensive and intensive margins, and (3) workers are given freedom in
setting their effort levels and work time. The details of the treatment, called TP30, are as follows:
       TP30: All workers who provide at least 10 minutes of work and then complete a
questionnaire about the work are paid $25 for their time. In addition, workers in this treatment
compete for a Tournament Prize bonus of $30 paid to one winner from each gender-balanced
group of four workers (2 men and 2 women). We set a value of $30 for the prize because it is the
smallest round (multiple of 10) dollar amount larger than the promised pay of $25. Competitors
in each tournament perform the task simultaneously (receiving their training together and starting
at the same time) but independently (on separate tablets) in a small room. The winner of the
tournament is the person with the highest total output (defined in Section 2.2). In the event of a
tie, the winner is chosen randomly from among those with the highest output. No one except the
winner is paid a bonus. Workers are told about the bonus prize after being told they will receive
the promised $25 if they work for at least 10 minutes (rather than the hour for which they were
hired) as part of the short initial training at the start of the work session. During this training, the
task, its purpose, and the value of the work to the employer are discussed (see details below).
Workers can work for a maximum of 40 minutes, at which point the program automatically shifts
to the questionnaire.
       A key feature of the design is that all workers are explicitly told that they are "free to
leave" after they finish working and complete the questionnaire. Even though the winner of the
tournament bonus can only be determined after the last worker has finished, there is no reason
for other workers to stay until the end of the session, because all workers are paid via PayPal
within two days of the work session. The option to leave the job site after they stop working,
rather than needing to remain for the rest of the hour, substantially increases the opportunity cost
to workers of expending effort on the extensive margin.
       We estimate the impact of competition on labor supply by comparing outcomes in TP30
to those in a treatment under which workers are given the same options about how long to stay,
but not provided with any explicit monetary incentive to work past 10 minutes. This is our fixed
payment (FP) scheme.


                                                   7
       FP: In the Fixed Payment treatment, workers perform the same task under the same
conditions as those in TP30, except that they are paid the same $25 regardless of how long they
work beyond the mandatory 10 minutes. Like TP30 workers, FP workers are kindly asked to stay
for as long as they can (up to 40 minutes) and to work as hard as they can, because it will benefit
the employer, but no additional payment is offered beyond the promised $25.


2.1.1 Theory Considerations for Tournament Treatment
In the classic Lazear and Rosen (1981) setup, the theoretical prediction is clear that we should
expect greater effort in TP30 than in FP. The particulars of our setup differ slightly from the
main example in Lazear and Rosen (1981) in that our random "luck" term affects output
multiplicatively rather than additively and that we have 4 workers in the room, but these
differences will not change the qualitative results.
       At a Nash Equilibrium outcome, workers in TP30 take their competitors' strategies as
given and adjust their effort levels to the point of equalizing the marginal costs and benefits of
effort, or until they hit a binding constraint. The marginal cost of effort is the incremental
disutility from engaging in the task and forgoing alternative activities during that time. The
marginal benefit of effort is the change in the probability of winning (as a result of increased
effort) times the increase in utility from winning.
       Our experiment allows effort to vary along both extensive (time worked) and intensive
(effort per minute) margins, but the distinction is immaterial to the predictions from the Lazear
and Rosen (1981) model. Nevertheless, it is useful to note that the time dimension of the
problem, a key focus of this paper, resembles a war of attrition. Because workers are in the same
room, they can employ strategies that vary with their coworkers' departure times. If we eliminate
the random shocks to productivity and variation in the intensive margin of effort (per minute
worked), our setting matches the classic war of attrition considered in Hendricks et al. (1988) for
2 players. The winner is then simply the person who stays longer, and he or she is assumed to
quit immediately after the loser does. This makes the payoffs equivalent to a second-price all-pay
auction. Without random shocks to productivity, there are sharp discontinuities in returns to
effort, as chances of winning go from 0 to 0.5 for the move from a narrow loss to a tie and from
0.5 to 1 from a tie to a narrow win. This drives the pure strategy Nash equilibrium to extreme
cases in which both workers either leave within a few seconds or stay until the terminal time.


                                                  8
Mixed strategies that involve workers staying for intermediate amounts of time can smooth away
jumps in the returns to effort function and may also be possible in equilibrium. In our setting, the
existence of a luck component accomplishes the smoothing and allows for interior solutions.
Moreover, workers who are the last to remain in their session may still continue to work as long
as working increases their chances of winning and the marginal benefit is greater than the
marginal cost.
       Our research design limits work time to a maximum of 40 minutes, which is also similar
to the finite time horizon in Hendricks et al. (1988). This constraint lowers the level of effort
supplied by workers whose optimal unconstrained work time is greater than 40 minutes.
However, it can also induce offsetting spillover effects. This happens if some workers whose
optimal work time is under 40 minutes in the unconstrained equilibrium experience greater
returns to effort with the constraint because now their competitors are prevented from working
beyond 40 minutes. Those workers will increase their effort levels as a result, making the impact
of the constraint on total work effort supplied in the room theoretically ambiguous.
       Spillover effects can also induce workers to change their optimal effort levels in response
to the distribution of other workers in the room with them. A worker who expects one or more
competitors to quit early (e.g., because of high effort costs) will have a higher marginal benefit
of staying longer (and higher total benefit of staying the full time) than an otherwise identical
worker who expects to face 3 competitors until the end.
       Thus, although the direction is clear, the extent of the labor supply response to
tournament pay depends on the distribution of worker types and the equilibrium outcome of the
game that is played (which may not be unique) and is therefore clearly an empirical question.
Furthermore, as we discuss in the next subsection, if we relax the theoretical setup to incorporate
agents who are not purely rational selfish optimizing workers, then even the direction of the
effect can be ambiguous.


2.1.2 Design Considerations for the Fixed Payment Treatment
In the standard model, workers expend no costly effort beyond the minimum required in their
contracts for payment, which makes the FP treatment trivial and potentially unnecessary for




                                                 9
assessing TP30. 5 We have two main reasons for including the FP comparison. The first is simply
to confirm that effort is costly to workers, which we do by checking that not all FP workers
stayed for 40 minutes and exerted maximal effort. The fact that 30% of FP workers left within 7
seconds of the minimum time further points to costly effort.
        Our second motivation for including this treatment is grounded in recent results from the
behavioral economics literature suggesting that workers do, at times, work longer than their
contractually mandated hours even without explicit monetary compensation. This happens, for
example, when they are intrinsically motivated because of characteristics of the work itself (see
Gneezy, Meier, and Rey-Biel, 2011 for a recent survey) 6 or when they are the type of person who
always works hard ("boy scouts" in Segal, 2012) or when work relationships include elements of
gift-exchange (see Cooper and Kagel, 2016 for a recent survey). Because these factors are likely
to operate in the workplace, and because their effects on labor supply may be partially or entirely
crowded out by offering monetary incentives, we decided it was important to include an FP
comparison group for our measurement of the effects of competition.
        For the FP comparison to be meaningful, however, we need to use a field experiment
with a real work task that has value to the employer (DellaVigna et al., 2016) rather than a real-
effort task in a laboratory experiment. 7 Four elements of the field experiment design contribute,
in combination, to inducing FP workers to work longer than the minimum time in response to the
request to do so.
        First, we ensure that workers are available to stay for longer than 10 minutes, and rule out
external time constraints as a source of variation in labor supply, by hiring workers for a full
hour and then setting a maximum work time of only 40 minutes.
        Second, we use a task in which greater effort (on both the intensive and extensive
margins) can credibly be described as beneficial to the employer. Our explanation (described in


5
  If a worker faces a threat (explicit or implicit) of being fired for working less than some number of hours
above their contracted work hours, we would clearly consider the necessary hours, rather than the
nominally contracted hours, to be the relevant minimum number of hours for that job.
6
  We are focused on costly effort and therefore not interested in capturing intrinsic motivation from a
work task that is itself enjoyable to workers. Even if workers find parts of their jobs intrinsically
motivating and therefore experience periods of low (or even negative) effort costs, this is unlikely to
apply to all necessary parts of the job to a degree that exceeds enjoyment from leisure (Lazear, 2018).
7
  While laboratory experiments can allow for a deeper understanding of the operating forces, our concern
here is that subjects in a laboratory would treat the tasks they are asked to perform as games rather than
work, and we would not be able to induce workplace social considerations.

                                                     10
detail in Section 2.2) is that the employer needs reliable performance data on the computer
program that will be used in future research. 8 Workers are told that the purpose of the job is to
learn how well people can perform the task under different conditions and asked to, "please try
your best" (emphasis in the written script; see Appendix B). This makes it clear to workers that
investing high effort is expected and necessary for the employer to achieve the goals for which
the worker is hired.
          The "testing and benchmarking" task also provides a natural justification for the unusual
combination of conditions: hiring workers for a full hour, only requiring that they stay for 10
minutes, but then asking them to stay as long as they can. We explain to workers that, although
the employer asked them to be available for the full hour, she thought that it "might be too taxing
to do this task for so long." In fact, workers are told that figuring out how long individuals can
perform the task is one of the reasons why they were hired. Therefore, the instructions state that
while the employer "would like you to stay for as long as you can, in order to get paid you only
need to perform the task for at least 10 minutes and answer the questionnaire about the task." Not
only are workers asked multiple times to try hard and to work as long as possible, but the
purpose is also explained to them ­ it is in order to improve the quality of data received from the
testing. Thus, workers are told that staying longer is beneficial to the employer, but it is not
necessary for receiving the $25 wage.
          Third, we surprise workers favorably about their working conditions (and for some, their
compensation). This is intended to trigger positive feelings towards the employer. Telling
workers that they only need to work 10 minutes in order to be paid the full amount promised for
one hour provides an unexpected "gift" to workers from the employer and may inspire
reciprocity motives. These motives should be enhanced by the reason given for the shortened
work time, which is the employer's concern for the workers' wellbeing.
          Fourth, the employer shows respect and appreciation for the workers' effort. She does
this by kindly asking workers to "please stay as long as you can" and "please try your best"
(emphasis in both cases in the written script; see Appendix B). She also does it by explaining to
them how their output will be used in future research. These efforts should enhance reciprocity,
feelings of duty, and intrinsic motivation, and direct those impulses to be expressed through
increased labor supply.

8
    A variant of the program was indeed used by one of the authors in subsequent research.

                                                     11
        In practice, as discussed in Section 4 below, our efforts were successful at inducing many
workers in FP to stay beyond the required 10 minutes, some for significantly longer: over 58%
worked longer than 11 minutes and 7% worked the full 40 minutes (Figure 1). We believe that
behavioral considerations are the most likely reason for this additional labor supply in FP rather
than dynamic considerations about future employment or recommendation letters from the
supervising professor. We attempted to exclude those out in our design by hiring workers for a
one-time job, as part of a time-sensitive mass-recruiting drive, rather than an ongoing
relationship, and by using a rote and unskilled task. 9


2.2 The Work Task: Benchmarking the Red Square Program
As described above, workers are hired for research assistance positions aimed at helping to test
and benchmark a computer program. The program is generically named Red Square. 10 It is a
simple "game" in which players earn points by tapping on stationary squares that appear on a
tablet computer (see screenshots in Appendix B). We use a computer program so that we can
control the task and automatically track how workers engage with the program to create reliable
measures of effort and output. The job of testing a new program also makes it natural to collect
end-line survey data about the subjective work experience and opinions of the program.
        During a work session, the program alternates between "active" and "rest" screens. At the
start of each active screen, a stationary red square appears at a random location. The player earns
a point if they tap on the square. Once the red square is tapped, it disappears from the screen, and
a button appears that allows the player to advance to the next rest screen. If the player does not
tap the advance button, the screen automatically advances to the rest screen 10 seconds after the
start of the current active screen, whether or not the red square has been tapped. Each rest screen
lasts 10 seconds; there is nothing for players to do during this time. Once 10 seconds have
elapsed, the rest screen disappears and the next active screen appears. This cycle repeats until the
end of testing. The only variation is that, with a probability of 10%, the active screen includes a
gold square (in a random location) in addition to the red one. Tapping the gold square earns 5



9
  We are not able to say for certain what workers expected, but it is worth noting that not a single worker
contacted the employer requesting a reference letter or additional employment.
10
   Workers are not specifically told the name of the program, but the name is stored on the work tablets,
and so can potentially be discovered by them.

                                                    12
points, so workers can earn 6 points on a screen with a gold square by tapping both gold and red
squares.
        For the duration of the work session, the following items are displayed on the top left of
the screen: running tallies of accumulated points earned and time worked and a countdown timer
showing the time left on the current screen. After 10 minutes of testing, a "Go to the
questionnaire" button appears on the bottom of the screen. The worker then has the option to tap
on the button and end their testing session immediately or to continue working and tap on the
button at a later time. 11 After 40 minutes of testing, the questionnaire automatically appears on
the screen. Workers can therefore spend between 10 and 40 minutes on the work task. There is
no time limit for the questionnaire.
        Several features of the task are worth highlighting.
        First, the task is extremely simple to understand and to perform. There is no scope for
outside knowledge to affect performance and workers need only brief training.
        Second, the inclusion of rest screens helps prevent even highly motivated workers from
straining or over-exerting themselves. This should make it physically possible for all workers to
perform the task for extended periods of time.
        Third, the enforced waiting from the rest screen also serves the function of making the
task quite boring and tedious, which increases the costs of effort. It is crucial for us that workers
not find the task intrinsically enjoyable or fun, because we want to study costly labor supply. The
choice of stationary squares, always the same size and colors, are similarly intended to reduce
enjoyment of the task. The random elements, varying the location of the red square and only
offering gold squares on occasion, might make the game slightly more interesting, but they also
increase the attention demanded of players, who have to scan each new active screen to find the
square or squares. Responses to the questionnaire item of "How much did you enjoy the game?"
confirm that workers did not generally enjoy the task. With a scale from 0 (not at all) to 5 (very
much), 61.4% answered 0 (29.2%) or 1 (32.2%). 12



11
   To avoid mistaken termination from accidental taps, workers are asked to confirm their decision to end
the work session before they advance to the survey. The exact wording is "Are you sure you want to stop
working on the task? You will not be able to return to the task." The options are: "Cancel" or "Continue
to questionnaire."
12
   Workers in FP, who had no financial incentive to stay longer than the minimum time, but who often
did, actually expressed the least enjoyment: 73.3% answered 0 (33.3%) or 1 (40.0%).

                                                   13
        Fourth, workers can vary the amount of effort they exert within the program along both
extensive and intensive margins, and their output (number of points earned) increases in direct
proportion to their effort. By tapping the "Go to next screen" button on the active screen faster, a
worker earns points faster. They still have to spend 10 seconds on the rest screen, but the next
active screen arrives sooner and increases the number of points that can be earned per unit of
time worked. At one extreme, a worker who never taps "Go to next screen" will be shown 3
active screens per minute, or 120 over 40 minutes. A worker who instead clicks "Go to next
screen" after 1 second, on average, will see about 5.5 active screens per minute, or 218 over 40
minutes.
        We are therefore able to use the program to construct three measures of effort. The first is
simply the extensive margin of time spent working. The second captures total effort on both
margins: it is the total number of times a worker taps the "go to next screen" button over the
entire 40-minute work session. For the intensive margin, we also use the frequency of taps, but
only include minutes in which the worker is working. We chose the "go to next screen" button
instead of the red square (though results are unchanged if we use the latter instead, or if we use
total points) because the variation in red square taps is driven almost entirely by variation in
active screen time and the resulting frequency of red square offers.
        Fifth, the "gold square" feature of the program described above introduces a random
"luck" component to the output function that maps effort to points earned. This generates
randomness in outcomes, similar to the  term in Lazear and Rosen (1981), as discussed above in
Section 2.1.
        Finally, the potential for differences in physical (finger speed) or cognitive (alertness)
ability to affect performance is very limited relative to the scope for differences in effort. This
means it is practically impossible for a high ability worker to "work smarter, not harder" or to
"coast" on low effort and still earn a high score; the only way to earn points is to sit in the room,
watch the screen, and tap the squares. It also means that low ability workers should feel that they
have a chance to win and therefore expend effort. 13 Although ability variation may be quite
important in productive output, most high-stakes workplace competitions include an abundance
of high-ability contenders. This makes low-effort a risky (and generally unsuccessful) strategy,

13
   Lazear and Rosen (1981) demonstrate that mixed-ability tournaments with private information about
ability will generally lead to inefficient levels of effort. Brown (2011) shows empirically that large skill
differences among competitors lower average effort.

                                                    14
even for the most talented among them. Thus, it was important to minimize the role of ability in
our work environment.


2.3 Alternative Bonus Schemes
In addition to our main comparison between TP30 and FP, we also study two alternative bonus
schemes. As in the first two treatments, workers in these treatments are all paid the promised $25
for staying at least 10 minutes. They may also receive an additional bonus payment that is related
to their performance of the task.
        PR: Because we can measure effort and performance exactly in our setting, piece rate
compensation is possible. We use the PR treatment to test if outcomes differ with individual
incentives, based on absolute instead of relative performance. We set the price per point to match
the actual average amount paid in bonus per point under the TP30 tournament, which was 3
cents per point. 14 As discussed in Lazear and Rosen (1981), it is theoretically unclear a priori
how labor supply, worker utility or firm profits will compare between tournament pay and piece-
rate compensation.
        TP15: Our choice of $30 for the main tournament was based on setting a bonus level
above the fixed payment amount. We have no reason to expect that it will be optimal for
employers. In particular, by limiting the total work time to 40 minutes, we also limit the amount
of incremental effort the employer can extract from each worker. This suggests that a lower prize
amount might be equally effective, which we test with TP15, in which a $15 prize is paid to the
winner of each tournament. Our expectation is that a lower prize value will weakly decrease the
total effort supplied at the room level. We have no such prediction at the individual level,
because the $15 difference in prize value could have different utility effects on different workers.
If some workers who stayed to the end in TP30 decide to quit early, others who left early in
TP30 might respond by increasing their effort to become contenders in TP15.


3. Implementation of the Field Experiment
The field study was conducted at a major American research university in the Spring of 2016. A
professor at the university sent emails to departmental undergraduate major email lists with the

14
 As we do not know our workers' degree of risk aversion or their beliefs about competitors' strategies,
we are unable to derive the piece rate value that is, on average, equivalent to TP30 from their perspective.

                                                    15
job announcement that invited interested applicants to click on a link to an online survey to
apply. The email made it clear that multiple RAs were needed and would be hired for the same
position. All recruitment material and scripts are in Appendix B. Applicants had several days to
complete the online survey, and the work sessions were held in conveniently located library
study rooms on campus. Potential workers were provided a link to a secure website where they
can apply for the position and provide contact (name, email address, phone number) and
background (gender, major, year, GPA) information and list their periods of availability during
the workweek. We used availability and gender for work assignment and asked about year, major
and GPA for plausibility.
       Conditional on availability and gender, applicants were randomly assigned to one-hour
work sessions (particular time slots on particular days) in such a way that each session had an
equal number of men and women assigned to that session. Applicants were informed by email
that they were hired, provided with the date and time of the work session and the location of a
central room used for intake, and asked to confirm their employment by clicking a link and
completing an online form.
       In this email, they were explicitly told that they would be working in groups and asked to
therefore arrive a few minutes early to ensure a timely start. Workers could have assumed before
this point that they would be working in groups ­ because of the initial statement about a large
number of workers to be hired ASAP and because of the sign-up form offering fixed time slots
for availability ­ but even if they had not done so previously, it would be clear to all workers
before they arrived at the work session that other student RAs would be present as well.
       To increase attendance at the work sessions, workers who confirmed employment were
sent a reminder the day before the assigned session. 15 Slots that opened up because invited
workers declined the invitation were reassigned to other applicants to the extent possible. No
applicant was ever assigned to more than one work session. 16
       Workers arrived at the work location and checked in with the manager at the central
intake room. Workers were allocated into rooms to maximize the number of 4-person, gender
balanced rooms. Workers in all rooms tested the same computer game, but different room-

15
   The average share (across sessions) of confirmed workers who showed-up as scheduled was 91% while
the median show-up rate was 92%.
16
   One person managed to sign up twice by using a different email address for signup but the same PayPal
account. This was discovered after the fact, and we dropped the room from the analysis.

                                                  16
session combinations were assigned to different compensation scheme treatments. 17 We
confirmed the balance of workers' characteristics (as reported in the sign-up form) across
treatment, for all workers, and separately by gender. Results, in Appendix Table A1, show no
significant differences across treatments (from joint F-tests) in most outcomes, but we do fail the
balance test at the 10 percent level (in 3 out of 42 tests) for being a third year student in the
pooled and male samples and for being a first year in the female sample. Controlling for these
variables in our individual level regressions (pooled or by gender) has no effect on the estimated
treatment effects.
        At the designated session start time, trained graduate student assistants escorted the
workers in groups to their assigned rooms to start the work. Workers sat in front of tablets, and
the assistant described the game testing task, reading from the predetermined set of instructions,
provided in Appendix B. The assistant then answered any questions, made sure the game was
loaded and working on each of the tablets, and left the room. The work was conducted
unsupervised unless workers encountered problems. 18 Workers were instructed to leave their
tablets on the table when they departed. The last worker to leave each room was asked to send a
text message to inform the manager that the room was empty so that the tablets could be secured.
Workers were all told they would be paid within 2 days.
        After each day of sessions, total amounts owed to each worker were computed, and
workers were paid as promised via PayPal. In total, the sessions generated data for an analysis
sample of 236 workers. This includes 15 gender-balanced 4-person sessions in FP, TP15 and
TP30 and 14 sessions in PR. 19


4. Effects of Tournament Pay on Labor Supply and Employer Costs
This section discusses our main results from the control (FP) and main (TP30) treatments. The
outcomes of interest include three measures of labor supply: duration of work, total

17
   Worker that were assigned to rooms that were not full and balanced were all assigned to the FP
treatment and their data are excluded from the analysis.
18
   We dropped all disrupted sessions, 6 in total. The disruptions occurred in early sessions because some
workers started the program early and then tried to restart it later. After we become aware of this problem,
we instructed the assistant to ensure that all programs were running properly and that all workers started
at the same time, which eliminated further problems.
19
   There are only 14 piece rate rooms because one of the 15 sessions included a worker who had
previously been hired under a different e-mail address (see footnote 9). We detected the issue only after
the work sessions were complete and were therefore unable to add another session.

                                                    17
(unconditional) effort, and intensity of effort (conditional on working). The first two measures
are novel to the literature on tournaments as they incorporate the extensive margin of labor
supply. The third measure captures the intensive margin and is more standard in the existing
literature. We also examine the effects of competition on employer costs in this section. Results
from auxiliary treatments and estimation of heterogeneous effects by gender are discussed in
later sections.


4.1 Effects on Time Worked
Figure 1 presents histograms of the distributions of work time across individual RAs in the FP
and TP30 treatments. It shows two notable features of the FP treatment, discussed in Section 2.1.
First, the distribution of work time clearly demonstrates that some workers were induced to work
longer than the minimum time with no direct financial incentives to do so. About 58% of the FP
group worked longer than 11 minutes and the average time worked was 16.2 minutes. This
indicates that our design efforts were successful at getting workers to treat the program testing
RA job as they would another job and to therefore be willing to work longer in response to a
(justifiable) request from their employer. 20 Second, the fact that only small fraction of FP
workers stayed the full 40 minutes confirms that effort was indeed costly to our workers.
        Comparing the FP and TP30 distributions in Figure 1 reveals our main result: offering a
tournament prize induced people to work much longer. Workers assigned to TP30 worked
substantially longer than those not offered a bonus. The median person in TP30 worked for the
maximum time of 40 minutes and less than 15% worked for under 11 minutes. This shows that
financial incentives based on relative performance increased work time well beyond the effects
of behavioral considerations operating in FP. 21




20
   The presence of behavioral considerations hypothesized in Section 2.1 are confirmed in some workers'
statements of the reasons for staying the amount of time they did, such as feeling a moral obligation
because they had been hired for a one-hour job (mentioned by 17.9% of workers who stayed for the full
time). Other RAs (7.5% of those who stayed less than 40 minutes) apologized for leaving early or
provided the excuse that they felt that staying longer would not be helpful to the professor. These
statements also suggest that workers perceived that they were expected to stay to help the professor.
21
   It could be that the behavioral factors remained operational in TP30 (and that gift exchange was even
enhanced by the opportunity for additional payment). It is also possible that financial incentives crowded
out non-financial motivations, but that their effect was much larger, leading to an overall increase in labor
supply.

                                                     18
          We conducted non-parametric and regression-based tests to assess the statistical
significance of the apparent difference between FP and TP30. Although we have data on
individual workers, we take a conservative approach to testing and use a room-level unit of
analysis. This is because strategic interactions (for TP30) and social norms (for FP and possibly
for TP30) within rooms make it likely that outcomes are correlated across workers in the same
room. Results are unchanged if we use the individual level instead.
          Our regression analysis, presented in column 1 of Table 1, supports the two main findings
of Figure 1. The outcome is average time worked per person, and the unit of observation is a
room. Because work time is bounded above (at 40) and below (at 10), we estimate Tobit models
with upper and lower limits. 22 The regressors of interest are the treatment groups. The omitted
category is our main treatment, TP30, so point estimates in the table are all relative to that
group. 23 Workers without any monetary incentives for effort work significantly more than the
minimum necessary for payment: the constant term + the FP treatment dummy = 16.25 minutes,
which is significantly different from 10 (p < 0.001). 24 Nevertheless, work time in FP is
significantly (p < 0.01) and substantially (13.56 minutes per worker) lower than in TP30. Adding
performance-pay in the form of a winner takes all tournament increased timed worked by about
80%. 25


4.2 Effects on Effort
The results in the previous section show that workers stayed longer in TP30, but not that they
supplied greater effort or worked more intensively. We consider these outcomes next.


22
   Results are unchanged if we use OLS models that ignore the bounds. Because the room level limits are
only binding if all workers in the room are at the minimum or maximum time, we also confirmed that
results are unchanged if we use an individual level analysis (with standard errors clustered at the room
level) that applies the bounds at the individual worker level (the level at which they are imposed in the
experiment). The coefficients in the individual-level Tobit models suggest a larger increase in work time
between FP and TP30, making our main room-level estimates a conservative measure of the impact of
competition on work time.
23
   To keep the models and results consistent throughout the paper, results for all treatments are in Tables 1
and 2, though discussion of auxiliary treatments (PR and TP15) only starts in Section 5.
24
   A Wilcoxson signed rank test on room-level data from FP rejects the hypothesis that time stayed is
equal to 11 (p = 0.01).
25
   The corresponding non-parametric comparison of these work time distributions shows the same results.
The distribution of room level average time worked in TP30 first-order stochastically dominates the
distribution in FP; the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test yields p < 0.001. The opposite test (that FP dominates
TP) is not significant, with p = 1 in the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.

                                                     19
       The observable action that we use to signify effort is tapping the button to advance to the
rest screen and our effort measure is the number of taps. If we instead use the number of total
taps (also including taps on red and gold squares) as an effort measure, or if we only add taps on
red squares (with no random component) to our effort measure, the results are qualitatively and
quantitatively unchanged. Our main regression models have a room-level unit of observation (as
in the previous section). We aggregate effort across workers and over the full session time and
use two measures of effort. The first captures average effort per worker, where effort is the
number of times a worker taps the "go to next screen" button in the session. The second isolates
the intensive margin of effort supplied per worker by only including workers who are still
formally "on the job" in the denominator. The measure is created by dividing the total effort
supplied by workers in the room during the session by the total time worked in the session.
       To graphically explore how effort evolved over time, we also calculated room-level effort
measures separately for each of the 40 minutes in the work session and then averaged these
values across rooms by treatment category. Figure 2 displays the first measure, which is average
effort per worker provided in each minute. In this measure, workers naturally contribute zero
effort in minutes after they end their session. By contrast, those workers are excluded from the
second effort measure, displayed in Figure 3, average effort per worker per minute among
workers who are still working at that minute. We calculated that value for each minute using
only individuals who worked for the full minute: we then divided their total effort during that
minute by their number. The effort measures in Figure 2 and Figure 3 are the same for the first
10 minutes when all four workers are working, but this changes after workers start to leave.
       Figures 2 and 3 clearly echo the two main patterns in the prior section: workers in the FP
treatment continued to supply effort after the 10 minutes necessary for payment and effort was
significantly higher in TP30.
       It is also apparent that allowing the extensive margin to vary in our field experiment was
an important design feature, as that margin is by far the more economically significant one.
Differences in the intensive effort measure are small, especially after the mandatory 10 minutes.
Part of this might be because the sample of workers used to compute the intensive margin in
Figure 3 is changing over time as workers who supply less extensive margin effort are dropped
when they stop working. If these workers also supply less effort on the intensive margin, the
sample of current workers becomes more favorably selected over time. Such selection effect


                                               20
would be larger in FP than TP30 because more workers leave early in FP. We can eliminate this
source of bias by focusing on the first 10 minutes of the session (in Figure 2 or 3): for those
minutes, the graphs do suggest higher effort in TP30 than FP.
        A concern about focusing on the first 10 minutes is that effort might be changing during
the session if workers get better at the task with practice or if they slow down when they get
tired. Figure 3 shows no evidence of those dynamics: average effort (within treatment) was fairly
constant after the first few minutes. A very similar picture appears if we remove selection effects
by restricting attention to those who stayed for the full work time (giving us a balanced panel on
a fixed set of workers). This lends supports to the value of examining effort in the first 10
minutes and further suggests that our production technology is indeed linear. Learning (if it
happens) is limited to the first 3 minutes and fatigue did not hamper performance within 40
minutes of work.
        We quantify the magnitudes of these effects using room-level regressions, and report
results in columns 2, 3, and 4 of Table 1. Starting with the total effort measure, we find a
substantial effect of competition on effort. Total room effort is 88% higher in TP30 than in FP
(column 2). 26 Conditional on working, the intensive margin of effort is also significantly greater
in TP30 than in FP (p < 0.05 in column 3 for the entire session; p < 0.10 in column 4 for the first
10 minutes), 27 but the magnitude of the increase is fairly small. Relative to TP30, there is a mere
4% reduction in mean effort intensity, either over the entire session (column 3) or within the first
10 minutes (column 4).
        In unreported estimates, we also considered a different type of effort measure based on
mistakes, defined as red or gold squares that are displayed but go "untapped." These mistakes
turned out to be very rare in our data. Out of 30,585 red squares shown on screens across all
treatments, only 45 (0.15%) were not tapped. The fraction of red squares missed, the number of
red squares, and an indicator for at least one red square missed in a room are all uncorrelated
with the treatment. Workers were slightly more likely to miss tapping a gold square, but still the


26
   Using non-parametric tests, we find that the total effort level in TP30 first-order stochastically
dominates that in FP (with Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests yielding p < 0.001), while total effort in FP does
not dominate that in TP30.
27
   Using non-parametric tests for both intensive margin measures, we find that effort in TP30 first-order
stochastically dominates the level in FP (with Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests yielding p = 0.014 for the full
session and p = 0.091 for the first 10 minutes) while effort in FP does not dominate that in TP30 (both
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests yield p = 1).

                                                   21
number is small. Out of 3,001 gold squares shown on screens in all treatments, 37 (1.2%) were
not tapped. As with the red squares, the fraction of gold squares missed, the number missed, and
an indicator for at least one being missed in a room are all uncorrelated with the treatment.
Because these mistakes reflect effort invested on the intensive margin, the finding that they are
uncorrelated with treatment supports the limited intensive margin response we found with our
main effort measures. In light of these results, we focus on measures that include the extensive
margin (time worked and total effort) in what follows.


4.3 Effects on Employer Costs
The previous two sections document large and significant increases in work time and effort in
TP30 relative to FP, but the additional labor was not free. Rather, the increased effort was
induced by paying a $30 prize to the worker with the most points in their room, which increased
labor costs by 30%. This raises the question of whether paying for performance was worthwhile
to the employer.
       Table 2 presents the answer to this question using several alternative measures of
employer costs of effort or output. Column 1 examines labor costs per work minute, using the
average amount paid per minute worked in the room. We find that TP30 significantly decreased
labor costs per minute. Without the bonus, we paid $2.18 more for each minute worked, which
corresponds to 46% higher costs per minute. In column 2, we use payment per red tap because
the objective of the task was to earn points and red taps capture points earned irrespective of
luck. We find the same result: TP30 was significantly cheaper than FP. We paid $0.11 more (or
almost 50% more relative to the TP30 mean) per red tap in FP. In column 3, we return to our
main effort measure from Section 4.2, the number of times workers tapped the "go to next
screen" button, and measure costs per tap. Again, the results are the same: we paid $0.121 (52%)
more for effort in FP. Results are also unchanged if we measure costs per point earned in the
game (where each red square equals 1 point and each gold square equals 5 points; column 4), per
tap of either a red or gold square (column 5), or for any action that could measure effort (i.e.,
tapping a red square, gold square or the "go to next screen" button; column 6). In each case, we
paid significantly (at least 50%) more in FP than when we provided workers with performance-
based incentives. (Scaled to the higher average effort costs incurred in FP, the tournament prize
reduced costs by over one-third.)


                                               22
       These measures show an economic value to employers of offering tournament incentives,
which is the reduction in the cost of extracting effort from workers. Another benefit that applies
in this setting may not generalize to other workplaces, but is worth noting: the improved quality
of the "testing" data produced. Recall that one of our stated goals to workers was learning how
long individuals could (physically and mentally) perform the red-square task. The answer to that
question differs dramatically if we use results from FP or TP30. In FP, only 6.67% workers
stayed the whole 40 minutes and 15% stayed 30 minutes or longer. In TP30, however, 55%
stayed the full 40 minutes and 61.7% stayed 30 minutes or longer. Based on TP30, it appears that
most workers could work for at least 40 minutes. If we had only run FP, we would have instead
concluded that at most 10% of workers could do that. Although this particular outcome is
specific to the RA tasked used in this study, it is worth noting that work quality (from the view of
what the employer values) in our setting was also higher in TP30 than FP.


5. Auxiliary Treatments
In light of the large effects of TP30 on labor supply and employer costs, it is natural to ask if
such a large prize was necessary to induce effort from workers. This is particularly relevant in
our setting where work time was capped at 40 minutes and many TP30 workers worked that
long. We assess this using the TP15 treatment that differs from our main TP30 treatment only in
awarding a $15 rather than $30 prize to the winner.
       Because output and effort can be measured accurately in our task, it was also feasible to
offer individual piece rate incentives that can be effective at motivating workers to supply more
effort. We separately designed a PR treatment with a payment per point set to 3 cents to match
the amount that was paid in the TP30. As discussed in Section 2.3, this price is set to match the
average employer costs across all workers, but it is not expected to match workers' expected
marginal returns to effort functions between the two treatments. Returns to effort are independent
across workers in PR but depend on what others are expected to be doing in TP30. The results
from these alternative treatments are shown in Figure 4 and Tables 1 and 2.
       Figure 4 depicts the CDF of room-level total time worked by treatment. Like Figures 1
and 2, Figure 4 again depicts the longer work time in TP30 relative to FP that was discussed in
Section 4.1. Interestingly, we find that work time is distributed nearly identically in TP30 and
PR, with 48.2% of workers staying the full 40 minutes in PR. Work time appears somewhat

                                                23
lower in TP15 compared to the other incentivized treatments, but still substantially longer than in
FP, with 41.67% of workers staying the full 40 minutes.
        The regression results in Table 1 show the same patterns. The omitted category is TP30.
Estimates in column 1 indicate that, while work time (in minutes per worker) was shorter in
TP15 and slightly longer in the PR relative to TP30 (coefficients of -3.9 and 0.49, respectively),
these differences are statistically insignificant. Table 1 also reports the relevant F-tests between
each of the different treatment pairs. These tests indicate longer work times relative to FP in each
of the three treatments that includes performance-based incentives but no significant differences
among those treatments. 28
        Column 2 reports estimates with the total effort measure that captures both extensive and
intensive margins. 29 As in column 1, we find no significant differences in total effort invested
across the different treatments with financial incentives. The point estimates suggest lower effort
in both TP15 and PR relative to TP30, but the differences are not statistically significant. The F-
tests, reported at the bottom of the table, further show that total effort in the auxiliary treatments
was significantly higher than in FP and also that TP15 and PR are not significantly different from
one another.
        The next two columns present results for the intensive margin effort measures: for the
whole 40 minutes (in column 3) and for the first 10 minutes (when all workers are present and
working, in column 4). For each of these measures, we find that neither auxiliary treatment is
different from TP30, or from the other. The one difference that emerges in columns 3 and 4 is for
tournaments relative to FP: workers invested significantly more intensive margin effort in TP15
and TP30, but not in PR. Nevertheless, as the main impact of performance-based incentives
occurs along the extensive margin of time worked, the pattern is still consistent with higher total
effort in PR than in FP (as in column 2) and no significant difference in total effort between PR
and the tournaments.


28
   Again, the non-parametric tests deliver the same results. In both the TP15 and PR treatments, work time
was significantly longer than in FP. The distribution of time worked in either of these treatments first-
order stochastically dominates FP (the Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests yield p = 0.005 and p < 0.001,
respectively), but is not dominated by it (both the Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests yield p = 1). However,
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests and Mann-Whitney tests indicate that the TP30, TP15, and PR are not
different from one another.
29
   Interested readers can see the graphs for both intensive margin effort measures for all 4 treatments in
Appendix Figures A1 and A2.

                                                   24
        The fact that both TP15 and PR increased labor supply relative to FP (reported in Table
1) suggests that the employer might have also been able to lower costs with the auxiliary
treatments. This is shown in Table 2, which reports the various cost measures described in
Section 4.3. Across the various measures of costs per output or effort, the auxiliary treatments
are never significantly different from TP30 (i.e., the TP15 and PR coefficients are never
significant). However, costs are significantly lower in the new bonus treatments TP15 and PR
than they are in FP for every output and effort measure we consider (shown in the F-tests below
the coefficients). The auxiliary treatments are also not different from one another (as indicated
by the p-values for the last F test).
        The findings from the auxiliary treatments therefore provide further empirical support for
the theoretical prediction that tournaments can lead to longer work time, while also showing that
similar results can be achieved with individual incentives (when available to employers). The
fact that TP15 and TP30 had similar effects on labor supply and employer costs shows that
outcomes may not be overly sensitive to the precise details of the incentive scheme. 30 The fact
that tournaments can improve profits even if the employer is not able to solve for (or implement)
the optimal prize structure provides additional support for their widespread use in practice.


6. Gender Differences in Labor Supply Across Treatments
In this section, we explore gender differences in labor supply within and across treatments. We
focus on the extensive margin of effort, time worked, because that is the main driver of variation
in total effort (Section 4.2), but also show that results are unchanged for total effort. 31 Our unit of
observation is now an individual, so we account for within-room correlations by clustering
standard errors at the room level.
        We start by estimating separate effects of competition on the labor supply of male
(columns 1 and 2) and female (columns 3 and 4) workers. The results for time worked are
depicted in Figure 5. Relative to TP30, we find that both male and female workers provide

30
   Additional comparisons between TP30 and the alternative bonus schemes are presented in Online
Appendix C. Section C.1 shows that effort is significantly higher in TP30 than in TP15 if we expand our
model to control for "luck" (rate of gold stars per screen), suggesting that higher prizes induce more
effort. Section C.2 shows a significantly lower rate of having a single worker in the room at 40 minutes in
TP30 and PR, consistent with the spillovers across workers implied by the tournament structure.
31
   We find very few differences when examining our intensive margin measures of average effort per
minute worked, overall or in the first 10 minutes. These results can be found in Appendix Table A2.

                                                    25
significantly less effort in FP. The p-values, reported at the bottom of the table, indicate that both
male and female workers invested more effort in TP15 and in PR relative to FP. This indicates
that men and women both respond to financial incentives based on either relative or individual
performance metrics.
       However, Figure 5 also shows that responses differ by gender. Among the performance-
based incentive schemes, men provided the most effort in TP30, followed by PR, and then TP15.
Women, on the other hand, provided the most effort in PR, followed by TP15 and TP30 (which
appear nearly identical in the figure). We quantify these observations with regression estimates
in the first four columns of Table 3. While the ordering is indeed as depicted in Figure 5, the
only significant difference in effort provided across the incentivized treatments is for men
between the two tournaments: men invest significantly less effort in the lower-stakes TP15 than
in TP30. The other differences are statistically insignificant.
       Because Figure 5 groups outcomes by gender, differences between men and women are
not readily apparent. We therefore show the distributions grouped by treatment in Figure 6. We
also report estimated gender differences by treatment group in a regression framework by
supplementing the separate regressions for male and female workers in columns 1-4 of Table 3
with results from a pooled sample of men and women in columns 5 and 6. In these pooled
models, the treatment dummies capture the differences across treatments (relative to TP30) for
men. 32 The coefficients for female interacted with each of the 4 treatment dummies correspond
to the gender differences within each treatment.
       Figure 6 and the additional regression results indicate that men and women worked the
same amount of time in FP and PR (coefficients on Female×FP and Female×PR are small and
insignificant). Although the figure suggests gender differences in both tournament treatments,
the regressions reveal the only significant difference is in TP30. Specifically, in TP30, women
worked significantly less than men did (coefficient of -11.69, p = 0.044) and as a result invested
less effort (coefficient of -35.47, p = 0.053). If the gender difference in work time and effort in
TP30 applies to high-stakes competitions more generally, this result implies that women will be
underrepresented among tournament winners, and hence less likely to be promoted to high
ranking positions, even without external constraints on their work time.


32
  The observant reader will note that the treatment dummies in Column 5 are not identical to the ones in
Column 1. The reason is that we use a non-linear Tobit model for work time to account for censoring.

                                                  26
        The fact that we find a gender difference in effort in TP30 but not in TP15 is consistent
with the prior literature on competition showing that gender differences vary depending on the
specific features of the competition, such as the prize amount (Petrie and Segal, 2013) or nature
of task (see Niederle, 2016 for a summary). However, because it presents a more complex
picture, we further confirmed that the differential between the two tournaments was not the result
of some spurious correlation from luck (being worse for women in TP30 or for men in TP15) or
worker characteristics to treatments. Our balance checks in Appendix Table A1 indicate that
background characteristics and luck are, on the whole, equal across treatments by gender.
Nevertheless, we repeated the regressions in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 adding controls for
characteristics and luck (the fraction of screens shown that included a gold square and the square
of this value); the analysis confirms the same pattern of gender differences.
        To understand the source of the observed differences in effort between TP30 and TP15,
we must first remember that each worker's effort level is an equilibrium outcome in which that
worker is responding optimally to their beliefs about the strategies of their 3 competitors. The
marginal (financial) return to effort is the prize amount multiplied by the marginal increase in the
probability of winning the prize from an increase in effort. Increasing the prize amount would
always increase the returns to own effort if competitors kept their effort unchanged, but it seems
likely that at least some competitors would also find the increased prize attractive and increase
their effort. In particular, the value to any given worker of staying the entire time is lowered with
each additional coworker who is expected to also stay that long. It would therefore be wrong to
think that workers whose effort is unchanged are ignoring financial incentives because their
expected financial incentives might not have changed much. 33
        The presence of a gender gap in TP30 and absence of one in TP15 together suggest that
responses to tournament incentives are determined differently by gender. Because of the
equilibrium effects described above, the pattern we observe can be generated by some utility
factor that either (1) attracts men to TP30 more than to TP15 or (2) attracts women more to TP15

33
   Consider a worker whose effort costs make them willing to stay 40 minutes for an expected bonus of
$12 or higher. That worker will not compete in TP15 if they expect at least one other worker in their room
at 40 minutes, because their expected bonus from staying that long is $7.5. The same worker would be
willing to compete for 40 minutes in TP30 against one other person (expected bonus of $15) but not
against 2 or 3 others (expected bonus of $10 or $7.5). If they faced one competitor in both TP15 and in
TP30, that worker would supply more effort in TP30 than in TP15. However, if competition increased the
number of competitors staying to the end from 1 in TP15 to 2 in TP30, the worker would supply the same
low effort level in both.

                                                   27
than to TP30. Because we ran a field experiment, we cannot directly measure beliefs and
preferences and with their help determine whether it is men or women who are responding
differentially to TP30 versus TP15 or pinpoint the precise reasons for their behavior. To identify
potential sources, we therefore turn to the strand of the experimental literature on gender and
competition that, like this paper, assigns workers to different incentive schemes. 34
       One possibility is gender ratios. Starting with Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini (2003),
the literature documents that, under certain conditions, women respond significantly less to
tournament incentives in mixed-gender competitions than men do. Although both TP15 and
TP30 start out mixed-gender, financial considerations alone should cause fewer workers to stay
to the end in TP15. Women in TP15 can therefore anticipate a higher chance of participating in
an all-female contest in TP15 than in TP30. If the equilibrium number of workers staying 40
minutes is 2 in TP15 and 3 in TP30, a woman who stays in TP15 has a one-third chance of
facing only female competition, but one who stays in TP30 has no chance. Indeed, one-third of
all TP15 sessions ended with female workers engaged in single-sex tournaments, while all TP30
sessions had at least one male worker among the last to leave (Fisher exact test yields p = 0.042).
Thus, our female workers may have found TP30 relatively less attractive because it involved
competition with men and TP15 relatively more attractive because of competition with another
woman (Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini, 2003; Niederle, Segal and Vesterlund, 2013).
       It is also possible that male workers derived more utility from competing in TP30 than in
TP15, and were willing to increase effort in it, because the higher prize amount made the
competition more exciting and salient to them. Iriberri and Rey-Biel (2017) document a large
improvement (relative to piece rate) in male, but not female, performance in tournaments where
competition is made salient, but not in other tournaments.
       Gender differences in beliefs and risk aversion can also produce differential responses to
competitive pay. The literature on gender differences in tournament entry, going back to
Niederle and Vesterlund (2007), finds these are important contributing factors. 35 In our setting, if
women believe that men perform better on the task, this could increase their willingness to

34
   We focus on that strand because workers in our setting face a choice between working under a given
incentive scheme or not working and leaving the workplace. They are not given a choice among different
incentive schemes (as is done, for example, in Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007, and Dohmen and Falk,
2011).
35
   Recent work by Gillen et al. (forthcoming) even argues those factors explain the entire gender
difference in entry.

                                                 28
compete against other women rather than against men. It is in fact a common finding that gender
differences in competition arise primarily in tasks for which men are stereotypically expected to
outperform women (for a summary, see Niederle, 2016). Additionally, differences in the number
of active competitors can also affect the variance in payoffs between TP15 and TP30, which
could produce gender differences in effort if men and women differ in their degree of risk
aversion. For example, if women are more risk averse than men, they might be willing to stay 40
minutes for a 50% chance of $15 but not for a 25% chance of $30, while men are willing to stay
for both. Because mixed-sex competition, high salience, stereotypically male tasks, and high
variance in payoffs are all part and parcel of high-stakes competition in the workplace, the
gender difference found in TP30 could extend to elite occupations if its source is any of these
underlying mechanisms.


7. Conclusions
Long work hours are pervasive in high-pay, high-status jobs. While this feature has previously
been attributed to production technology and sorting into professions, we examine whether it
could be explained by the competitive incentives common to those workplaces. That is, could on
the job competition drive long work hours? The findings from our study suggest the answer is
yes.
       We use a field experiment at a real job to isolate the effects of competitive pay on
employees' work time and effort. Our comparison fixed payment scheme offered workers no
financial incentives for additional effort beyond the mandatory work time, yet a majority of
workers stayed longer after being asked to do so, suggesting some nonfinancial, behavioral
motives are present. Work time and effort were significantly higher in our main treatment with a
large tournament prize and lowered costs for the employer by more than a third. Auxiliary
treatments with a piece rate bonus or a small tournament prize also induced higher worker effort
and lower employer costs relative to fixed wages.
       When tournament incentives are cost-effective, it is natural that firms will offer them, and
competitive jobs will entail long work hours. Therefore, our findings highlight a fundamental
challenge for policy efforts aimed at reducing work hours in order to enhance overall worker
wellbeing or improve gender equality in elite occupations. These policies may be rendered
ineffective with pay incentives that encourage workers to voluntarily supply additional labor and

                                                29
circumvent formal hours restrictions. 36 Moreover, policies effective at reducing hours may entail
substantial costs to employers and some employees.
        Our field experiment also revealed a significant gender difference in labor supply, but
only in the high-prize tournament. The fact that men worked longer in that tournament hints at a
second channel through which high-stakes workplace competition can contribute to gender gaps
in labor markets. The first is based on our overall result that indicates that competition can
increase the work hours needed to succeed in elite professional careers. This disproportionately
deters women, who traditionally have more binding time constraints from greater household
obligations. The second channel is through differential effects of high-stakes competition on
labor supply, even absent any differences in time constraints.




36
  See, e.g., Fargen and Rosen (2013) on under-reporting of duty hours among medical residents.

                                                  30
References
Abeler, J., Falk, A., Goette, L., & Huffman, D. (2011). Reference points and effort provision.
        American Economic Review, 470-492.
Backstone, Nick (January 13, 2019). "Facebook's job evaluations are so ruthless that `meeting
        most' expectations could lead to getting fired, former employees say," Business Insider.
        https://www.businessinsider.com/former-facebook-employees-describe-brutal-job-
        performance-reviews-2019-1
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul (2005). Social preferences and the response
        to incentives: Evidence from personnel data. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120.3: 917-
        962.
Bell, L. A., & Freeman, R. B. (2001). The incentive for working hard: explaining hours worked
        differences in the US and Germany. Labour Economics, 8(2), 181-202.
Bertrand, M., Goldin, C., & Katz, L. F. (2010). Dynamics of the gender gap for young
        professionals in the financial and corporate sectors. American Economic Journal: Applied
        Economics, 2(3), 228-255.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Kevin F. Hallock. "The gender gap in top corporate jobs." ILR Review
        55.1 (2001): 3-21.
Blau, Francine, and Lawrence Kahn (2000). Gender Differences in Pay. Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 14(4): 75­99.
Bracha, A., Gneezy, U., & Loewenstein, G. (2015). Relative pay and labor supply. Journal of
        Labor Economics, 33(2), 297-315.
Brown, J. (2011). Quitters never win: The (adverse) incentive effects of competing with
        superstars. Journal of Political Economy, 119(5), 982-1013.
Bull, Clive, Andrew Schotter & Keith Weigelt (1987). "Tournaments and Piece Rates: An
        Experimental Study. Journal of Political Economy 95: 1-33.
Cooper, David J. and John H. Kagel .2016. Other-Regarding Preferences: A Selective Survey of
        Experimental Results. In John H. Kagel, Alvin E. Roth (Eds.), The Handbook of
        Experimental Economics, Volume 2, Chapter 4, 217­289. Princeton: Princeton
        University Press.
Cortes, Patricia and Jessica Pan (2016). Prevalence of Long Hours and Women's Occupational
        Choices. Working Paper.
Cortes, Patricia and Jessica Pan (2017). When Time Binds: Returns to Working Long Hours and
        the Gender Wage Gap Among the Highly Skilled. Working Paper.
Deci, E. L. (1971). Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic motivation. Journal of
        Personality and Social Psychology, 18(1), 105.
DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao (2016). Estimating
        social preferences and gift exchange at work. National Bureau of Economic Research
        Working Paper w22043.
Dohmen, Thomas, and Armin Falk (2011). Performance Pay and Multidimensional Sorting:
        Productivity, Preferences, and Gender. American Economic Review, 101(2): 556-90.
Ehrenberg, Ronald and Michael Bognanno (1990). "Do Tournaments Have Incentive Effects?"
        Journal of Political Economy 98(6): 1307-1324.
Fargen, Kyle and Charles Rosen (2013). Are Duty Hour Regulations Promoting a Culture of
        Dishonesty Among Resident Physicians? Journal of Graduate Medical Education, 5(4):
        553-555.


                                              31
Flabbi, Luca and Andrea Moro (2012). The effect of job flexibility on female labor market
         outcomes: Estimates from a search and bargaining model. Journal of Econometrics 168
         (2012) 81­95.
Freeman, Richard B., and Alexander M. Gelber (2010). Prize Structure and Information in
         Tournaments: Experimental Evidence. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
         2(1): 149-64.
Gicheva, Dora. "Working long hours and early career outcomes in the high-end labor market."
         Journal of Labor Economics 31.4 (2013): 785-824.
Gillen, Ben, Erik Snowberg and Leeat Yariv (forthcoming). "Experimenting with Measurement
         Error: Techniques with Applications to the Caltech Cohort Study," Journal of Political
         Economy.
Hendricks, Ken, Andrew Weiss, and Charles Wilson. (1988). "The War of Attrition in
         Continuous Time with Complete Information." International Economic Review 29(4):
         663-80.
Hsiang, E.Y., Mehta, S.J., Small, D.S., Rareshide, C.A., Snider, C.K., Day, S.C. and Patel, M.S.
         (2019). Association of Primary Care Clinic Appointment Time With Clinician Ordering
         and Patient Completion of Breast and Colorectal Cancer Screening. JAMA Network
         Open, 2(5): e193403-e193403.
Gneezy, Uri, Stephan Meier, and Pedro Rey-Biel. (2011). "When and Why Incentives (Don't)
         Work to Modify Behavior." Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(4):191-210.
Gneezy, U., Niederle, M., & Rustichini, A. (2003). Performance in Competitive Environments:
         Gender Differences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1049-1074.
Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini (2004). Gender and competition at a young age. American
         Economic Review 94.2: 377-381.
Goldin C. (2014). A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter. American Economic Review.
         104(4):1091-1119.
Greenfield, Rebecca and Jeff Green. November 8, 2017. "Uber's Employee Ratings Put Women
         at a Disadvantage, Suit Says." Bloomberg News.
          https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-11-08/uber-s-employee-ratings-put-
         women-at-a-disadvantage-suit-says
Iriberri, Nagore, and Pedro Rey-Biel (2017). Stereotypes are only a threat when beliefs are
         reinforced: On the sensitivity of gender differences in performance under competition to
         information provision. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 135: 99-111.
Kunze, Astrid, and Amalia R. Miller (2017). Women Helping Women? Evidence from Private
         Sector Data on Workplace Hierarchies. Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(5): 769-
         775.
Landers, R. M., Rebitzer, J. B., & Taylor, L. J.. (1996). Rat Race Redux: Adverse Selection in
         the Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms. American Economic Review, 86(3),
         329­348.
Landers, R. M., Rebitzer, J. B., & Taylor, L. J. (1997). Work norms and professional labor
         markets. In Gender and family issues in the workplace, ed. F. D. Blau and R. G.
         Ehrenberg, 166­202. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Lazear, Edward & Sherwin Rosen (1981). "Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor
         Contracts." Journal of Political Economy 89: 841-864.
Lazear, Edward P. (2018). "Compensation and Incentives in the Workplace." Journal of
         Economic Perspectives, 32 (3): 195-214.


                                               32
Linardi, S., & McConnell, M. A. (2011). No excuses for good behavior: Volunteering and the
        social environment. Journal of Public Economics, 95(5), 445-454.
Mas, A., & Pallais, A. (2017). Valuing alternative work arrangements. American Economic
        Review, 107(12), 3722-59.
Matsa, David A. and Amalia R. Miller (2011). Chipping Away at the Glass Ceiling: Gender
        Spillovers in Corporate Leadership. American Economic Review, 101(3): 635­39.
Niederle, Muriel. (2016). Gender. In Handbook of Experimental Economics, second edition, Eds.
        John Kagel and Alvin E. Roth, Chapter 7, 481-553. Princeton: Princeton University
        Press.
Niederle, M., Segal, C., & Vesterlund, L. (2013). How costly is diversity? Affirmative action in
        light of gender differences in competitiveness. Management Science, 59(1), 1-16.
Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2007). Do Women Shy Away From Competition? Do Men
        Compete Too Much?. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1067-1101.
Petrie, Ragan and Carmit Segal (2017). Gender Differences in Competitiveness: The Role of
        Prizes. Working Paper.
Segal, Carmit (2012). Working when no one is watching: Motivation, test scores, and economic
        success. Management Science, 58(8), pp.1438-1457.
Waldman, M. (1997). Commentary on Chapter 6. In Gender and family issues in the workplace,
        ed. F. D. Blau and R. G. Ehrenberg, 166­202. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Wasserman, Melanie (2018). Hours Constraints, Occupational Choice, and Gender: Evidence
        from Medical Residents. UCLA Working Paper.




                                              33



                                        Figure 1: Histogram of Time Worked
                0.6
               0.55
                           TP30
                0.5
               0.45
                           FP
                0.4
               0.35
    Fraction




                0.3
               0.25
                0.2
               0.15
                0.1
               0.05
                 0
                      10   12     14   16      18   20   22    24    26    28   30   32   34   36   38    40
                                                          Time worked (mins)
Notes: Distribution of work time across individual workers in TP30 ($30 tournament prize) and FP (fixed payment)
treatments. Work time was constrained to lie between 10 and 40 minutes.

                                            




                                                               
                                                              34



                                Figure 2: Mean Room Effort per Minute




Notes: Average room-level effort per minute of work session in TP30 ($30 tournament prize) and FP (fixed
payment) treatments.

                Figure 3: Mean Room Effort Conditional on Working per Minute




Notes: Average room-level effort per minute of work session, among workers still on the job for that minute, in
TP30 ($30 tournament prize) and FP (fixed payment) treatments.




                                                         
                                                        35



                Figure 4: CDF of Average Time Worked in Room by Treatment




Notes: CDF of room-level average work time per session in TP30 ($30 tournament prize), FP (fixed payment), TP15
($15 tournament prize) and PR (piece rate) treatments.




                                                       
                                                      36



                             Figure 5: Treatment Differences by Gender
                        Male                                                    Female




Notes: CDF of individual work time per session in TP30 ($30 tournament prize), FP (fixed payment), TP15 ($15
tournament prize) and PR (piece rate) treatments, separately by gender.




                                                       
                                                      37



                               Figure 6: Gender Differences by Treatment
                          FP                                                       TP30




                          PR                                                       TP15




Notes: CDF of individual work time per session by gender, separately for TP30 ($30 tournament prize), FP (fixed
payment), PR (piece rate), and TP15 ($15 tournament prize) treatments.




                                                        
                                                       38



Table 1: Effects of Compensation Scheme on Room Level Labor Supply
                             (1)                   (2)                       (3)                       (4)
                        Time Worked        Total Effort in the        Effort per Worker-     Effort per Worker-
                                                Session               Minute Conditional    Minute in the First 10
                                                                         on Working               Minutes
                                             Main Treatments
FP                       -13.562***           -70.867***                  -0.214**                   -0.210*
                           [2.494]              [12.687]                   [0.086]                   [0.121]
                                           Auxiliary Treatments
TP15                       -3.921               -19.017                     -0.025                  0.033
                          [3.011]              [15.412]                    [0.087]                 [0.110]
PR                         0.494                 -1.587                     -0.112                  -0.109
                          [2.859]              [13.511]                    [0.075]                 [0.126]
Constant                 29.807***            151.033***                  5.123***                5.020***
                          [2.023]               [9.881]                    [0.058]                 [0.090]
Prob>F: TP15 = FP          < 0.001               < 0.001                   0.0415                    0.0218
Prob>F: PR = FP            < 0.001               < 0.001                    0.201                     0.405
Prob>F: TP15 = PR           0.15                  0.25                      0.281                     0.196
Observations                  59                   59                       59                     59
R2                                               0.384                    0.130                  0.196
Notes: Observations at the room level. Tobit model is estimated for time worked and linear regressions for effort
measures. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1



Table 2: Effects of Compensation Scheme on Labor Costs
                            (1)            (2)                  (3)             (4)            (5)                 (6)
                                                         Pay for Effort                      Pay for           Pay for Any
                          Pay for       Pay for          (Tapping "Go                       Tapping a         Tap (Red, gold,
                           Work        Tapping a            to Rest           Pay for      Red or Gold        or "Go to Rest
                          Minute       Red Square          Screen")            Point         Square              Screen")
                                                   Main Treatments
FP                       2.181***       0.114***           0.121***          0.081***       0.105***             0.056***
                          [0.678]        [0.035]            [0.037]           [0.026]        [0.033]              [0.017]
                                                 Auxiliary Treatments
TP15                       0.364           0.018             0.020              0.011         0.016                0.009
                          [0.626]        [0.033]            [0.034]           [0.023]        [0.030]              [0.016]
PR                         -0.179         -0.006             -0.006            -0.007         -0.007               -0.003
                          [0.401]        [0.022]            [0.023]           [0.016]        [0.020]              [0.011]
Constant                 4.709***       0.229***           0.232***          0.156***       0.210***             0.110***
                          [0.344]        [0.019]            [0.020]           [0.014]        [0.018]              [0.009]
Prob>F: TP15 = FP          0.024          0.020             0.018              0.017          0.019               0.019
Prob>F: PR = FP           < 0.001        < 0.001           < 0.0011           < 0.001        < 0.001             < 0.001
Prob>F: TP15 = PR          0.338          0.398             0.397              0.353          0.384               0.390
Observations                  59              59              59              59             59               59
R2                          0.244           0.245           0.250           0.248          0.246            0.248
Notes: Observations at the room level. Pay is total pay, counting fixed payments plus any bonuses. Robust standard
errors in brackets. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                            
                                                           39



Table 3: Labor Supply Results by Gender
                               (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)          (5)                (6)
                                      Male                              Female                           All

                                Time                                                             Time               Total
                             Worked       Total Effort    Time Worked        Total Effort     Worked               Effort
FP                         -25.577***     -89.833***       -14.000***        -51.900***     -25.769***         -89.833***
                              [4.693]       [14.795]         [5.007]           [17.262]        [4.695]           [14.827]
TP15                        -14.120**      -43.533**          1.434              5.500       -14.238**          -43.533**
                              [6.099]       [20.085]         [6.028]           [20.192]        [6.217]           [20.128]
PR                             -6.985        -19.302          5.366             16.129          -7.068            -19.302
                              [5.656]       [16.057]         [6.134]           [19.109]        [5.712]           [16.091]
Female x TP30                                                                                -11.694**           -35.467*
                                                                                               [5.775]           [17.940]
Female x FP                                                                                     0.164               2.467
                                                                                               [2.018]            [9.328]
Female x TP15                                                                                   3.967             13.567
                                                                                               [5.484]           [19.461]
Female x PR                                                                                     0.714              -0.036
                                                                                               [4.829]           [14.688]
Constant                   42.259***      168.767***       30.872***         133.300***     42.464***          168.767***
                            [4.452]        [11.195]         [4.743]           [14.999]         [4.367]           [11.219]
Prob>F: TP15 = FP             0.032           0.020             0.001            <0.001
Prob>F: PR = FP              <0.001          <0.001            <0.001            <0.001
Prob>F: TP15 = PR             0.237           0.237             0.500             0.557
Observations                   118             118              118             118             236               236
R2                                            0.242                            0.153                             0.199
Notes: Observations at the worker level. Tobit models are estimated for time worked and linear regressions for total
effort (over the session). Robust standard errors clustered at the room level in brackets. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
p < 0.1




                                                           
                                                          40
