                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WAGES AND HOURS LAWS:
                      WHAT DO WE KNOW? WHAT CAN BE DONE?

                                      Charles C. Brown
                                     Daniel S. Hamermesh

                                      Working Paper 25942
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25942


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




The authors thank the Editors, two referees, Will Carrington, David Ellwood, Larry Katz, David
Weil and other participants at the Conference for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Charles C. Brown and Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Wages and Hours Laws: What Do We Know? What Can Be Done?
Charles C. Brown and Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 25942
June 2019
JEL No. J23,J38

                                         ABSTRACT

We summarize recent research on the wage and employment effects of minimum wage laws in
the U.S. and infer from non-U.S. studies of hours laws the likely effects of unchanging U.S. hours
laws. Minimum wages in the U.S. have increasingly become a province of state governments,
with the effective minimum wage now closely related to a state's wage near the lower end of its
wage distribution. Original estimates demonstrate how the 45-year failure to increase the exempt
earnings level for salaried workers under U.S. hours laws has raised hours of lower-earning
salaried workers and reduced their weekly earnings. The overall conclusion from the literature
and the original work is that wages and hours laws in the U.S. have produced impacts in the
directions predicted by economic theory, but that these effects have been quite small.


Charles C. Brown
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
charlieb@umich.edu

Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
Barnard College
3009 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu
    I.      Regulating Wages and Hours

         In most markets we concern ourselves with two dimensions--price and quantity. In labor markets

too we concentrate on price (broadly, compensation per hour, of which the hourly wage is the largest

component); but in considering quantity we examine both its incidence--the number of employees, and its

intensity--hours per employee. In the U.S. the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938 has regulated the

wage rate by setting a minimum on what can be paid in covered employment and has mandated

premium/penalty pay on weekly hours per worker above some level for non-exempt workers in covered

industries/firms.

         Here we review recent policy developments and try to synthesize what we know about the

economic effects of these two major methods by which we regulate labor markets. While both wages and

hours are regulated under the same law, policy developments and research on the law's impacts could not

be more different between the two areas. The federal minimum wage has been raised numerous times; and

many sub-federal jurisdictions impose their own wage minima that, where they exceed the federal

minimum, supersede it. Perhaps because of this variation, a huge literature examining the effects of

minimum wages on the U.S. labor market has arisen and has continued to burgeon. A fair conclusion is that

American labor economists have spilled more ink per federal budgetary dollar on this topic than on any

other labor-related policy. The opposite is the case for regulating hours. The essential parameters of hours

regulation have not changed since the Act's passage; and perhaps because of this, there is a remarkable

dearth, especially recently, of research on the economic impact of hours regulation in the U.S.

         Because of these contrasts, for the minimum wage we summarize and evaluate recent legislative

changes, and we synthesize the large number of recent studies that have examined the effects of minimum

wage laws on wages and employment in the U.S. In the case of overtime pay, we evaluate the impact of a

provision of the regulations that has not changed in 45 years, and we synthesize the likely impact of

changing other provisions of the law on employment, hours and wages by examining international evidence.




                                                     1
II. Minimum Wage Laws in the U.S.: What We Know

    A. Minimum Wage Laws Then and Now

        Initially the FLSA of 1938 set the federal minimum wage at $0.25 (roughly $3.50 today, using the

Personal Consumption Expenditure deflator), to increase to $0.30 in the following year; coverage was

limited to workers engaged in or producing goods for interstate commerce. Since then the nominal

minimum has been increased nine times (often in multi-year installments). With periodic nominal

adjustments, the impact of the law has followed a saw-toothed pattern, increasing discretely when a higher

minimum wage was mandated and then eroding gradually until the next hike. These adjustments have

become less frequent over time ­ roughly twice a decade in the 1960s and 1970s, once a decade since.

Coverage of the law was also expanded, most notably to include workers in construction and large retail

trade and service employment in 1961 and 1966 (U.S. Department of Labor, 2018).

        State legislation can matter in two ways: By extending coverage to small employers who are

exempted from the federal law and by requiring a higher minimum than the federal law for existing covered

employers. State-level coverage became less important as federal coverage expanded through the 1970s.

But over the past 30 years, states' decisions to increase their minimum wages have become increasingly

important as the federal minimum has been changed less frequently. For example, in 2010 (after the 2007

federal increases had become fully effective) only one-third of the workforce was in states with state minima

that exceeded the federal $7.25. By 2016, with the federal minimum still at $7.25, that fraction had risen to

nearly two-thirds. As of 2018, 29 states, shown shaded dark in Figure 1, had minimum wages above $7.25.

        States that have raised their minimum wages above the federal minimum have tended to be high-

wage states, and the result has been a minimum wage that is much more closely (though still imperfectly)

aligned with local wages. A simple way of summarizing this relationship is to regress the logarithm of the

minimum wage in each state (the higher of the federal or state minimum) on the logarithm of the wage rate

at the 25th percentile in the state (from the Occupational Employment Survey). For 2010 this regression

yields an elasticity of 0.28, R2 =0.27. Only six years later, the combination of federal gridlock and state




                                                     2
activism had raised the elasticity to 0.98, R2 = 0.54. The pattern is similar, although a bit less dramatic,

using the median wage rather than the wage at the 25th percentile as the measure of local market wages.

        Supporters of the minimum wage often argue that a skillfully set minimum raises wages at minimal

cost to employment, but that further increases threaten unacceptable employment losses (Castillo-Freeman

and Freeman, 1992; Krueger, 2015). It is difficult to imagine that the point at which the wage gain ­

employment loss trade-off becomes too steep is the same in all states. It seems likely that an "ideal"

minimum wage would vary geographically, in line with wages at some relevant percentile of the local wage

distributions. As states seem to have overcome the fear that a higher minimum wage will drive business to

other states, they have produced a pattern of minimum wages that approximates a national minimum wage

indexed to local wage distributions. 1

        B. Evolution of Research Strategies for Studying Effects of the Minimum Wage

        The increasing role of the states in determining minimum wage policy has led to greater cross-

sectional variation in the minimum and has provided the basis for a new generation of research on its effects.

But the new work has not simply adopted the specifications used in earlier generations of research. Having

more years of data and more variation than in earlier years has encouraged researchers to be more ambitious

in attempts to control for other factors that may influence low-wage labor markets.

        At the time of the Minimum Wage Study Commission, 1979-1981, the available literature was

based largely on simple aggregate (national) time-series regressions of the teen employment/population

ratio on a minimum wage variable and other variables to control for cyclical forces and longer-run trends

(Brown et al., 1982). What we used to call the New Minimum Wage research introduced two important

advances. First, variation in state minimum wages and in the "bite" of the federal minimum wage in high-

vs. low-wage states led to estimation based on state-by-year observations. Most of the data came from



1
 A recent proposal by Rep. Terri Sewell (Sewell, 2019) would formalize this by grouping metropolitan and non-
metropolitan areas into five "tiers" based on Regional Price Parity data. The federal minimum wage in the highest
tier would be about 30% higher than in the lowest tier. Each tier would then be indexed, though from a lower base
level than under most competing proposals.



                                                       3
tabulations of Current Population Survey (CPS), which included demographic variables, employment

status, wages and state identifiers. A typical study included fixed effects for state and year and a small

number of state-by-year variables as controls. Second, based on surveys of samples of employers, Card and

Krueger (1994) and Neumark and Wascher (2000) studied the response of New Jersey fast-food restaurants

to a 1992 minimum wage increase, comparing outcomes there to those of nearby employers in Pennsylvania

who were bound only by an unchanging federal minimum--a cross-border approach.

        The 2010s have seen significant further developments of both new approaches. As the state-by-

year panels became richer ­ more years and more state-level variation ­ researchers have been able to

control for state-specific trends. And as more states have increased their minimum wages, researchers have

extended the cross-border estimation strategy to exploit the large number of "experiments" provided by

employers in adjacent counties in different states facing different minimum wages. In some cases, these

studies follow the state-by-year panels in adding area- (typically, county-) specific time trends as controls;

others adopt an alternative specification in which each border-county pair x time-period has its own fixed

effect. These studies relate differences in wages or employment in border-county pairs to differences in

minimum wages across the border.

        In the experimental paradigm, each of these approaches can be thought of as comparing outcomes

in a "treated" state or county affected by a minimum wage increase to those in a "control" area that was not

treated. The border-county approach explicitly identifies the county across the border as the comparison

group ­ i.e., as the basis for inferring what would have happened in the treated county but for the higher

minimum wage there. But geographic proximity need not be a reliable indicator of underlying similarity.

"Synthetic" control groups (Abadie et al., 2010), have provided an alternative strategy for identifying what

would have happened in a state or county absent a change in the minimum wage. 2

         There is also a smaller literature evaluating the effects of local minimum wage laws. We do not

focus on these here, for two reasons. First, it is challenging enough to do justice to the large and very diverse


2
 Abadie et al. had 19 years of data prior to treatment and 38 untreated states from which to form a synthetic control
group (for California, which was "treated" with an anti-smoking program in 1989).


                                                         4
literature on state and federal minimum wages; comparisons for local legislation would require a separate

study. Second, given the evidence that the estimated effects of individual state-level changes are quite

dispersed (Dube et al., 2010), it is not clear that we have enough local ordinances to have any confidence

that results from the small number of early adopters would generalize to other cities.

        C. Recent Evidence on the Effects of Minimum Wage Laws on Wages and Employment

        Studies of the effects of the minimum wage on employment have generally focused either on

teenagers or on workers in the restaurant industry. This focus is largely due to the relatively large share of

minimum wage workers in both groups. For example, Dube et al. (2016) report that, during the 2000-2011

period that they study, 30 percent of teenagers and 23 percent of restaurant workers earned within 10 percent

of the minimum wage in effect in their states. Given that a minority of workers are directly affected by the

minimum wage even in these relatively minimum-wage intensive groups, the elasticity of the average wage

with respect to the minimum wage will be much less than one, and the elasticity of employment will be

much less than a conventionally estimated elasticity of labor demand (Neumark, 2019).

        Studies of teenagers have traditionally relied on data from the Current Population Survey. A recent

addition to our data arsenal, the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI), matches information about payroll

and employer industry from Unemployment Insurance records to a limited set of demographic variables,

primarily from taken from Social Security records. Researchers who focus on low-wage industries have

tended to rely on the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), which provides data on payroll

and employment (but not worker demographics) from essentially all employers. The QWI and QCEW both

provide data by county, which are often used to study adjacent counties in states with different minimum

wages. The "wage" measure is weekly earnings and so also captures any changes in hours worked per week.

        An overview of recent work is presented in Table 1. (Appendix Table 1 presents a less-condensed

summary, with more specifications and with standard errors for each estimate.) A robust finding is that

minimum wage laws raise the wages of teenagers, with an elasticity of about 0.20. This is roughly in line

with a naïve model in which the wages of teenagers who initially earn less than the minimum are raised up

to that level, and better-paid teens are unaffected.


                                                       5
        There is substantially greater variation in the estimated effects on employment, which is largely

due to the different strategies used to control for the effects of determinants of employment that are not

explicitly included in the analysis. The estimates are also often sensitive to the choice of sample period.

Thus, for example, Neumark et al. (2014) begin with what they call a standard panel-data model ­ fixed

effects for year and state ­ and estimate an employment elasticity of -0.165 (s.e. = 0.041). They then add

linear state-specific trends, mirroring Allegretto et al. (2011), which leaves a much smaller and statistically

insignificant employment elasticity, -0.074 (s.e. = 0.078). They then consider more flexible polynomials,

leading to estimates that approximate those when no state-specific trends are included. Similarly, allowing

region x year fixed effects greatly reduces the original estimate of Allegretto et al. (2011).

        Just when we thought we had discovered a stable pattern of instability, Allegretto et al. (2017)

report that, when their sample is extended to 1979-2014, estimates without state-specific time trends remain

negative and significant. But including state-specific trends ­ whether linear or a higher-order polynomial

­ greatly reduces the estimated impacts and leaves them statistically insignificant. They then attempt to let

the data decide the appropriate set of control variables, using a LASSO procedure. The "optimal"

specification produces estimates similar to those using state-specific trends, but it chooses a sub-set of linear

trends and one set of region-period fixed effects. Perhaps this is "optimal" for prediction, but it certainly

does not allow any understanding of what economic factors the chosen set of controls might represent.

        While variations in specification matter, so does the time-period being considered: Neumark et al.

(2014) report that a model with linear state-specific trends produces an employment-minimum wage

elasticity of ­0.229 (s.e. = 0.095) with data from 1994-2007, but only ­0.074 (s.e. = 0.078) when the sample

period is extended to 1990-2011.

        The sensitivity of the estimates to the introduction of these additional control variables has led

researchers to consider an alternative strategy--synthetic controls. For a state experiencing a minimum

wage increase in year t (that is, "treated" in t), the procedure selects a set of "un-treated" states that are

"similar" in terms of teen employment and/or other related variables. The difference between teen




                                                       6
employment in the treated state and a weighted average of the non-treated states (the "synthetic" control)

is an estimate of the effect of treatment.

        When analyzing the minimum wage, the set of "untreated" states is constantly changing, and

identifying "untreated" states requires a relatively short memory. (Operationally in these studies "untreated"

means "not treated recently," since even currently "untreated" states might have seen changes in minimum

wages in the past.) It is therefore perhaps not surprising that the results of studies using these synthetic

("data-driven") controls vary greatly depending on the criteria for choosing the controls. Powell (2017)

proposes estimating the control-group weights and the "treatment" (i.e., minimum wage) effects

simultaneously, making it "unnecessary to make the distinction between ever-treated and never-treated

units." The resulting employment-minimum wage elasticity, -0.45, is larger than the typical estimate, but

the 95-percent confidence interval extends almost up to 0. While his method allows for inclusion of

traditional time-varying controls, Powell does not include them on grounds that they are potentially affected

by the minimum wage.

        The right-most columns of Table 1 show estimates of the effect of the minimum wage on

employment in the restaurant industry. Once again, minimum wage increases raise wages, again with an

elasticity of about 0.20. The employment elasticities are somewhat less varied than those for teenagers,

although in specifications with county-specific trends, matched border-pairs or synthetic control groups the

estimates are often not significantly different from zero. In a broader sample of low-wage industries

Gopalan et al. (2018) report a larger elasticity (-.026 [s.e. .012]), all of which comes from changes in

tradeable-goods industries. 3 Cengiz et al. (2019) report a broadly similar pattern.

        What one makes of the wealth of estimates in Table 1 may depend on why one is interested in them.

If the goal is to test predictions of standard labor demand theory, we might view an estimated elasticity of

-0.12 (s.e. = 0.05) as confirming the theory, while -0.06 (s.e. =0.05) sends a much less clear signal. But



3
 Gopalan et al. use payroll-like data from Equifax with nearby states as controls. While this data source includes
individual-level wage and turnover data, the sample is skewed toward larger and, apparently, multi-location
employers, for whom shuffling production across locations would be relatively easy.


                                                        7
from a policy perspective, the two estimates are both "small" ­ small enough that the earnings gains caused

by a minimum-wage increase are only partially offset by employment losses. It is this perspective that led

Freeman (1996, p. 639) to describe the minimum wage as "a risky but potentially `profitable' investment

in redistribution."

        A related literature focuses on the effects of minimum wages on job transitions. Both Dube et al.

(2016) and Gittings and Schmutte (2016) report that accession and separation rates fall (for teenagers and

restaurant workers) in response to higher minimum wages. A decline in separations is not predicted by

frictionless models, but is consistent with search models with employed workers less likely to encounter a

better opportunity and so less likely to leave jobs voluntarily; Gopalan et al. (2018) find that the entire

employment reduction in their sample following minimum wage increases comes from reduced hiring.

        D. Conclusions and Concerns about Minimum Wage Effects

        For both teenagers and workers in the restaurant industry the employment effects of the minimum

wage are often but certainly not always estimated to be negative. In general, studies that control more

aggressively for other factors that might affect employment and wages (e.g., by including state-specific

trends) tend to find smaller effects of minimum wages on employment, while the effects on wages tend to

be more robust. As a rule, proportional reductions in employment tend to be smaller than (weekly) wage

gains, more clearly in the studies that attempt to control for more unmeasured factors. The sensitivity of the

estimates to choices about specification was noted in an earlier survey (Belman and Wolfson, 2014). It

remains despite the fact that newer studies have more data and often better-detailed empirical strategies

(Neumark, 2019).

        The bottom line that employment effects are fairly "small" comes with three important caveats.

First, while focusing on groups with relatively high concentrations of low-wage workers, such as teenagers,

makes sense from a statistical point of view, impacts on workers who are likely to be members of low-

income families ­ or on the income of poor households ­ would be of greater policy interest. The focus on

teenagers arises partly from historical accident. The early time series studies relied on employment data

tabulated from the CPS and published by BLS, and such data were not available for dropouts or heads of


                                                      8
single-parent families. Recent work by Clemens and Strain (2018) suggests that the effect on "low-skilled"

workers ­ those under age 16-25 who have not completed high school ­ may be larger than the effect on

teenagers generally. Comparing states which increased their minimum wage by more than a dollar

following the Federal minimum wage increases in 2007-09 to those that remained at the federal minimum,

they find much larger employment elasticities for low-skilled workers (on the order of -0.40) than for young

(16-21) adults (roughly -0.16). 4 Interestingly, states with increases below a dollar above the federal

minimum show no reductions in employment in either group, consistent with the notion that the minimum

"bites" more strongly the higher it is raised. 5

         Second, there is an intense debate among researchers about how actively one should control for

unmeasured factors: Such controls provide protection against omitted-variable bias, but at the cost of

statistically eliminating minimum-wage variation that is correlated with the controls. It is worth noting that

the additional controls do not lead to imprecise minimum wage estimates ­ typically, the standard error of

the minimum wage variable is reduced. Progress on this front is likely to depend on the ability to identify

what economic forces such variables as "state-specific trends" actually represent.

         Finally, the impacts discussed so far are all short-run; but policy should be based on longer-run

effects. With longer data series for each state and more states altering their minimum wages, researchers

have used distributed-lag specifications to try to tease out the long-run effects of a higher minimum wage.

Both Allegretto et al. (2017) [teenagers] and Dube et al. (2010) [restaurants] report cumulated employment

effects after three or four years that are not appreciably different from the current-period estimates. Sorkin

(2015) argues that this specification cannot recover long-run effects in an environment where capital


4
 Clemens and Strain do not report elasticities, and their estimates for young adults differ between those based on the
American Community Survey and the CPS. The text reports our attempt to construct traditional elasticities with
respect to the minimum wage, averaged over the two data sets.

5
 Studying low-wage workers directly is difficult, because wages change from job to job and, of course, are changed
by the minimum wage. Clemens and Wither (2019) focus on workers paid less than $7.50 before the federal minimum
wage increased from $6.55 to $7.25 and find very large employment losses in states where the federal increase was
fully binding ­ from a relatively small increase. Cengiz et al. (2019) report that minimum wage increases reduce
employment below the new minimum but increase employment at and above the new minimum, for no net loss ­ and
that this applies to workers who had been employed prior to the increase. The conflicting messages of these two studies
are difficult to reconcile.


                                                          9
adjustment is slow (e.g., in the model the capital-labor ratio is fixed, so adjustment comes from entry and

exit). Indeed, the effects of a saw-toothed increase are small, and the cumulative effects on employment

decline rather than increase as time passes since a minimum wage was increased. Aaronson et al. (2018)

find that both exit and entry of "limited service" restaurants (especially chains) rise following an increase

in the minimum wage, with somewhat more exit than entry, while employment at restaurants remaining in

business stays flat, consistent with Sorkin's model. 6 In their calibrated model, the long-run effects are two

to five times larger than the short-run estimates, with the ratio sensitive to estimates of minimum-wage

labor's share of costs and to ex ante substitution possibilities between capital and labor. Given that they

find much less evidence of entry and exit effects in other low-wage industries, the ratio of long- to short-

run effects in low-wage labor markets remains quite uncertain.

        One relatively uncontroversial implication of the Sorkin and Aaronson et al. models is that long-

run responses to increases in minimum wages depend on employers' expectations about future increases.

In the absence of data on these expectations, the experience of states that have indexed their minimum wage

may help identify long-run effects ­ at least if, in forming expectations, employers assume that indexing

provisions will remain in place. Early evidence suggests that indexing may matter. Brummund and Strain

(forthcoming) allow the effect of the minimum wage on employment to differ in states that have indexed

their minimum wage compared to those that have not. In their preferred specifications (with county and

period fixed effects or using border-county pairs) the effect of an indexed minimum wage is about three

times the effect of that in non-indexed states; but when border pair x time effects are allowed, there is no

effect of either indexed or unindexed minimum wages Clemens and Strain (2018) do not find further

employment losses in 2015-6 among states that had previously indexed their minimum wage.




6
 Card and Krueger (1995, updated 2015) found some evidence of entry, but essentially no exit, by one chain
(McDonald's) in an earlier (1986-91) period. Exit rates are very low, overall, in their sample, compared to those in
Aaronson et al.


                                                        10
III. Overtime Laws and FLSA Overtime: What We Know

           A. Overtime Provisions: History, Changes, Current Issues and Expected Effects

           In the 80 years since the FLSA was enacted the specification of its crucial parameters regulating

hours--a penalty rate of 50 percent extra wages on hours beyond the standard weekly hours (HS) of 40--

has not changed. The only changes have been extensions of coverage to additional industries and firms, all

of which were complete by the mid-1970s, and alterations in the weekly earnings above which salaried

workers are presumed exempt from the law. Similarly, there have been no major changes in state overtime

laws. Indeed, most states simply extend the FLSA's provisions to some otherwise uncovered workers. Only

Alaska, California, Colorado and Nevada have mandated overtime penalties on daily work schedules

beyond 8 hours, varying the application of this mandate over the years. 7 While this additional requirement

does alter labor-market outcomes (Hamermesh and Trejo, 2000), it too has not changed in the last two

decades. In short, because of their remarkable constancy, U.S. overtime laws do not provide as fertile a

field for evaluating policy as the regulation of wages. Not surprisingly, therefore, very little research on

them has been produced in the U.S. in the last decade.

           This absence does not mean that overtime regulations have been neglected in debates over labor-

market policy. A repeated topic has been the substitution of "comp time" for overtime pay, i.e., allowing

employers to offer workers time off in lieu of the 1.5 times their wage rate that they would otherwise receive

for overtime hours worked. This proposal regularly resurfaces in Republican-controlled Congresses, as it

did in 2017 (115th Congress, H.R. 1180), passing the House of Representatives but stalling in the Senate.

Evaluating its potential impacts is extremely difficult, as it is unclear to what extent employers and workers

would wish to avail themselves of the opportunity to substitute more time off for additional pay.

           The only other policy issue that has seen serious recent debate in the U.S. is the dollar amount

above which white-collar (salaried) workers can be considered presumptively exempt from the FLSA's

overtime provisions. This limit, set at $455/week in the mid-1970s, has not changed in over 40 years. As


7
    https://shermanhoward.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/WHDI-2016-State-By-State-Chart.pdf .



                                                       11
shown in Figure 2, its erosion in real terms is such that, while the limit was nearly 200 percent of median

weekly earnings in the U.S. in 1979, today it is barely above 50 percent (based on calculations using the

CPS-MORG for the years 1979-2017). As the figure also shows (right vertical axis), the percentage of the

work force that is salaried, although varying slightly, has remained between 42 and 46 percent for the past

4 decades. The rough constancy of this percentage of workers means that the dollar limit has become

decreasingly relevant for nearly half the U.S. workforce.

        To extend overtime protection to more salaried workers, the Obama Administration, after very

lengthy discussion, issued a rule in 2016 raising the limit to $913/week and indexing it beginning in 2020

to wages at the 40th percentile of the distribution of earnings of full-time salaried workers

(https://www.dol.gov/whd/overtime/final2016/). This rule would have extended the overtime provisions of

the FLSA to over one-fifth of all full-time salaried workers, as many as an additional 6 percent of all

American workers. An injunction was issued before the rule became effective, and it was struck down by

district and appellate courts in 2017.

        The economic outcomes that might be affected by changes in the provisions of overtime laws are

employment, hours per worker, overtime hours per worker, and the hourly wage rate (and thus total earnings

too). For employment the implications of decreasing HS (the standard workweek), increasing the penalty or

extending coverage are clear: Because employers substitute workers for hours when the price of the latter

increases, which it will with all these changes, more binding overtime laws are a "job-creator." The issue,

of course, is how many jobs, and whether any induced increase in employment would be large enough to

prevent total labor input from deceasing. It will not be--total worker-hours will decrease because of the

scale effect induced by the higher price of labor at the margin (Hamermesh, 1993).

        Hours per worker overall will decrease with the greater stringency of overtime laws, but the changes

depend on where the worker would be in the distribution of workhours. Those working less than HS when

coverage is extended or the penalty rises, and those whose hours are below any new, lower HS, will be

unaffected or might even see their hours increase as employers shift away from the now more-expensive

workers who had put in more than HS hours per week. Lowering HS makes hours of workers who were


                                                    12
already covered and non-exempt, whose hours exceed the previous HS, more expensive. It produces scale

effects on employers' demand for them, but does not affect the price of a marginal hour of their worktime.

        Those workers who become covered or whose hours are newly partly subject to a penalty will see

their weekly hours reduced--those hours have become more expensive at the margin, generating both

substitution and scale effects. Moreover, their hours will be more likely to be at the corner solution of 40

per week. These are the least ambiguous theoretical predictions about overtime laws: The laws will reduce

the hours of those workers who beforehand were not affected by them, either because they were exempt,

uncovered or because their hours were below the previous HS but are above the new HS. Even though their

total hours will fall, their hours that are paid as overtime hours will rise.

        This discussion assumes that these changes do not alter hourly wage rates. The evidence (Trejo,

1991, and subsequent work) shows that expansions of overtime laws do reduce wage rates. That is to be

expected: With a supply of labor to firms and the market that is not perfectly inelastic, offering some

workers a higher return on the marginal hour of their worktime induces them to supply more effort. That

enables employers to offer lower straight-time pay per hour. A strong prediction is that hourly wage rates

will decrease as overtime provisions become more stringent. Coupled with receipt of overtime pay for more

hours, whether the cut is enough to reduce total earnings is unclear. But because of it, and because of the

induced cuts in weekly hours, we can be sure that earnings will rise by less than the product of 50 percent

of any previous hourly wage and previous hours exceeding the new HS.

        B. International Evidence on the Effects of Overtime Laws

        Since 2006 nine studies examining changes in overtime laws, in seven different countries, have

been published. In Table 2 we summarize them, detailing the legislated changes and their impacts on the

essential economic outcomes--overtime hours, hours/worker, the hourly wage rate, and earnings. No study

presents estimates of effects on employment, and none offers evidence on all outcomes; but on each of the

other outcomes we have evidence from at least two studies. Except for the French tax waiver examined by

Cahuc and Carcillo (2014), all the research summarized in the Table deals with changes that extended

overtime protection by reducing HS.


                                                       13
        The most frequently studied outcome in this recent research has been the impact on total hours.

The results are unanimous and consistent with the theory: Reducing HS, thus subjecting more weekly hours

to overtime penalties, leads employers to cut total worker-hours. The reductions in hours are concentrated

among those workers whose hours had been below the previous HS but above its new lower level. The

somewhat sparser evidence shows that overtime hours decrease as overtime laws become more stringent.

        The direct evidence on changes in wage rates and earnings from these foreign legislative changes

is ambiguous--in some of the cases wage rates rise, in others they fall. The impacts on total earnings are

varied, but typically tiny. Given the decreases in hours, the minute effects on earnings suggest that declines

in wage rates eat up much of the impact of broader applications of overtime laws.

        With the likely conclusion that expansions of overtime provisions decrease total hours through

demand-side effects, but that they produce at worst small decreases in weekly earnings, the question is

whether workers benefit from this trade-off--from sacrificing a bit of income to obtain a reduction in their

work time. Comparing life satisfaction of affected workers in Japan and Korea before and after legislated

decreases in HS, Hamermesh et al. (2017) show that they were happier after being forced to accept this

trade-off (which changes in Japanese and Korean hours legislation induced employers to make).

        C. Measuring the Impact of the Erosion of the FLSA Exempt Level

        No doubt because of the absence of major changes in the law, only one scholarly economic study

of U.S. overtime laws has been published in the past 10 years (Barkume, 2010). Using detailed information

on the quasi-fixed costs of labor from the BLS National Compensation Survey, the study finds that lower

hourly wages are associated with more use of overtime in a plant. While large numbers of establishment-

based covariates are accounted for, the absence of any exogenous shock that might be altering these

outcomes means the study cannot, and does not, claim that the relationship is causal. With the current

catchphrase in applied microeconomics being "causality über alles," this makes it difficult to assess whether

any changes in the law's parameters would affect outcomes.

        Despite the absence of legislated changes, the law's economic effects may have changed. Because

the nominal exempt level for salaried workers has been fixed at $455 for over 40 years, the hours, wages,


                                                     14
etc., of some workers who would have been affected by the FLSA overtime provisions are no longer

affected because of its erosion in real terms. This is the "treatment group," Group T, defining treatment as

removal of presumptive non-exempt status. It works out that the salary limit in this group in 2014-2016,

the recent period that we use in our empirical example, would have been almost exactly at the 40th percentile

of full-time salaried workers' earnings had the exempt limit not eroded. 8

        There are two "control groups": Group C1 consists of low-wage white-collar workers, sufficiently

near the bottom of the earnings distribution to be non-exempt in both 2014-2016 and 1987-1989, the earlier

period that we use here. Only full-time salaried workers in the lowest 8 percent of the earnings distributions

of such workers remained non-exempt in 2014-2016. Group C2 consists of workers sufficiently high up the

distribution of salaried workers' earnings to be exempt today and to have been exempt in the past. These

are in the top 60 percent of the distributions of these workers' earnings.

        We chose to examine these two periods because both were times of near full-employment (roughly

5 percent in both periods), and because the earlier period included the first three such years for which CPS-

MORG data are available to provide information on method of pay, usual weekly earnings, actual weekly

hours, and detailed demographics. The outcomes of interest are the double-differences in weekly hours and

the probability that weekly hours equal 40, the differences:

    D1 = [(T2010s ­ T1980s) - [(C12010s ­ C11980s)] ,                                                      (1a)

and:

    D2 = [(T2010s ­ T1980s) - [(C22010s ­ C21980s)].                                                       (1b)

Each double-difference measures the change in the outcome over these 27 years in the "treatment group"

relative to the change in a "control group."

        In classifying workers into these two groups we cannot use their actual weekly earnings. Since

these are the products of hours and wage rates, they are themselves affected by overtime laws and are thus



8
 In the recent period two states, California and New York, have set exempt limits above the federal level. We account
for these by classifying workers whose weekly earnings in 2014, 2015 or 2016 were between these higher amounts
and $455 as in C1, those above these levels but below the 40th percentile of earnings as in the treatment group.


                                                         15
endogenous to the shock whose impact we are measuring. We thus estimate a first-stage earnings regression

over all full-time salaried workers, using as covariates all the demographic information in the CPS--marital

status, gender and their interaction; presence of young children, and indicators of state of residence, years

of schooling and age. Also included are vectors of indicators of 3-digit occupation and industry; but because

of the endogeneity problem, weekly hours of work are excluded. We then classify full-time salaried workers

into one of the three groups, T, C1 and C2, using the worker's predicted earnings.

         Because of the "duties test" in determining whether a salaried worker is exempt from the overtime

provisions, even if the worker's earnings are below the exempt limit, we cannot just classify workers based

on their predicted weekly pay. And with the test being idiosyncratically applied in individual cases by

employers, we cannot be sure which workers in the Treatment or Control groups might be eligible for

overtime pay. The best we can do without national firm-based micro data that includes employers'

classifications of their workers by overtime eligibility, data that do not exist, is to exclude from the samples

workers whose employers are likely to claim they are exempt because of the duties test. We thus eliminate

all those CPS respondents whose occupational classification is as "manager," "supervisor" or one of several

occupations in which the employee clearly supervises others (e.g., lawyers and judges). 9 These restrictions

eliminate roughly 1/3 of salaried workers from the samples, very few from (the low-wage employees in)

C1, nearly half from (the higher-paid employees in) C2.

         Table 3 presents single- and double-differences in weekly hours (actual hours worked in the CPS

reference week) and the probability of working exactly 40 hours. The double-differences describing Group

T ­ Group C1 --the group that was always non-exempt-- show a clear statistically significant increase in

hours because of the failure to raise the exempt amount and a positive but statistically insignificant increase




9
 We use the detailed occupation classifications in the variable occ80 in the 1987-89 sample and in the variable occ2012
in the 2014-16 sample (Bureau of the Census, 1989; Centers for Disease Control, 2017).



                                                          16
in bunching at 40 hours per week. Examining what would happen if the 50-percent overtime penalty were

extended to the treatment group, the elasticity of overtime hours is a statistically significant -0.180. 10

        The second comparison, between Group T and Group C2, yields a large and statistically highly

significant double-difference in hours, with an elasticity of overtime hours with respect to imposing the

wage penalty of -0.609. The impact on bunching at exactly 40 hours is essentially zero, albeit statistically

significantly negative. Averaging the double-differences, the best conclusion is that failing to allow the

presumptively exempt limit on salaried workers' overtime to increase over the past 4 decades has raised

some salaried workers' work time by about one-half hour above what it otherwise would have been.

        This exercise does not allow estimating what the impact on hourly wage rates would have been had

the limit been increased. But the literature suggests that any decline in wage rates would have been too

small for earnings received on (the reduced) overtime hours not to have risen. It also does not account for

possible anticipatory responses by employers in 2014-16 to any expected increase in the presumptively

non-exempt salary level that briefly would have become effective in December 2016 and that was formally

proposed in 2015. If such responses did occur, however, they simply mean that the absolute values of the

estimated elasticities in Table 3 are biased toward zero.

        We can conclude that increasing the exempt limit would have raised some salaried workers'

earnings and reduced their weekly hours. One exercise (Eisenbrey and Kimball, 2016) suggested that 12.5

million workers would have been affected. Using our estimates, workers who could possibly have been

affected if the increase in the exempt amount had been allowed to remain in effect are those in the treatment

group T. Taking the size of this group relative to the number of salaried workers in 2016, and using this

ratio along with the fraction of all employees who are salaried, yields a prediction that around 3 million

workers would benefit directly if the exempt limit were raised as was proposed by the Obama

Administration. This estimate is quite close to the estimate of 4 million workers produced by the

Department of Labor (as noted in Weil, 2017).


10
 The elasticity is calculated as the double-difference change in hours shown in the table divided by the average of
overtime hours in the two groups, all divided by 0.5.


                                                        17
        Performing the same calculations, but based on the Trump Administration's proposed regulation

(an unindexed limit of $679/week) yields the prediction that slightly over 1 million salaried workers would

become non-exempt. 11 This number would erode over time due to the absence of indexation under the

proposed regulation. Indeed, assuming 3 percent annual growth in earnings in this part of the distribution,

by 2025 over half of the one million additional workers would no longer be non-exempt.

     D. Conclusions about the FLSA's Overtime Provisions

        The FLSA's overtime provisions currently have only small effects on labor-market outcomes. They

do reduce employers' demand for overtime hours, and they reduce weekly hours of work slightly. The law

probably spreads employment among a few more labor-force participants, although total labor input--hours

per worker times employment--probably decreases because hours drop more than employment increases.

Of course, in the long run it has no impact on unemployment rates. Earnings of affected workers are

probably very slightly above what they would otherwise be, even though their hourly wage rates are

probably reduced. In the context of general equilibrium, however, this is a relative wage advantage

compared to workers and others who are not affected, since the decline in total labor input reduces total

GDP. With these conclusions about its effects, we can also infer that small changes that would apply the

FLSA overtime provisions more broadly--by lowering standard hours, raising the overtime penalty or

expanding coverage/reducing exemptions--would have small effects in the same directions.

IV. What Might Be Done?
        When the federal minimum wage was first adopted, it covered employers engaged in interstate

commerce. As such, it had the capacity to change the distribution of economic activity between high- and

low-wage areas, because it focused on the tradable sector. As the economy and minimum-wage legislation

have co-evolved, the law's impact is now more concentrated on locally consumed goods and services.

Perhaps because of this, most studies find modest effects on the employment of low-wage groups ­ in line,

déjà vu all over again, with what Eccles and Freeman (1982, p.227) called "the professional consensus."



11
 See U.S. Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division (2019).


                                                    18
As was true nearly 40 years ago, however, we do not have a reliable estimate of the long-run effects of

minimum wages.

        The controversy over recent proposals to increase the minimum wage to $15 an hour has implicitly

raised the question of the level at which minimum wages begin to have more serious negative effects on

employment. The available evidence is just not very helpful in answering this question. First, states in which

the minimum wage has come closest to this level have been high-wage states. Second, as the minimum

wage is increased, both the fraction of workers affected and the average increase that affected workers

receive increases. Third, most recent studies have backtracked from measuring the impact of the minimum

wage based on these two factors ­ in effect, assuming that the effect of raising the minimum wage from,

say, $10 to $11 is the same in Washington as it would be in Alabama.

        While the question of the "right" level of the minimum wage remains controversial, the evolution

of recent minimum wage policy has taken what seem like two constructive directions. The flurry of state

legislation has produced a set of minimum wages that are, very roughly, de facto indexed to local wages in

a cross-sectional sense; and twelve states have explicitly indexed the level of their legislated minimum

wage over time. Whatever the right level of the minimum wage, it ought to vary with local wages; and apart

from historical accident it is hard to see why indexing makes sense for Social Security, federal income tax

brackets, and the estate tax, but not for the minimum wage. Indeed, even at the federal level indexing seems

like a sensible idea, and it might have the important political advantage of reducing the frequency and

severity of legislative fights over changing the minimum.

        The mobility of firms, workers, and consumers across state borders raises potentially important

concerns for this decentralized minimum wage "policy." At an empirical level, estimates that rely on cross-

border designs may be biased if the "control" counties are "out of control." E.g., if employment there rises

as employers move to avoid higher minimum wages in adjacent jurisdictions, the difference between

treatment and controls may exaggerate the true effect on treated jurisdictions. 12 And from a policy


12
 Alternatively, workers in areas with low minimum wages may cross the border to look for perhaps scarcer but higher-
paying jobs (Brown et al., 1982, pp. 491-2).


                                                        19
perspective, such migration is one more source of elasticity to the demand for low-wage labor in each state,

and one more source of job loss from an aggressive minimum wage policy. We do not any find tendency

for cross-border estimates to be larger than other estimates, suggesting, at least in the short run, that there

is little evidence of this sort of response. The concentration of directly affected jobs in retail trade and

service industries ("non-tradables") likely limits the opportunities for cost-saving relocation in the longer

run. However, there is some evidence of this sort of relocation in tradeable goods industries.

        Recent history suggests that major changes in the FLSA are not likely to occur any time soon.

Perhaps in response to this absence of mobility, and as with states' responses to the lack of federal action

on minimum wages, a number of states are now considering joining California and New York and changing

their laws to bring more salaried workers into non-exempt status. 13 If federal rigidity continues, it is likely

that the number of such states will expand.

        Even with expansion of overtime regulations at the state level, and even if the applicability of FLSA

overtime regulations were to be expanded, the effects on labor-market outcomes--wages, earnings, and, of

particular interest, hours and employment--would be small. If we are interested in spreading work among

more people and removing the U.S. from its current position as the international champion among wealthy

countries in annual work time per worker, minor tinkering with current overtime laws will do little. We

might borrow from some of the panoply of European mandates that alter the amount and timing of

workhours. Among these are penalties for work on weekends, evening and nights, and limits on annual

overtime hours, while lengthening the accounting period for overtime beyond the current single week. If

our goal is to spread work and make for a more relaxed society, these changes will help; but their effects

will also be small.




13
  See discussions in Pennsylvania, http://www2.philly.com/philly/blogs/inq-phillydeals/overtime-labor-employment-
trump-wolf-pennsylvania-overtime-20180626.html; Washington, https://lni.us.engagementhq.com/learn-about-eap-
exemptions; and Michigan, http://www.legislature.mi.gov/documents/2015-2016/billintroduced/Senate/pdf/2016-
SIB-1137.pdf .




                                                       20
        Beyond these specific changes in FLSA policy, it is worth noting that the law was structured to

apply to labor markets that are much different from today's. Fewer workers have "9 to 5" schedules at fixed

workplaces than was true in the 1930s; and an increasing, although still small fraction of the work force

even has irregular "gig" jobs (Abraham and Houseman, this volume; Katz and Krueger, this volume). Even

greater changes are likely in the future (Weil, this volume). These considerations will make it worthwhile

for policy analysts to go beyond the kind of narrow, but important recommendations that we have presented

based on our analyses of existing wage-employment-hours structures to think more broadly about how, and

even whether wage and hours policy fits into a labor market that is hugely different from what was

contemplated when the FLSA was enacted in 1938.




                                                    21
REFERENCES


Aaronson, Daniel, Eric French and Isaac Sorkin. 2018. "Industry Dynamics and the Minimum Wage: A
       Putty-Clay Approach." International Economic Review 59(1): 51-84.

Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. "Synthetic Control Methods for
       Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control Program."
       Journal of the American Statistical Association 104(490): 493-505.

Abraham, Katharine, and Susan Houseman, forthcoming. "Making Ends Meet: The Role of Informal Work
      in Supplementing Americans' Income," RSF Journal of the Social Sciences.

Addison, John, McKinley Blackburn, and Chad Cotti. 2015. "On the Robustness of Minimum Wage
       Effects: Geographically-Disparate Trends and Job Growth Equations." IZA Journal of Labor
       Economics 4(24).

Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, and Michael Reich. 2011. "Do Minimum Wages Really Reduce Teen
        Employment? Accounting for Heterogeneity and Selectivity in State Panel Data." Industrial
        Relations 50(5): 205-40.

Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich and Ben Zipperer. 2017. "Credible Research Designs
        for Minimum wage Studies: Response to Neumark, Salas and Wascher." Industrial and Labor
        Relations Review 70(3): 559-92.

Barkume, Anthony. 2010. "The Structure of Labor Costs with Overtime Work in U.S. Jobs." Industrial
      and Labor Relations Review 64(1): 128-42.

Belman, Dale, and Paul Wolfson. 2014. What Does the Minimum Wage Do? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
       Institute.

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen, 1982. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
       Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Economic Literature 20(2): 487-528.

Brummund, Peter and Strain, Michael. "Does Employment Respond Differently to Minimum Wage
     Increases in the Presence of Inflation Indexing?" Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming

Cahuc, Pierre, and Stéphane Carcillo. 2014. "The Detaxation of Overtime Hours: Lessons from the French
       Experiment." Journal of Labor Economics 32(2): 361-400.

Card, David, and Alan Krueger. 1994. "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-Food
       Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania." American Economic Review 84(4): 772-93.

Card, David, and Alan Krueger. 1995 (updated version 2015). Myth and Measurement: The New Economics
       of the Minimum Wage. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.

Castillo-Freeman, Alida, and Richard Freeman. 1992. "When the Minimum Wage Really Bites: The Effect
        of the U.S.-Level Minimum on Puetro Rico." In Immigration and the Workforce: Economic
        Consequences for the United States and Source Areas, edited by George Borjas and Richard
        Freeman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



                                                 22
Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer, 2019. "The Effect of Minimum Wages
        on Low-Wage Jobs: Evidence from the United States Using a Bunching Estimator." NBER
        Working Paper No. 25434.

Chemin, Mathieu, and Étienne Wasmer. 2009 "Using Alsace-Moselle Local Laws to Build a Difference-
      in-Differences Estimation Strategy of the Employment Effects of the 35-Hour Workweek
      Regulation in France." Journal of Labor Economics 27(4): 487-524.

Chen, Long-Hwa, and Wei-Chung Wang. 2013. "The Impact of the Overtime Policy Reform--Evidence
       from the Low-paid Workers in Taiwan." Applied Economics 43: 75-90.

Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Strain. 2018. "Minimum Wage Analysis Using a Pre-Committed Research
      Design: Evidence through 2016." IZA Discussion Paper 11427.

Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2019. "The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession: Evidence of
      Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers," Journal of Public
      Economics 170: 53-67.

Dube, Arindrajit, William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. "Minimum Wage Effects Across State Borders:
       Estimates Using Contiguous Counties." Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4): 945-64.

Dube, Arindrajit, William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2016. "Wage Shocks, Employment Flows, and Labor
       Market Frictions." Journal of Labor Economics 34(3): 663-704.

Eccles, Mary, and Richard Freeman. 1982. "What, Another Minimum Wage Study?" American Economic
        Review 72(2): 226-32.

Eisenbrey, Ross, and Will Kimball. 2016. "The New Overtime Rule Will Directly Benefit 12.5 Million
       Working People." Economic Policy Institute. Washington, DC: May 17.

Freeman, Richard. 1996. "The Minimum Wage as a Redistributive Tool," Economic Journal, 106(436):
       639-49.

Gittings, R. Kaj, and Ian Schmutte. 2016. "Getting Handcuffs on an Octopus: Minimum Wages,
        Employment, and Turnover." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 69(5): 1133-70.

Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Barton Hamilton, Ankit Kalda, and David Sovitch, 2018. "State Minimum Wage
       Changes and Employment: Evidence from One Million Hourly Wage Workers," Unpublished
       Paper, Olin Business School, Washington University.

Hamermesh, Daniel. 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Hamermesh, Daniel, and Stephen Trejo. 2000. "The Demand for Hours of Labor: Direct Evidence from
      California." Review of Economics and Statistics 82(1): 38-47.

Hamermesh, Daniel, Daiji Kawaguchi, and Jungmin Lee. 2017. "Does Labor Legislation Benefit Workers?
      Well-being after an Hours Reduction." Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 44(1):
      1-12.

Katz, Lawrence, and Alan Krueger, forthcoming. "Understanding Trends in Alternative Work
       Arrangements in the United States," RSF Journal of the Social Sciences.


                                                 23
Kawaguchi, Daiji, Jungmin Lee, and Daniel Hamermesh. 2013. "A Gift of Time." Labour Economics 24(2):
      205-16.

Kawaguchi, Daiji, Hisahiro Naito, and Izumi Yokoyama. 2017. "Assessing the Effects of Reducing
      Standard Hours: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from Japan." Journal of the Japanese and
      International Economies. 43(1): 59-76.

Krueger, Alan. 2015. "The Minimum Wage: How Much Is Too Much?" New York Times, October 3, 2015.

Kuroda, Sachiko, and Isamu Yamamoto. 2012. "Impact of Overtime Regulations on Wages and Work
       Hours." Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 26(2): 249-62.

Lee, Jungmin, and Yong-Kwan Lee. 2016. "Can Working Hour Reduction Save Workers?" Labour
       Economics 40 (2016): 23-36.

Liu, Shanshan, Thomas Hyclak, and Krishna Regmi, 2016. "Impact of the Minimum Wage on Youth Labor
       Markets," Labour 30(1): 18-37.

Neumark, David. 2019. "The Econometrics and Economics of the Employment Effects of Minimum
      Wages: Getting from Known Unknowns to Known Knowns," German Economic Review, 2019.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2000. "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the
      Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Comment." American Economic Review
      90(5): 1362-96.

Neumark, David, Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014. "Revisiting the Minimum Wage-Employment
      Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review
      67(Suppl.): 609-48.

Powell, David. 2017. "Synthetic Control Estimation Beyond Case Studies: Does the Minimum Wage
        Reduce Employment?" RAND Corporation Working Paper WR-1142. Los Angeles: RAND Corp.

Raposo, Pedro, and Jan van Ours. 2010. "How Working Time Reduction Affects Jobs and Wages."
       Economics Letters 106: 61-3.

Sánchez, Rafael. 2013. "Do Reductions of Standard Hours Affect Employment Transitions? Evidence from
       Chile." Labour Economics 20: 24-37.

Sewell, Terri I. 2019. "PHASE-in $15 Wage Act ­ Explainer."
        https://sewell.house.gov/sites/sewell.house.gov/files/4.2.19%20PHASE-
        in%20%2415%20Wage%20Act%20Explainer.pdf

Skuterud, Mikael. 2007. "Identifying the Potential of Work-Sharing as a Job-Creation Strategy." Journal
       of Labor Economics 25(2): 265-87.

Sorkin, Isaac. 2015. "Are There Long-Run Effects of the Minimum Wage?" Review of Economic Dynamics
        18(2): 306-33.




                                                  24
Totty, Evan. 2017. "The Effect of Minimum Wages on Employment: A Factor Model Approach."
        Economic Inquiry 55(4): 1712-37.

Trejo, Stephen. 1991. "The Effects of Overtime Pay Regulation on Worker Compensation." American
        Economic Review 81(4): 719-40.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1989. The Relationship between the 1970 and 1980 Occupation Classification
       Systems. Technical Paper No. 59.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control, 2017. NHANES 2011-12 Data Documentation: Occupation-Industry and
       Occupation Codes.

U.S.   Department of Labor, 2018. History of Changes               to   the   Minimum   Wage    Law
        https://www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/coverage.htm

U.S. Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, 2019. Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: Overtime
       Update. March 9, 2019.

Weil, David. 2017. "Defend Obama's Overtime Policy." U.S. News & World Report, October 25.

Weil, David, forthcoming. "Understanding the Future of Work in the Fissured Workplace Context," RSF
       Journal of the Social Sciences.




                                                 25
Table 1. Elasticities from Recent Studies of the Employment and Wage Impacts of Higher Minimum Wages (Details in Appendix Table 1)

                                                                                                                            Restaurant
                                                                                                     Teenagers                Workers

                                                                                                     E*        W*           E         W*
 Authors (Year) Data                     Years       Areas              Controls

 Neumark et al. (2014) CPS            1990-2006      states             synthetic controls          -0.145#

 Neumark et al (2014) QCEW            1990-2011      border counties    state & quarter FE                                 -0.112

 Addison et al. (2015) QCEW           1990-2014      counties           state & year FE                                    -0.067     0.222#

 Addison et al. (2015) QCEW           1990-2014      counties           county-specific trends                             -0.043#    0.171#

 Dube et al. (2016) QWI               2000-2011      border counties    period x pair FE          -0.059      0.222#      -0.022     0.207#

 Allegretto et al (2017) CPS          1979-2014      states             state-specific trends     -0.062      0.228#

 Allegretto et al. (2017) CPS         1990-2014      border counties    period x pair FE                                   0.023      0.209#

 Liu et al. (2016) QWI                2000-2009      counties           area-specific trends      -0.173#     0.209#

 Totty (2017) QCEW                    1990-2010      counties           factor model                                      -0.013     0.231#

 Totty (2017) CPS                     1990-2013      states             factor model              -0.040      0.097#

 Brummund-Strain (forthcoming)
 QCEW                                 1990-2016      border counties    period &pair FE                                    -0.153#    .236#


CPS = Current Population Survey, QCEW = Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, QWI = Quarterly Workforce Indicators.
*E = Employment; W = Hourly earnings in CPS, weekly earnings in QCEW and QWI.
#
  Significantly different from zero at the 90-percent level of confidence.


                                                                               26
Table 2. Labor-Market Impacts of Overtime Policy Changes, 7 Countries
                                                                                 Effect on:
                                                                                                                           Hourly
Study                    Country    Policy Change                    Overtime Hours                 Total Hours            Wage     Earnings

Sánchez (2013)            Chile     2001-05: HS , 48 to 45                                                                   

Cahuc-Carcillo (2014     France     2007: Exempt OT pay from            high-wage                         0
                                     income and some payroll taxes     workers only



                                                                                                                            very
Chemin-Wasmer (2009)     France     1998: 35-hour HS, different in                                    very small           small
                                     3 départements                          `

Kuroda-Yamamoto (2012)    Japan     1980s-1990s: HS  48 to 40                                                                       0

Kawaguchi et al (2017)    Japan     1990s: HS  44 to 40                                          , if prior 44 > H > 40             0

Kawaguchi et al (2013)    Korea     2000s: HS  44 to 40                                        H  by 40 minutes, large
                                                                                                 cut in Saturday work



Raposo-van Ours (2010)   Portugal   1996: HS  44 to 40                                        H  a lot, if prior 42>H>40             small

Skuterud (2007)          Quebec     1997-2000: HS  44 to 40          OT  nearly 1 hour                  small               small


                                    2001: HS 48/week to                                                                              0 males
Chen-Wang (2011)         Taiwan     84/biweekly                                                      high-wage                       small  females
                                                                                                    workers only


                                                                      27
Table 3. Effect on Hours of Lowering Real Overtime Exempt Weekly Earnings, 1987-1989 to 2014-2016*
                                       Difference 2014-2016 ­ 1987-1989                Double-difference
                                   Outcome:         Hours        Pr{H=40}           Hours         Pr{H=40}

                                                                                           GROUPS:

      GROUP:                                                                                T ­ C1

C1. Always non-exempt                              -0.442         0.070                0.302         0.010
                                                   (0.150)        (0.008)              (0.138)       (0.008)
Elasticity:                                                                            -0.180
                                                                                       (0.083)

T. Exempt 2014-2016, non-exempt
1987-1989                                          -0.140         0.080
                                                   (0.058)        (0.003)


                                                                                            T ­ C2

C2. Always exempt                                  -1.195         0.087                0.834         -0.007

                                                    (0.048)       (0.064)              (0.087)       (0.003)

Elasticity:                                                                         -0.609
                                                                                     (0.030)

*Standard errors in parentheses. Estimates based on comparisons of weekly earnings predicted from a densely specified earnings regression based on CPS-MORG data for
these years. Salaried workers in occupations where the duties test was unlikely to render the worker exempt and in states other than CA or NY were classified as: Always
non-exempt, if predicted earnings were below $455 in 201-2016 and in 1987-1989 below $223, the same percentile point as $455 was in 2014-2016; exempt 2014-2016,
non-exempt 1987-1989, if predicted earnings were above $455 in 2014-2016 and above $223 but below $455 in 1987-1989; and always exempt, if predicted earnings were
above $455 in both periods. In CA the cut-off between C1 and T was $720 in 2014 and 2015, $800 in 2016; in NY the cut-off was $600 in 2014, $656 in 2015, and $675 in
2016.




                                                                                  28
Figure 1. States with Minimum Wages that Exceed the Federal Minimum (in dark blue)
Source: https://www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/america.htm




                                                                  29
                                         200                                                                                            50




                                         160                                                                                            48
  Exempt Amount/Median Weekly Earnings




                                         120                                                                                            46




                                                                                                                                             Percent Salaried
                                         80                                                                                             44




                                         40                                                                                             42




                                          0                                                                                             40
                                               1979   1983   1987   1991       1995   1999         2003       2007        2011   2017

                                                                                      Year


                                                                    Earnings Ratio           Pct. Salaried (Full-time)


Figure 2. FLSA Overtime Exempt Limit as Percent of Median Earnings, and Percentage Full-time Salaried Workers, 1979-2017
Source: Authors' calculations based on CPS-MORG weekly earnings.




                                                                                                                     30
Appendix Table 1. Elasticities from Recent Studies of the Employment and Wage Impact of Higher Minimum
Wages


                                              Geographic            Control                    Employment         Wage*

Study:                     Data   Years       Units                 Variables                           s.e.            s.e.

Teenagers

Neumark et al. (2014)      CPS    1990-2011   states                state & year FE            -0.165   0.041

Neumark et al. (2014)      CPS    1990-2006   states                synthetic control group    -0.145   0.060

Dube et al. (2016)         QWI    2000-2011   border county pairs   county & quarter FE        -0.173   0.071   0.177   0.036

Dube et al. (2016)         QWI    2000-2011   border county pairs   county pair x quarter FE   -0.059   0.084   0.222   0.047

Liu et al. (2016)          QWI    2000-2009   counties              county & quarter FE        -0.230   0.067   0.127   0.057

Liu et al. (2016)          QWI                counties              Econ area x quarter FE     -0.173   0.047   0.209   0.030
                                  2000-2009
                           CPS
Allegretto et al. (2017)   MORG   1979-2014   states                state & year FE            -0.214   0.044   0.266   0.037

                           CPS
Allegretto et al. (2017)   MORG   1979-2014   states                state-specific trends      -0.062   0.041   0.228   0.020

Totty (2017)               QWI    2000-2011   counties              factor model               -0.036   0.017   0.308   0.018




                                                               31
 Restaurant Workers

 Neumark et al. (2014)      QCEW      1990-2011   border county pairs   county & quarter FE        -0.112   0.079

 Neumark et al. (2014)      QCEW      1990-2006   counties              synthetic control group    -0.063   0.023

 Addison et al. (2015)      QCEW      1990-2014   counties              state & year FE            -0.067   0.042   0.222   0.022

 Addison et al. (2015)      QCEW      1990-2014   counties              county-specific trends     -0.043   0.023   0.171   0.021

 Dube et al. (2016)         QWI       2000-2011   border county pairs   county & quarter FE        -0.073   0.042   0.203   0.028

 Dube et al. (2016)         QWI       2000-2011   border county pairs   county pair x quarter FE   -0.022   0.091   0.207   0.059

 Allegretto et al. (2017)   QCEW      1990-2014   counties              county & quarter FE        -0.240   0.075   0.233   0.026

 Allegretto et al. (2017)   QCEW      1990-2014   border county pairs   period x pair fixed fe     0.023    0.069   0.209   0.033

 Totty (2017)               QCEW      1990-2010   counties              factor model               -0.023   0.019   0.148   0.026

 Brummund-Strain
 (forthcoming)              QCEW      1990-2016   counties              county pair & quarter FE   -0.153   0.078   0.236   0.032

 Brummund-Strain
 (forthcoming)              QCEW      1990-2016   counties              county pair & quarter FE   -0.002   0.051   0.213   0.031



CPS = Current Population Survey, MORG = Merged Outgoing Rotation Group, QCEW = Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, QWI =
Quarterly Workforce Indicators.
*Wage = Hourly earnings in CPS, weekly earnings in QCEW and QWI.




                                                                   32
