                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              FERTILITY AND MODERNITY

                                       Enrico Spolaore
                                      Romain Wacziarg

                                     Working Paper 25957
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25957


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




We thank Quamrul Ashraf, Guillaume Blanc, John Brown, Matteo Cervellati, David De La
Croix, Raphael Franck, Oded Galor, Raphael Godefroy, Michael Huberman, Yannis Ioannides,
Noel Johnson, David Le Bris, Monica Martinez-Bravo, Jacques Melitz, Deborah Menegotto,
Omer Moav, Luigi Pascali, Nico Voigtländer, Joachim Voth, Susan Watkins, David Yanagizawa-
Drott as well as participants at numerous seminars and conferences for useful comments. Shriya
Didwania, Andrea Di Miceli and Youngjin Song provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Fertility and Modernity
Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg
NBER Working Paper No. 25957
June 2019
JEL No. J13,N13,O40

                                          ABSTRACT

We investigate the determinants of the fertility decline in Europe from 1830 to 1970 using a
newly constructed dataset of linguistic distances between European regions. We find that the
fertility decline resulted from a gradual diffusion of new fertility behavior from French-speaking
regions to the rest of Europe. We observe that societies with higher education, lower infant
mortality, higher urbanization, and higher population density had lower levels of fertility during
the 19th and early 20th century. However, the fertility decline took place earlier and was initially
larger in communities that were culturally closer to the French, while the fertility transition
spread only later to societies that were more distant from the cultural frontier. This is consistent
with a process of social influence, whereby societies that were linguistically and culturally closer
to the French faced lower barriers to the adoption of new social norms and attitudes towards
fertility control.


Enrico Spolaore
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
enrico.spolaore@tufts.edu

Romain Wacziarg
Anderson School of Management at UCLA
C-510 Entrepreneurs Hall
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
wacziarg@ucla.edu




Author research website is available at
https://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty_pages/romain.wacziarg/papersum.

An appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25957
1    Introduction

What explains the transition from high to low fertility, occurring in society after society over the
past two hundred years? In this paper, we present evidence on the di¤usion of the fertility decline
in Europe from 1830 to 1970 using a newly constructed dataset of linguistic distances between
European regions. We ...nd that the modern decline is the outcome of a gradual di¤usion of new
fertility behavior from French-speaking regions to the rest of Europe. This is in contrast with
the spread of the Industrial Revolution, where England played a leading role. The di¤usion of
the fertility decline and the spread of industrialization followed di¤erent patterns because societies
at di¤erent relative distances from the respective innovators (the French and the English) faced
di¤erent cultural barriers to imitation and adoption.

    Our contribution bridges the gap between two approaches to the study of fertility. One approach,
pursued mainly by economists, emphasizes changes to the incentives for having children, due for
instance to urbanization or improved health and human capital (Galor, 2011). The other approach,
more popular among demographers, sociologists, and anthropologists, interprets the fertility change
in terms of cultural transmission of new values and norms (Coale and Watkins, 1986; Richerson and
Boyd, 2005, pp.169-173; Newson et al., 2005; Newson and Richerson, 2009). We do not view the
two approaches as substitutes but as complements. In our analysis, fertility choices are impacted
by the intrinsic costs and bene...ts from having children, but also by norms that di¤use across
culturally related groups. We present a model where the transition from higher to lower fertility
is the outcome of social innovation and social inuence. In our framework, higher intrinsic costs
or lower bene...ts from having children are necessary but not su¢ cient to generate a reduction in
actual fertility. What is needed is also a change in the social norms that regulate marital fertility.
It is only when traditional attitudes are abandoned and new norms are adopted, lowering the
stigma associated with fertility control within marriage, that people change their behavior. At the
beginning, only societies close to the cultural innovators experience reduced fertility. Over time,
the social innovation spreads to more distant societies.

    In the empirical part of the paper, we focus on di¤usion across linguistic barriers, while also
controlling for variables that a¤ect the economic incentives for fertility choices. We observe that,
on average, societies with higher education, lower infant mortality, higher urbanization, and higher
population density had lower levels of fertility during the 19th and 20th centuries. However, the
fertility decline took place much earlier and was initially larger in communities that were culturally
closer to the French, while the fertility transition spread only later to those societies that were more

                                                   1
distant from the cultural frontier. Overall, both cultural and economic forces played a signi...cant
role in the fertility transition.

        We argue that linguistic distance matters in the transmission of fertility decline because indi-
viduals in societies that are linguistically closer face lower barriers when they interact socially with
each other and learn about new norms and behavior. The e¤ect of linguistic distance on the di¤u-
sion of the demographic transition is an important example of how cultural relatedness a¤ects the
transmission of innovations across societies. Individuals who are linguistically closer to each other
are also on average more closely related, and therefore tend to share intergenerationally transmitted
traits that make them more likely to interact with each other and learn from each other. This does
not mean that these traits themselves have a direct e¤ect on the probability of adopting the new
behavior. Indeed, the new fertility behavior eventually spread to all European populations in our
sample, even to those linguistically and culturally farthest from the French. This suggests that
linguistic distance captures barriers to the di¤usion of innovations, rather than the direct e¤ects
of culturally transmitted traits on behavior (for a discussion of this distinction, see Spolaore and
Wacziarg, 2013).1 In sum, this paper provides evidence for a cultural barrier interpretation of the
e¤ect of social distance on the di¤usion of modern fertility behavior.


2        Cultural and Economic Factors in the Fertility Decline

2.1        The Princeton European Fertility Project

The starting point for our analysis is the data about fertility in Europe over the past two centuries
collected in the landmark Princeton European Fertility Project (Coale and Watkins, 1986, hence-
forth PEFP), which was the ...nal product of a massive interdisciplinary research project started in
1963. In the subsequent debate, critics (Guinnane, Okun and Trussell, 1994; Brown and Guinnane,
2007) pointed out several conceptual and methodological issues with the Princeton Project.2 Nev-
    1
        In the Appendix, we also consider genetic distance, a measure of long-term relatedness between populations.
We ...nd that genetic distance from the French, like linguistic distance, explains the timing of the di¤usion of the
fertility decline in a sample of 37 European populations. Populations that were genetically closer to the French faced
lower barriers to learn and adopt the new cultural behavior, and did so earlier and to a greater extent. However, all
the populations in this sample, even those genetically far from the French, eventually transitioned to lower fertility.
Genetic distance, like linguistic distance, is properly understood as capturing temporary barriers to the spread of
modern fertility behavior.
    2
        For instance, some interpretations in the original studies were based on the presumption of a simultaneous
adoption of the new fertility behavior by all households across heterogeneous societies. Instead, critics noted that


                                                          2
ertheless, this study remains the most comprehensive source of historical data on fertility across
European regions in the 19th and early 20th century, documenting a dramatic decline of fertility in
society over society over the past two centuries.

       European societies had experienced uctuations in overall fertility before (Livi-Bacci, 2001).
However, in pre-modern times fertility control and decline took place mostly through marriage
postponement and celibacy.3 Demographers call such forms of control nonparity-speci...c, meaning
that they a¤ect the probability of conception irrespective of the number of children already pro-
duced. In contrast, PEFP authors have attributed the modern fall in fertility to parity-speci...c
limitations (Coale, 1986, pp. 9-10), de...ned as behavioral changes that married couples adopt in
order to avoid additional births after the desired number of children has been born. The ideal
to "marry, have a couple of kids, and stop," is a modern innovation, which spread across Euro-
pean populations only during the 19th and early 20th centuries. PEFP's critics have questioned
this parity-speci...c interpretation, and argued that marital fertility might also have been reduced
through changes in behavior that are typically considered non-parity speci...c, such as changes in
breast-feeding (Guinnane, Okun and Trussell, 1994). In our analysis, we do not take a stand on
whether couples limited fertility within marriage through parity-speci...c limitations or also using
non-parity speci...c controls. The important fact from our perspective is that, starting at the begin-
ning of the 19th century, there occurred a major change in attitudes towards fertility control within
marriage that led to much lower observed fertility.

       The PEFP provides data on fertility in Europe both at the level of sub-national regions, as well
as nation-states. In our empirical analysis, we focus on Ig , the index of marital fertility. For each
region or country, Ig is equal to the total number of children born to married women divided by
the maximum conceivable number of children, obtained from data on the Hutterites, an Anabaptist
sect that does not practice any form of fertility limitations.4 For any society i:
                                                                m
                                                               Bi
                                                 Igi = PN                                                        (1)
                                                          j =1 Mij Gj


the data are consistent with a more gradual transition, in which minorities of households within di¤erent societies
may have signi...cantly increased their use of fertility control methods, before such behavior spread to most other
households in their society (Guinnane, Okun and Trussell, 1994, p. 3). In our theoretical framework in Section 3, we
explicitly allow for a gradual di¤usion across heterogeneous households within each society.
   3
       See Voigtländer and Voth (2013) for a discussion of marriage postponment in Europe starting in medieval times,
as a means to reduce total fertility.
   4
       See Coale and Treadway (1986), chapter 2, Appendix B, p. 153 in Coale and Watkins (1986).


                                                           3
       M is the total number of children born to married women, j denotes an age cohort de...ned
where Bi
at 5-year intervals, Mij is the number of married women in age cohort j and Gj is the Hutterite
rate of fertility for age cohort j . The denominator therefore represents the total number of children
that could conceivably be generated in society i if it had the age-speci...c schedule of fertility of the
Hutterites, while the numerator is the actual number of children born to married women.


2.2       The Debate in the Literature

The Princeton Project spurred a vigorous debate on the role of economic channels and choices
in the demographic transition. According to the leading PEFP authors, the decline in European
fertility could not be explained as the direct result of higher income per capita and industrialization
(Coale and Watkins, 1986). This contrasted with the view, widespread among economists, that the
fertility decline and modern economic development were two sides of the same coin. For instance,
a causal mechanism going from higher income to lower fertility was at the center of Becker's (1960)
classic argument that industrialization would lead to lower fertility, by increasing the opportunity
cost of raising children. However, the pattern of fertility transition in Europe during the 19th and
20th centuries was not consistent with a simple story linking industrialization and lower fertility,
because societies at relatively lower levels of development experienced a decline in fertility at the
same time, or even before, economically more advanced societies (Coale and Watkins, 1986).5

       While the decline of fertility in Europe was not a direct result of industrialization, economic
incentives could still have played a role in fertility decisions. Substantial empirical support exists
for economic theories that connect advancements in health and human capital to a reduction in the
incentives to have children. For example, a decline in child mortality enabled families to attain the
same number of surviving children with total lower fertility rates (Preston, 1978, Doepke, 2005).
Human capital formation also reduced fertility by leading to a substitution of child quality for
quantity (Galor and Weil, 2000). Recent empirical analyses have shown that advancements in
health and human capital, by increasing the "quality" of children, reduced fertility in the United
States (Bleakley and Lange, 2009) and in German regions (Becker, Cinnirella and Woessmann,
2010). According to Murtin (2013), human capital was a fundamental force behind the demographic

   5
       Becker's mechanism may not hold empirically because the substitution e¤ect, which should reduce the desired
number of children, can be o¤set by the income e¤ect, which raises desired fertility. Therefore, we should not
necessarily expect higher income and productivity to go hand in hand with a decline in fertility. See also the
discussion in Galor (2011), chapter 4, p. 118. In the Empirical Appendix, we ...nd that per capita income is not a
signi...cant determinants of fertility levels or of the fertility transition date in a sample of 37 European populations.


                                                            4
transition in a worldwide sample of countries.6 Overall, these economic contributions have provided
essential insights on the fertility decline. However, the evidence collected by the Princeton Project
suggested that economic forces alone were not su¢ cient to explain the dynamics of the fertility
transition, and that cultural and linguistic variables may have played an important role in the
transmission of the new fertility behavior (Richerson and Boyd, 2005, pp. 172-173).


2.3       The Onset of the Fertility Decline in France

A key fact about the modern fertility decline was the pioneering role played by French households,
whose fertility permanently declined to low modern levels before 1830. However, there was signif-
icant variation across French départements, with regions at the cultural and linguistic periphery
transitioning to modern fertility much later. For example, in the départements of Finistère and
Côtes-d'Armor in Brittany, where the traditional language and culture were far from standard
French, the ...rst 10% decline in marital fertility only happened in 1905.7 Similarly, in Belgium
during the 19th century, French-speaking households in Wallonia reduced their fertility to mod-
ern levels much before Dutch-speaking households in Flanders. As noted by Lesthaeghe (1977,
p. 227), "the early adoption of fertility control [...] stopped at the language border. Not only
did Flemings and Walloons who lived as neighbors in this very narrow strip along the language
border fail to intermarry to a considerable extent, but they also did not take each other's attitude
toward fertility. As a result, two separate di¤usion patterns developed in Flanders and Wallonia."
Remarkably, Walloon and Flemish regions had similar levels of human capital at the time of the
fertility transition. For instance, in our data, in 1880 the literacy rate was 59% in French-speaking
Liège and 61% in Dutch-speaking Bruges, and yet Liège started its transition to modern fertility in
1875 and Bruges only in 1905. A similar phenomenon can be observed in Spain, where the literacy
rate in 1880 was 43% in Barcelona (Catalonia'
                                            s largest city) and 46% in Bilbao (the largest city in
the Basque Country), but Barcelona transitioned to modern fertility in 1865, while Bilbao only in

   6
       For a general evolutionary theory of the trade-o¤ between quality and quantity of children and its implications for
fertility, see Galor and Moav (2002). A theory of the persistence of poverty that links high fertiliy and low investment
in child quality is provided in Moav (2005).
   7
       There also exists detailed microeconomic evidence at the village level that the French reduced their fertility before
the large increase in the supply of schooling due to national policies, such as the Guizot Law of 1833. For instance,
see Blanc and Wacziarg (2019) and the references therein.




                                                              5
1925.8 In this case, again, the key di¤erence seems to be that Catalans spoke a Romance language
relatively close to French, while the Basques shared a much more distant ancestral language and
culture. We will return to this important point when we discuss the di¤usion of the fertility decline
from France to the other regions of Europe.

       An open question, widely debated by historians and demographers, is why the transition to
lower marital fertility started in France. Several factors are likely to have contributed to the
onset of the fertility transition within French society. One is the cultural development towards
secular modern norms and values, which had already spread among elites and other groups in
France during the Enlightenment (or even earlier) and accelerated with the French Revolution. A
parallel mechanism points to political and institutional changes that a¤ected the traditional power
structure - in particular, the Church and other traditional centers of political and cultural inuence
- therefore determining or facilitating changes in social norms and behavior. As France started to
experience a decline in fertility in the second half of the 18th century, a few contemporary observers
attributed the new phenomenon to a change in moral standards. For example, Jean-Baptiste
Moheau, in his Recherches et considérations sur la population de la France (1778), noticed that
the French were having less children than in the past because people had become more focused
on their own sel...sh material interests and were reluctant to bear the high cost of having children,
while they no longer felt a moral obligation to reproduce out of religious and civic duty. In a recent
study, Blanc (2019) uses a measure of traditional religiosity across di¤erent French départements
in 1791 introduced by Tackett (1986): the percentage of "clergé réfractaire," the Catholic priests
who refused to accept the authority of the French Revolutionary State over all religious matters.
Remarkably, Blanc ...nds that this religiosity measure has a large and signi...cant impact on fertility
a generation later (in 1831). He also ...nds that subscriptions to Diderot'
                                                                          s Encyclopédie is negatively
correlated with fertility across French départements in 1831, even when controlling for industrial
output per capita, urbanization, literacy and pre-industrial development. The Encyclopédie was
a fundamental source of secular philosophy and scienti...c knowledge that had persistent e¤ects on
French long-term development (Squicciarini and Voigtländer, 2015). These ...ndings strongly point
to a cultural mechanism to explain the onset of the fertility decline in France, operating through
the weakening of traditional religious values and the emergence of secular attitudes.

       The e¤ects of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic conquests on modern institutional

   8
       Correspondingly, the levels of marital fertility (Ig ) averged over the 1881-1910 period were 0:499 in Liège and
0:796 in Bruges, 0:460 in Barcelona and 0:710 in Bilbao.



                                                            6
reforms outside France have been studied by Acemoglu, Cantoni, Johnson and Robinson (2011).
Relatedly, Lecce and Ogliari (2019) ...nd that the e¤ect of the (exogenous) adoption of formal
Napoleonic institutions on economic performance in German regions depended on cultural (religious
and linguistic) proximity to France. Cultural proximity to France is also likely to have impacted
the possible e¤ects of secular Napoleonic institutions on fertility, because only people who were
culturally close to the French also embraced the social norms that made the new institutions "work",
not only de jure but also de facto. Therefore, such an institutional mechanism is not an alternative
explanation for the fertility transition, but it is broadly consistent with our interpretation in terms
of cultural di¤usion of novel social norms and behavior from France.9

       As traditional social norms against fertility control weakened, it is also possible that direct
knowledge about reproduction control and contraceptive methods became more widespread across
the population. However, the fertility transition during the 19th century took place well before
modern methods of contraception had become widely available, so that French fertility was reduced
to just about two children per woman using rudimentary "natural" methods, such as withdrawal,
which had been known since biblical times (van de Walle, 2005, p. 4). In contrast, condoms made
from sheep gut or ...sh bladder were used mainly in brothels and were too expensive for general
use. Early condoms were mentioned for the ...rst time in England, not in France, around 1700, and
their original purpose was to protect against syphilis; in France, they became known as "redingote
d'Angleterre" (English riding coats), while "the other technical innovation of the eighteenth century
was the vaginal sponge mentioned for the ...rst time in an English erotic work of 1740" (van de Walle,
2005, p. 3). Therefore, it is plausible to conjecture that the main mechanism behind the onset and
spread of the fertility transition, ...rst within France and then from French society to neighboring
communities, was not new technological knowledge about contraception but new social norms that
reduced the stigma attached to well-known natural methods of fertility control.


2.4       The Di¤usion of the Fertility Decline

In our theoretical and empirical analysis, we hypothesize that the novel behavior originally emerged
in France and then spread along cultural lines, with populations closer to the French being more

   9
       In the empirical analysis, we control for measures of economic development and for country ...xed e¤ects, therefore
accounting for the direct e¤ects of country-speci...c formal (de jure ) institutions on fertility and for the indirect e¤ect
of institutions (both de jure and de facto ) on economic performance, which may vary across regions, depending on
cultural distance from France.




                                                             7
likely to learn about the new behavior, and more willing to adopt it. That is, in our analysis we
focus on the di¤usion process, not on the factors that generated the onset.

   Our central hypothesis is that the fertility decline can best be understood as a process of di¤usion
of new social norms and behavioral changes, spreading from early adaptors to imitators. In this
respect, the fertility transition was similar to the spread of productivity-enhancing innovations
associated with the di¤usion of the Industrial Revolution from England to other societies, which
we studied in previous work (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009, 2012, 2013). However, a di¤erence
between the di¤usion of fertility decline and the spread of industrialization is that the two processes
started at di¤erent frontiers. We argue that the di¤usion of fertility decline and the spread of
industrialization followed di¤erent patterns because societies at di¤erent relative distances from
the respective innovators (the French and the English) faced di¤erent barriers to social learning,
imitation, and adoption. Below, we test empirically the hypothesis that barriers to the di¤usion
of the fertility transition were lower for societies that were culturally closer to the innovators (the
French).

   Our analysis is related to empirical studies on fertility changes that have emphasized social
and cultural e¤ects. Contributions that explicitly consider social inuence and social learning in
developing countries include studies of the impact of social networks on fertility in Ghana, Kenya
and Malawi (Montgomery, Casterline, and Heiland, 1998, Behrman, Kohler, and Watkins, 2002,
2009). Munshi and Myaux (2006) provide an explanation, based on social norms, for why the same
external interventions regarding fertility had di¤erent e¤ects on di¤erent ethnic and religious groups
in India. La Ferrara, Chong and Duryea, (2012) estimate the e¤ect of new television-transmitted
norms on the fertility behavior of Brazilian women. Manski and Mayshar (2003) explain the
complex pattern of fertility across di¤erent ethnic-religious groups in Israel through interplay of
di¤erent private and social incentives, including conformity to group fertility norms. The role of
internal migration and social interactions in the di¤usion of the fertility transition within France
at the end of the 19th century is analyzed in Daudin, Franck and Rapoport (2018).

   More broadly, our contribution is connected to the economics literature on social interactions
and the spread of new behavior. Our theoretical framework builds on Akerlof (1997), while our
approach is also related to Young's (2009) analysis of the di¤usion of innovations in models of
social inuence and social learning, and to Fogli and Veldkamp'
                                                             s (2011) study of the di¤usion
of female labor force participation in the United States. Discussions of the economics literature
on social interactions are provided by Durlauf and Ioannides (2010) and Ioannides (2013), while


                                                  8
contributions that link culture and economics are surveyed in Bisin and Verdier (2010), Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2013), Spolaore (2014), and Alesina and Giuliano (2015).

   To our knowledge, no systematic attempt has been made to quantify cultural barriers across
di¤erent European regions and to relate them to the di¤usion of the fertility transition. This is a
central goal of our paper. By bringing in measures of cultural barriers along with economic variables,
we aim to bridge the gap between analyses of the demographic transition that emphasize cultural
mechanisms and those that focus on economic incentives. We take economic forces into account
both in our theory, where we model intrinsic costs and bene...ts associated with having children,
and in the empirical section, where we control for variables such as infant mortality, literacy rates,
population density, and urbanization. We ...nd that while economic incentives played a signi...cant
role, they are not su¢ cient to account for the dynamics of the demographic transition in Europe.
The novel behavior spread along linguistic lines, pointing to a key role for cultural di¤usion. As
we will show, we need both culture and economics to understand the dramatic decline of fertility
over the past two centuries.


2.5   An Example: the Bradlaugh-Besant Trial

We conclude this section with is an historical example that illustrates the di¤usion of new social
norms about fertility control in the 19th century: The Bradlaugh-Besant Trial.

   In 1877 Annie Besant and Charles Bradlaugh challenged the obscenity laws of the United
Kingdom by selling a cheap edition of a medical handbook on contraception and family planning.
In a Preface to the book, they explained their motives, stating that the "checks that ought to control
population are scienti...c, and it is these which we advocate," and expressing their con...dence that
"the English public will not permit the authorities to stie a discussion of the most important
social question which can inuence a nation's welfare." (reproduced in Chandrasekhar, 1981, pp.
91-2). Besant and Bradlaugh were immediately arrested and charged with violating the Obscene
Publication Act of 1857.

   The arrest, trial, conviction and eventual acquittal of the two birth-control activists represented
a landmark in the history of fertility control in Britain, and brought issues of family planning to
the forefront of discussion among the general public (Chandrasekhar, 1981). British birth rates fell
signi...cantly in the years right after the trial. Scholars have debated whether the trial may have
had a causal e¤ect. For example, Field (1931, p. 244) wrote: "In England particularly... the drop
[in fertility] appears suddenly about 1878. The coincidence of this change with the propaganda

                                                  9
called forth by the Bradlaugh-Besant trial is too signi...cant to be ignored. The deeper causes
of birth restrictions ... were latent in general social conditions... But the ill-starred prosecution
gave to slow-gathering forces instant and overwhelming e¤ect." Chandrasekhar (1981, p. 49) also
concluded that "the trial ... acted as a catalyst and crystallized public opinion in favor of birth
control."

       From our perspective, it is important to notice how the spread of fertility control among the
general public required major changes in societal norms. People had to perceive fertility control
as something ethically and socially acceptable, not as a violation of moral and religious norms.
Consistent with our di¤usion hypothesis, Besant and Bradlaugh defended themselves by citing
French teaching and practices stemming from the weakening of traditional religious beliefs and the
emergence of secular values and attitudes. For example, according to the coverage of the appeal
in The Malthusian (1879), the two activists argued that their arguments "showed how absolutely
necessary it was to limit families as the French did," and pointed out that "the Laws of England
are still tainted with that spirit of bigotry and intolerance, which has been left as a legacy to
us from the times of our barbarous ancestors . . . .whilst in France it has been found necessary
for the confessors of families to abstain from denunciations addressed against conjugal prudence,
the misguided jurors of England still prefer starvation and famine to thoughtful and praiseworthy
regulation of families."10

       After Besant and Bradlaugh were acquitted on appeal (on a technicality), social and legal norms
changed in Britain, and, in particular, it became legal to use the British mail system to di¤use
information about contraception and family planning. Indeed, Beach and Hanlon (2019) ...nd a
signi...cant relationship between the public release of information about the Bradlaugh-Besant trial
and the reduction of fertility in English speaking countries after 1877. They also ...nd that the e¤ects
of the trial impacted regions with widely di¤erent economic conditions. As Beach and Hanlon point
out (2019, p. 5), "the main debate during the trial, and the vast majority of the literature related to
the trial, was not focused on speci...c contraceptive techniques. Rather, the central debate was over
the very idea that couples should have a right, or even a responsibility, to choose their family size."
These ...ndings provide further evidence in favor of the spread of new social norms about fertility
choice and behavior as a key determinant of the fertility transition during the 19th century.

  10
       That is, they related the decline of fertility in France to the rise of secularism and the constraints imposed on
the Catholic Church.




                                                            10
3         A Model of Fertility Choice

Motivated by the preceding discussion, we present a model that captures major determinants of
fertility choices: intrinsic costs and bene...ts from having children, social norms about fertility
control, and the process of social inuence through which norms change and di¤use across di¤erent
societies. This model generates testable implications regarding the pattern of di¤usion of new
fertility behavior. Later, we will bring these predictions to the data.


3.1         The Framework

Consider a household i that chooses marital fertility fi to maximize the following indirect utility:
                                                            c 2
                                              Ui = bfi       f       (fn    fi )                                      (2)
                                                            2 i
where fi           fn . The ...rst two terms capture intrinsic bene...ts and costs from fertility, such as the
utility associated with children and the opportunity costs, in terms of foregone consumption, from
raising them.11 The third term captures the costs of reducing fertility below a maximum "natural"
level fn , the maximum number of children that the household can biologically have when no fertility
control is adopted. In order to reduce fertility below the natural level, agents must incur costs,
measured by the parameter                > 0. An interpretation of this parameter is technological - that is,
    is decreasing in the costs of fertility-control technologies (contraceptive devices). At the limit, if
fertility controls were completely costless ( = 0), the household would just choose the intrinsically
optimal level of fertility b=c. A broader interpretation of the parameter , which we prefer, is in
terms of social and moral norms. In this sense, agents pay a marginal cost                          when they reduce
fertility below fn because of a social and moral stigma associated with using fertility control and
achieving a level of fertility below the biological maximum.

         The equilibrium choice of fertility is:
                                                              b+
                                                 f = minf             ; fn g                                          (3)
                                                               c
It is useful to distinguish between traditional societies, where households choose f                           = fn <
(b + ) =c, and modern societies, where households choose f = (b + ) =c < fn .

    11
         The expression intrinsic utility for the ...rst two terms and their reduced-form speci...cation are borrowed from
Akerlof (1997). Galor (2011, chapter 4) provides models where fertility choice comes from the trade-o¤ between
bene...ts from having children and costs to raise them. For example, in Galor (2011, p. 120) the optimal number of
children is given by the ratio between a parameter capturing the direct utility of children and a parameter capturing
the opportunity cost of raising a child as a fraction of the parental unit-time endowment.


                                                              11
    Fertility choice can be in one of three possible equilibria, depending on the value of the para-
meters:

    1) Intrinsically optimal traditional equilibrium : f = fn < b=c for all      0: In this case, a high
natural fertility is intrinsically optimal, and households have no private incentives to reduce their
fertility even in the absence of social costs ( = 0). When intrinsic bene...ts from fertility are very
high relative to intrinsic costs, social norms that impose additional social costs on low fertility do
not reduce households'indirect utility. This can help explain how pro-fertility social norms (high
 ) can emerge and survive in equilibrium.

    2) Intrinsically suboptimal traditional equilibrium: b=c < f = fn          (b + ) =c. In this case,
fertility is above the intrinsic optimum and social norms against fertility control are binding. This
equilibrium can hold only if    is strictly positive and su¢ ciently large (      cfn   b > 0). In this
equilibrium, a reduction in    does matter for fertility choices, and has a positive e¤ect on indirect
utility.

    3 ) Modern equilibrium: f = (b + ) =c < fn . In this case, fertility is below the natural level
fn . Fertility is at the intrinsic optimum for   = 0 and above the intrinsic optimum for       > 0. In
either case, changes in the intrinsic bene...ts b and/or costs c are immediately reected in fertility
changes.

    This simple model captures both the e¤ects of purely economic factors - such as those that
depend on human capital - and the e¤ects of social norms. A prediction of the model is that a
substantial fall in the net intrinsic bene...ts of having children relative to their costs may not be
su¢ cient to produce an actual fertility decline unless it is accompanied by a signi...cant change in
the social norms about fertility control. The intrinsic bene...ts and costs can take the driving seat
only when the social costs have become su¢ ciently small. This framework can therefore reconcile
two conicting views of fertility decline: the economic view that focuses on intrinsic incentives and
the view that stresses social norms. Both sets of forces matter - a fact that is borne by our empirical
analysis.


3.2    The Di¤usion of the Fertility Decline

Where do social costs    come from, and how do they change over time? We now extend the model
to account for the possibility of social change, from traditional equilibria where f = fn to modern
equilibria where f < fn . As already mentioned, a reduction in social costs could lead to a shift
from a traditional equilibrium to a modern equilibrium only if intrinsic bene...ts over costs are

                                                  12
already low enough. In other words, relatively low intrinsic bene...ts over costs are a precondition
for a switch from a traditional equilibrium to a modern equilibrium, but they may not be su¢ cient
in the absence of a signi...cant reduction in . In the rest of the analysis, we only consider societies
that are ripe for change - that is, we assume that b=c < fn .

       To ...x ideas, consider three societies: X , Y and Z; each inhabited by a continuum of households
with mass normalized to 1. At time t < 0, all households in the three societies are at an intrinsically
suboptimal traditional equilibrium, where b=c < f = fn                       (b +     0 ) =c.   At time 0 the innovator
society X experiences a shock to its social norms, so that                     for all its household becomes          1   <
cfn       b<       0.   Consequently, at time 0 society X goes to the new modern equilibrium f = fm
(b +      1 ) =c   < fn .12


3.2.1       The Dynamics of Social Inuence

We assume that the change in social norms in society X a¤ects decisions in societies Y and Z
through a mechanism of social inuence.13 At each time t > 0, each household in society Y and
Z considers whether to adopt the new social-norm parameter                       1   (to imitate the social innovator)
or to stick to the old value            0.   While all households would gain from the switch in terms of
intrinsic bene...ts net of intrinsic costs, each agent is willing to abandon the old social norms only
if a su¢ ciently large number of other households have already adopted the new social norms.
Consistent with the literature on social interactions and social distance, we assume that, when
deciding whether to conform to the new or to the old social norms, each household in societies Y
and Z weighs the inuence of other households based on their respective social distance. In general,
social distance between two agents captures the extent to which the agents are likely to have socially
valuable interactions, and therefore to care about each other's preferences and behavior and to learn
from each other. In particular, we assume that the impact of a social innovator on a household
depends on what Akerlof (1997, p. 1010) calls inherited social distance between the two agents.
In our empirical analysis, we measure social distance using linguistic distance between ancestral
languages and dialects across di¤erent European regions. The relation between dialects and social

  12
       For simplicity, we assume that all households in society X experience the shift to the new modern equilibrium
simultaneously. The model can be generalized to allow for a gradual di¤usion of the new social norms within society
X , starting from a subset of innovators, along the lines of the di¤usion process from society X to societies Y and Z ,
discussed next.
  13
       For a general discussion of models of social inuence and social learning, see Young (2009). For a recent application
in the context of female labor force participation, see Fogli and Veldkamp (2011).


                                                             13
distance has been explicitly discussed in the literature on social interactions. For instance, Akerlof
(1997, p. 1015) wrote : "the existence of stable dialects for subgroups of a population can only be
interpreted as due to the clustering of social interactions. [...] Thus dialects act as a diagnostic for
social interaction."14

       Let d(i; j ) = d(j; i) denote the social distance between agent i and agent j . All households
within society Y are at a social distance d(Y; Y ) = 0 from each other and all households within
society Z are at a social distance d(Z; Z ) = 0 from each other. In contrast, each household in society
Y is at a distance d(X; Y ) = d(Y; X ) > 0 from each household in society X , while each household
in society Z is at a (larger) distance from each household in X : d(X; Z ) = d(Z; X ) > d(X; Y ).
Finally, households in societies Y and Z are at distance d(Y; Z ) = d(Z; Y ) > 0 from each other.

       At time t > 0, a household i in society Y adopts social norms                       1   if and only if the mass of
households that have already adopted these social norms, weighed by their social distance to i, is
at least as large as household i's critical threshold              i   - that is, if and only if:
                                               X
                                                        [1   d(Y; k )]Mkt   1        i                                      (4)
                                              k=X;Y;Z

where Mkt denotes the mass of households in society k which have already adopted social norms

 1   by time t      1. By the same token, each household i in society Z adopts the new norms at time
t if and only if:
                                               X
                                                      [[1    d(Z; k )]Mkt    1       i                                      (5)
                                          k=X;Y;Z

The parameter            captures the impact of social distance on social inuence, where                        1=d(k; j ) for
all k 6= j .15 For simplicity, we assume prohibitive barriers between society Y and Z :                      d(Y; Z )       1.16

       Households are heterogeneous with respect to their critical thresholds                     i.   Some households are
willing to adopt the new social norms as long as those norms have been adopted by a relatively
small number of other households, while other households need to observe a much larger mass of
modern households before changing their own social attitudes. In each society, critical thresholds

  14
       In the Appendix we also use genetic distance, an overall measure of relatedness between populations, as an
alternative measure of social distance.
  15                                                                   P
       More generally, the conditions could be written as:               k=X;Y;Z   maxf0; [1     d(Y; k)]gMkt   1       i   and
P
  k=X;Y;Z    maxf0; [1     d(Z; k)]gMkt   1      i.

  16
       The derivation for the case d(Y; Z ) < 1 is provided in the Appendix.




                                                              14
 0s     are distributed uniformly over the continuum of households, between a minimum threshold
 i

            0 and a maximum threshold                       >         17
 L                                                      H           L.

       We are now ready to derive the dynamics of di¤usion of new social norms within and across
societies. In order to allow for any spread of innovations across societies, we assume that the
minimum threshold               L   is not too high:18


                                                                L   <1          d(X; Y )                                             (6)

At time 0, only the innovator society has adopted the new social norms, and therefore MX 0 = 1,
MY 0 = MZ 0 = 0. At time 1, the new social norms are adopted by all households in society Y
for whom the social threshold                  i   is smaller or equal to the mass of households who have already
adopted the innovation in society X , weighed by their social distance. That is, all households such
that:19

                                           i       [1       d(X; Y )]MX 0 = 1                  d(X; Y )                              (7)

At time 1 the new social norms are adopted by the following fraction of households in society Y :

                                                                           1        d(X; Y )
                                                   MY 1 = min                                  ;1                                    (8)
                                                                                H       L

In society Z two cases are possible. For                            L      1     d(X; Z ) (relatively high levels of societal con-
formism and/or high levels of inter-societal barriers), no household adopts the new social innovation
at time 1. For            L   <1       d(X; Z ), a positive fraction of households in society Z adopts the new
norms; in that case, the mass of households adopting the new norms is:

                                                                           1        d(X; Z )
                                                   MZ 1 = min                                  ;1                                    (9)
                                                                                H       L

The number of adopters is lower in society Z than in society Y (MZ 1                                      MY 1 ) because of the larger
relative social distance from the innovator d(X; Z ) > d(X; Y ).20

  17
       For simplicity, we assume that such threshold distributions are identical in society Y and Z .
  18
       If   L   1       d(X; Y ); no positive mass of households in society Y (and, a fortiori, in society Z ) would ever adopt
the new social norms introduced in society X; and the social innovation would never spread across societies.
  19
       In order to allow for any spread of innovations across societies, we assume that                   L   <1   d(X; Y ). In contrast,
if we had       L   1      d(X; Y ), societies Y and Z would be so conformist that no positive mass of households in society
Y (and, a fortiori, in society Z ) would ever adopt the new social norms introduced in society X , and, therefore, the
social innovation would never spread across di¤erent societies.
  20
       The only instance when MZ 1 = MY 1 is in the extreme case when all households in both societies adopt the new
social norms immediately, which would occur at very low levels of barriers and/or conformism (                      H    1     d(X; Z )).


                                                                           15
        At time 1, the average level of fertility in society Y is:

                                                 fY 1 = MY 1 fm + (1           MY 1 )fn                                             (10)

and the average level in society Z is:

                                                 fZ 1 = MZ 1 fm + (1           MZ 1 )fn                                             (11)

In general, fZ 1           fY 1 , with the highest gap between fZ 1 and fY 1 occurring when fZ 1 = fn , when

    L       1       d(X; Z ). In contrast, there is no gap (fZ 1 = fY 1 ) in the extreme case MY 1 = MZ 1 = 1
(       H       1    d(X; Z )). In the rest of the analysis, we abstract from polar cases, and focus on the
intermediate range of parameters in which a positive number of households, but not all households,
adopt the novel behavior in society Z at time 1 - that is, the case                               L   <1          d(X; Z ) <   H.

        At time 2, in society Y the new social norms are adopted by all households with critical threshold

    i   such that:
                                                                           1       d(X; Y )
                                             i       1    d(X; Y ) +                                                                (12)
                                                                               H        L

which implies the following number of modern households in society Y at time 2:

                                                      1                             1       d(X; Y )
                                MY 2 = min                    [1    d(X; Y ) +                            ]; 1                      (13)
                                                  H       L                             H             L

By the same token, at time 2 in society Z the new social norms are adopted by all households with
critical threshold          i   such that:

                                                                           1       d(X; Z )
                                             i       1        d(X; Z ) +                                                            (14)
                                                                               H        L

which implies the following number of modern households in society Z :

                                                      1                             1           d(X; Z )
                                MZ 2 = min                    [(1    d(X; Z ) +                            ]; 1                     (15)
                                                 H        L                                 H         L

and so on as t increases.

        To further simplify notation and without much loss of generality, we assume                                  H     L   = 1. The
general levels of MY t and MZt at time t can then be written as:

                                                 Mkt = minft[1             d(X; k )]; 1g                                            (16)

where k = Y; Z .




                                                                    16
3.2.2    Timing of Transition, Fertility Levels, and Social Distances

We can now study the relationship between social distance and the dynamics of the di¤usion of
novel norms about fertility. Let M # denote the fraction of modern households such that average
fertility is f # < fn , that is:
                                        f # = M # fm + (1          M # )fn                     (17)

Let T (f # ) denote the earliest time at which such a level f # is achieved. It is immediate to
see that T (f # ) occurs earlier for society Y at distance d(X; Y ) than for society Z at distance
d(X; Z ) > d(X; Y ):
                                                TY (f # ) < Tz (f # )                          (18)

An important special case is when the society has completely transitioned to the new lower level of
                                       b+ 1
fertility, i.e. M # = 1 and f # = fm =        . Abstracting from T having to be an integer, here is
                                           c
the general closed-form solution for the time when a society at social distance d(k; X ) reaches M #
with fertility f # :
                                                                M#
                                             Tk (f # ) =                                       (19)
                                                           1    d(k; X )
The time at which a society at distance d(k; X ) achieves full modernization (M # = 1 and average
fertility equal to fm ) is:
                                                                1
                                             Tk (fm ) =                                        (20)
                                                           1    d(k; X )
Therefore, the model delivers a straightforward empirical implication, linking fertility transition
time to social distance from the innovator:

    Proposition 1: Societies at a smaller social distance from the social innovator experience an
earlier transition to lower fertility

    The model also implies testable predictions about the patterns of the fertility dynamics in
di¤erent societies in relation to social distance from the innovator. A numerical example will help
illustrate these predictions. Assume that d(X; Y ) = 2=3 and d(X; Z ) = 4=5. The two societies
will experience transitions to lower fertility as detailed in the following table:

                              T ime     MY t         fY t         MZt         fZt
                                                 1       2                 1       4
                                   1    1=3      3 fm   +3 fn     1=5      5 fm   +5 fn
                                                 2       1                 2       3
                                   2    2=3      3 fm   +3 fn     2=5      5 fm   +5 fn
                                                                           3       2
                                   3     1           fm           3=5      5 fm   +5 fn
                                                                           4       1
                                   4     1           fm           4=5      5 fm   +5 fn
                                   5     1           fm            1          fm

                                                           17
       In this example, society Y achieves full modernity before society Z , at time 3 rather than at time
5 (empirically, we can interpret each period as a generation). Eventually, both societies transition
to the full modern equilibrium where fertility is fm . Overall, fertility levels are inversely related to
distance from the innovator in the earlier phases of the transition to lower fertility. But the relation
between fertility and distance from the innovator across societies eventually fades as households in
the more distant society catch up and adopt the new social norms.

       One way to capture these patterns is in terms of the relation between distance to the innovator
and the transition status of each society, which is de...ned as 0 if the society has not yet achieved
full modernity (f # < fm ) and 1 if the society has achieved full modernity (f # = fm ). In the earlier
periods (1 and 2), neither Y or Z have transitioned (their transition status is 0), and therefore their
relative distance from the innovator has no impact on their relative transition status. In periods
3 and 4, Y has transitioned but Z has not, so that the transition status is negatively related to
distance from X . In period 5, both societies Y and Z have transitioned, and therefore the transition
status is again independent of distance from the innovator. In summary:

       Proposition 2: The absolute magnitude of the negative relationship between a society's transi-
tion status and its distance from the innovator is lower in the earlier phases of the di¤ usion of the
new fertility behavior, becomes higher over time, and falls again in the latest stages of the fertility
transition.

       Another useful way to capture the changing relation between fertility patterns and distance
from the innovator is in terms of correlations between levels of fertility and distances from the
innovator at di¤erent points in time. To ...x ideas, assume that fm = 1, fn = 3 and                            = 1. Then,
at time 1 there is a perfect correlation ( = 1) between levels of fertility in societies X , Y and Z
- which are 1, 7=3, and 13=5, respectively - and relative distances from the innovator, which are
d(X; X ) = 0, d(X; Y ) = 2=3 and d(X; Z ) = 4=5. At time 2 the correlation, while still very high,
will have decreased to            = 0:95, as fertility rates in societies Y and Z move, respectively, to 5=3
and 11=5. At times 3 and 4 the correlation between fertility and relative distance goes down to
  = 0:63 as society Y converges to full modern fertility fm = 1 at time 3, while society Z 's fertility
decreases ...rst to 9=5 at time 3 and then to 7=5 at time 4. Finally, at time 5 there is no longer a
positive covariance between fertility levels and distance from the innovator, as all three societies
now have the same levels of fertility fm = 1.21

  21
       A time 5 the correlation between fertility levels and distances is technically unde...ned because the fertility rate is
constant across societies, and therefore its standard deviation is zero. The correlation could be de...ned, for instance,


                                                              18
         The pattern of decreasing correlation between fertility levels and social distance from the inno-
vator is a general feature of the dynamics predicted by our model of social inuence. Over time,
all societies that are adopting the new norms converge to the same level of fertility fm , provided
that they have similar intrinsic costs and bene...ts.22 This can be summarized as follows:

         Proposition 3: In the earlier phases of the di¤ usion of the fertility decline, there is a strong
positive relationship between fertility levels and distance from the innovator, but this relationship
becomes weaker as more societies adopt modern social norms over time. Consequently, measured
correlations between fertility levels and relative social distance from the innovator are high and
positive during the earlier phases of the transition, and decline over time as more societies decrease
their fertility levels.


4         The Di¤usion of the Fertility Decline Across Europe

In this section, we bring the main predictions of the model to the data. We test the hypothesis
that social distance from the population that experienced the onset of the fertility transition (the
French) is related to the di¤usion of the fertility decline across Europe, and characterize how this
relationship changes over time. In doing so, we take care to control for variables capturing the
intrinsic costs and bene...ts of fertility.

         We explore three predictions of the model, corresponding to its three propositions. The ...rst test
is to examine whether the fertility transition started earlier in countries at lower social distances
from France (Proposition 1). The second test is to examine whether the probability of having
experienced the fertility transition was lower for populations or regions at a greater distance from
France, and how this relationship changed through time (Proposition 2). The third test is to
analyze the determinants of the level of marital fertility (Ig ) itself, over time, as a function of
social distance from France (Proposition 3). We use two datasets, the main one comprised of 775
sub-national regions of Europe, and the other covering 37 European populations. We focus here on
the regional dataset. Both the description of the population-level dataset and the corresponding
empirical results appear in the Appendix.

if we slightly extend the model to allow for some (small) variation in (modern) fertility - that is, if fm = 1 + ", where
" is a random variable with zero mean and a very small but positive variance. In that case, the correlation would be
de...ned, and equal to 0, at time 5.
    22
         For any pair of societies Y and Z such that d(Y; X ) < d(Z; X ) << 1= there will be a time T e such that fY t < fZt
for t < T e, , but fY t = fZt for t    T e:


                                                               19
4.1       Data and Measurement

The database of marital fertility rates in PEFP includes detailed information on various measures
of fertility across 775 regions of 25 European countries, from 1831 to 1970. The regional dataset
was built starting from this initial set of regions. In constructing the regional dataset, we faced
several challenges described in what follows.


Measuring social distance.              We require a summary measure of social distance from each region
to the innovator (France) - i.e. our main explanatory variable. To proxy for social distance, we
use linguistic distance. Linguistic distance captures separation times between populations speaking
di¤erent languages. Indeed, languages are transmitted from parents to children and linguistic
innovations arise in a regular fashion. Thus, populations at greater linguistic distances are likely
to be also distant from each other along a wide range of other cultural dimensions. In Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2016), we showed that linguistic distance is positively associated with genealogical
separation times and with cultural di¤erences across countries. It is important not to interpret the
e¤ect of linguistic distance narrowly as reecting only the ability to communicate, but to interpret
it more broadly as a general indicator of cultural distance: the barriers captured by linguistic
distance include communication, trust, di¤erences in norms, values and attitudes, i.e. ancestral
distance more generally.

       To construct a measure of linguistic distance across the regions of Europe, we painstakingly
constructed a database of ancestral European languages and dialects at a disaggregated geographic
level corresponding to the regional boundaries in the fertility data. Using a detailed map of the
ancestral languages and dialects of Europe (including extinct dialects), delineating the areas where
these were spoken in the 18th and 19th centuries, we matched every language in the source map to a
subnational region in the fertility dataset from Coale and Watkins (1986).23 We ended up with 275
languages and dialects matched as primary languages of each of the 775 regions.24 It is important to

  23
       The source for the language data was the map provided at http://www.muturzikin.com/carteeurope.htm. To our
knowledge this is the most comprehensive and detailed maps of historical European languages. Moreover language
headings used in this map closely track those in Ethnologue, on which we rely to derive linguistic distance.
  24
       In a minority of cases where a region straddles two linguistic areas we matched the region to two languages - a
primary and a secondary one. 108 of the 775 regions are matched to a secondary language. In most of the case the
match was to a language that is otherwise the primary language of some region, but for 26 regions the secondary
language is unique to that region. For instance, Kerneveg (a sub-dialect of Breton) is nowhere the primary language
but is matched as the secondary language of 3 subdivisions of Brittany (each of which is matched to a di¤erent



                                                           20
note that these languages are no longer necessarily spoken in the corresponding regions, as the 19th
and 20th centuries saw the virtual elimination of many subnational dialects in several European
countries through nation building (Alesina and Reich, 2013). For instance, regions of Southern
France are variously matched to Langue d'Oc, Provençal, or Savoyard, spoken nowadays by very
few. Linguistic distance based on 18th and 19th century languages is more likely to capture barriers
relevant during the time of the European fertility transition, and to capture a broad range of cultural
di¤erences with deep roots. Next, for each ancestral language we found its linguistic classi...cation
from Ethnologue.25 This allowed us to calculate the linguistic distance of each language to any
other (our main focus will be distance to French, i.e. the version of Langue d'Oïl spoken around
Paris, and English) by counting the number of di¤erent linguistic nodes separating any pair of
languages.26 Thus, we obtained a series describing the linguistic distance of each region in our
regional dataset to French and to English. The series on the number of di¤erent linguistic nodes
to French ("Français") ranges from 1 to 10, with a mean of 7:5. This is the main variable used to
assess the role of social distance to the birthplace of the fertility transition, as a determinant of its
di¤usion to the rest of Europe.


Geographic barriers.              We also assembled a comprehensive database of geographic characteristics
for each of the 775 regions. We determined the coordinates of the centroid of each region, and
calculated their geodesic, longitudinal and latitudinal distance to France and England. We also
coded variables representing natural barriers: whether a region is on an island, whether a region is
landlocked, whether it shares a sea or ocean with France, whether it is contiguous to France and
whether a region is separated from France by a mountain range (the Alps and the Pyrenees). These
serve to construct the geographic controls included in the regressions that follow.

sub-dialect of Breton as primary language). We only made use of the primary language in our analysis. A region's
secondary language is usually very closely related to its primary language, as the example of the regions of Brittany
suggests.
  25
       For instance, French (Français) is classi...ed as follows: Indo-European - Italic - Romance - Italo-Western - Western
- Gallo-Iberian - Gallo-Romance - Gallo-Rhaetian - Oïl - Français.
  26
       For instance, the linguistic classi...cation of Italian is Indo-European - Italic - Romance - Italo-Western - Italo-
Dalmatian. Thus, Italian shares 4 nodes in common with French out of a possible 10 nodes, and it's linguistic distance
to French is equal to 6. See Fearon (2003), p. 211, and Desmet et al. (2012) for work using the structure of linguistic
trees to measure linguisitic distance.




                                                             21
Intrinsic determinants of fertility.                  We assembled as much data as we could obtain related
to the intrinsic costs and bene...ts of fertility choices, at the regional level. First, we used regional
infant mortality data from PEFP. This variable varies through time, but is only available for
about 300 regions. Second, we gathered data at the region level on urbanization rates in 1800
and 1850, population density in the mid-19th century, and literacy rates in 1880. Due to data
availability constraints, these data cover many, but not all 775 regions for which marital fertility
data is available. The Appendix describes the sources and coverage of these data in greater detail.


Border changes.             During the period under scrutiny, the borders of some European countries
changed, so that a region that was located in one country at one point in time may have become
part of another later on. For example, this is the case for many regions of Poland, variously in
Germany or Russia at di¤erent times in the sample period. In our sample of 775 regions, 83 regions
in 1946 are in di¤erent countries than in 1846. These changes are mostly (but not exclusively) the
result of border redrawings that occurred after the First and Second World Wars. In the source
data on fertility from PEFP, these regions are alternately included in one country or another,
sometimes with di¤erent region names and borders. We rede...ned a single identi...er for each region,
with consistent borders throughout, and separately coded the country to which each region belongs
at di¤erent points in time, at 20-year intervals between 1846 and 1946. Country ...xed e¤ects can
then be de...ned using country borders at di¤erent points in time.


Time periods.            We need to de...ne the temporal unit of analysis. While the right-hand side
variables are time invariant, the rate of marital fertility Ig as provided by PEFP is an unbalanced
panel. Some countries like France have vast amounts of data through time. Others, chiey in
Eastern Europe, have fewer years of data available in the interval 1831 to 1970. To ensure that
enough observations on Ig are available in any period, we de...ned 12 overlapping periods of 30 years
centered at 10-year intervals, so that period 1 is 1831 to 1860, period 2 is 1841 to 1870, etc.27 The
analysis of the determinants of Ig will be conducted on repeated cross-sections de...ned over these
30-year periods, with marital fertility averaged over all available years within these periods. This
issue does not arise when exploring the determinants of the marital fertility transition date, or of
the fertility transition status at each point in time, both of which are available for almost all of the

  27
       For the ...rst period data was available only for 184 regions from 5 countries (as de...ned by their 1946 borders). By
period 3 we have 531 regions from 20 countries, and by 1911-1940 (period 9) we have 766 regions from 25 countries,
i.e. most of the regions in the sample have available data on marital fertility in the early decades of the 20th century.



                                                              22
775 regions.


Fertility Transition Dates and Transition Status.                        In addition to raw data on marital fertility
(Ig ), PEFP provides estimated transition dates at the regional level at 10-year intervals in map
form (Map 2.1 annexed to Coale and Watkins, 1986 and reproduced here as Figure 1). These dates
represents the ...rst instance when a 10% decline in Ig is detected for a population (so, for instance,
if for a given population the ...rst recorded level of Ig is 0:70, the transition date is the ...rst date
for which Ig falls below 0:63). For each region, starting from a visual examination of the PEFP
map, we assigned a fertility transition date (F T D) equal to the midpoint of each 10-year interval.
Looking at the numeric data on Ig , we veri...ed that these dates indeed correspond to the earliest
10% decline in marital fertility. For transition dates before 1830 and after 1930, we referred directly
to the data on Ig to determine the date of a 10% decline in the index of marital fertility. We ended
up with data for 771 regions, from 25 European countries.28 At any date t, the fertility transition
status Tt is then de...ned as 1 if t          F T D, and 0 otherwise.


4.2       Speci...cation and Results

This subsection presents empirical results obtained from the analysis of the regional dataset. Sum-
mary statistics for the regional dataset are presented in Table 3. There, we see the marital fertility
transition at work: the average level of Ig declines from 0:623 in 1831-1860 to 0:336 in the 1951-
1970 period. Across regions, the average date of the transition is 1899, with a standard deviation
of about 25 years. Turning to correlations in Panel B of Table 3, we see that the fertility transition
date is positively correlated with linguistic distance to French ( = 0:52). Similarly, the level of
marital fertility (Ig ) is highly correlated with linguistic distance to France in early periods, but this
correlation declines in later periods as more and more regions undergo the transition, consistent
with our di¤usion model.


4.2.1       Determinants of the Transition Date

Our ...rst speci...cation seeks to explain the transition date, as a test of Proposition 1:

                                                        f       0
                                      F T Djc =     1 LDjc   + Xjc   2   +   c   + "jc                          (21)

                                                                                   f
where F T Djc is the marital fertility transition date in region j of country c, LDjc is the linguistic
distance of region j to French,          c   is a country ...xed e¤ect and Xjc is a vector of control variables.

  28
       4 regions in the Balkans did not have enough Ig data to ascertain a date and were not coded on the source map.


                                                           23
The inclusion of country ...xed e¤ects is meant to control for any country-speci...c time invariant
characteristics, such as national institutions and policies, that could be correlated with both the
timing of the transition and social distance from France. Country borders used to de...ne the
country dummies are obtained from 1846 borders, but it matters little for our results whether
countries are de...ned by later borders. The vector Xjc varies across speci...cations. It contains
measures of geographic barriers between region j and France as well as proxies for the intrinsic
costs and bene...ts of fertility choices, such as the urbanization rate, population density (a proxy
for technological advancement in Malthusian times) and the literacy rate.

       Table 2 presents the baseline results considering distance to the French language (for linguistic
distance) and to Paris (for geographic distance).29 We ...nd a positive and highly signi...cant e¤ect of
linguistic distance to the French language on the marital fertility transition date - whether or not we
control for geographic distance. In the speci...cation of column 2, with the broadest set of geographic
controls, we ...nd a standardized e¤ect of linguistic distance equal to about 26:78%.30 The e¤ect
is highly signi...cant statistically. The regression overall performs well in accounting for variation
in transition dates, with an overall R2 of 72% (dropping the country dummies, the R2 only falls
to 60%). This alleviates concerns that transition dates may be estimated with too much error to
allow for meaningful estimates of their determinants. Both the R2 and the coe¢ cient on linguistic
distance to French remain very stable across speci...cations as we add controls, alleviating concerns
that there may be an important omitted variable (Oster, 2017). Finally, the e¤ect of linguistic
distance to French remains robust when we include controls for population density, urbanization
and literacy. These variables take on negative signs, as expected, since more urbanized, denser and
more literate regions face a lower ratio of intrinsic bene...ts to costs of children.

       Table 3 runs a horserace between distance to English/London and distance to French/Paris,
again with country ...xed-e¤ects. The goal is to see whether the fertility transition followed a dif-
fusion process that was distinct from that of the Industrial Revolution, for which the innovation
frontier was England. To do so, we include linguistic distance to English and geographic distance
to London in the speci...cation of equation (21). We ...nd that, no matter the included set of control

  29
       More precisely, linguistic distance is to the version of Langue d'Oïl spoken in the region around Paris. There is
substantial linguistic variation within France when considering its old regional dialects, as we do.
  30
       In what follows, magnitudes are assessed using the standardized beta coe¢ cient on the variable of interest: the
e¤ect of a one standard deviation change in the independent variable expressed as a share of a one standard deviation
change in the dependent variable.




                                                            24
variables, the e¤ect of linguistic distance to French on the transition date is positive, signi...cant,
and its standardized magnitude varies between 25% and 40%. In contrast, the e¤ect of linguistic
distance to English is often statistically insigni...cant and is always small in magnitude. These in-
ferences hold even in column (4), where we control for variables capturing the intrinsic costs and
bene...ts of fertility choice, where linguistic distance from English bears a negative and insigni...cant
coe¢ cient. In sum, linguistic distance to French wins in a horserace with linguistic distance to
English, indicating that the di¤usion process stemmed from France not England.31 This result
casts doubt on the view that the marital fertility transition was primarily a by-product of industri-
alization. These results are particularly noteworthy in light of the inclusion of country ...xed e¤ects,
a stringent test of our hypothesis since it requires identi...cation from within-country, cross-regional
variation.32

       Finally we replicated the same horserace, but between distance to German/Berlin and distance
to French/ Paris. This is to assess if perhaps the new fertility behavior might have di¤used from
Germany (for instance because that country was a leader in terms of literacy and human capital).
The results appear in Appendix Table A17. We ...nd that the e¤ect of linguistic distance to France
is always positive and signi...cant, while the e¤ect of linguistic distance from German is statistically
insigni...cant, and of the wrong sign.

  31
       Basso and Cuberes (2012) ...nd a positive e¤ect of genetic distance from the UK on the fertility transition date in
a worldwide sample of countries. However, in this broader sample, much of the variation in genetic distance comes
from the distance between non-European and European populations, trumping variation between Europeans. This
fact opens up the possibility that the frontier for fertility limitations was not the English but another European
population. We show that this population was in fact the ...rst adopter of the new fertility behavior, France, where
economic modernization came late relative to the UK, the birthplace of the modern Industrial Revolution. Hence, in
contrast with the conclusions in Basso and Cuberes (2012), our results suggest that economic development was not
the sole or principal force in the spread of fertility limitations in Europe, but that a process of cultural and social
di¤usion from France was an important force.
  32
       Appendix Tables A3, A4, A5 and A7 show empirical estimates of the e¤ect of social distance from France on
the fertility transition date in the population-level dataset. Tables A3, A4 and A5 use genetic distance from France
as a measure of social distance, while Table A7 uses two measures of linguistic distance for this purpose. We ...nd
results substantively similar to those obtained here using the regional dataset. The Appendix describes these results
in detail.




                                                             25
4.2.2       Determinants of Transition Status

We now seek to better understand the dynamics of the fertility transition, testing Proposition 2.
As de...ned above, Tjct is a simple dichotomous indicator of a region's fertility transition status. For
each date t separately, we run probit regression of this indicator on linguistic distance to France
and a set of geographic controls:

                                                               f       0
                                         Tjct =    0   +   1 LDjc   + Xjc   2   + "jct                               (22)

The analysis of the transition status has two limitations: 1) We no longer include country ...xed
e¤ects: since at a given date all or none the regions of some countries have Tjct = 1, the cor-
responding country dummy perfectly determines the outcome, resulting in far fewer observations
from which to estimate the within country-e¤ects of the other covariates.33 2) We include a smaller
set of covariates, excluding the geographic dummy variables but maintaining the geographic dis-
tance measures. The reason is the same as the preceding: for some periods, some dummy variables
perfectly predict the outcome, and the corresponding observations must be dropped, resulting in
small samples. Since we wish to compare the magnitude of the e¤ect of linguistic distance across
various periods, we require the sample and the set of controls to be the same across time.

       We start by displaying graphically the cumulative share of regions, among the 771 for which
transition date data is available, for which Tjct takes on a value of 1 (Figure 2). The process
follows a logistic distribution. The earliest transition dates signalling the ...rst 10% decline in Ig
are in 46 French regions; regions with the latest dates are located mostly in Ireland and Spain in
the late 1920s, 1930s and early 1940s. The last regions to begin the marital fertility transition in
this dataset are Salamanca (1941), Zamora (1941), Avila (1942), Dublin County (1943) and Las
Palmas/Canary Islands (1945).

       The logistic pattern provides information about the nature of the di¤usion process. Young
(2009) considers four possible processes: pure inertia (agents adopt with exogenous delays, without
feedback from prior to future adopters), contagion (agents adopt when they come in contact with
prior adopters, and innovations spread like epidemics), social inuence (agents adopt when enough

  33
       When including country ...xed e¤ects in the probit speci...cations anyway, we end up with as few as 89 observations
(for 1841) and as many as 204 (in 1901) from which to estimate the relationship - in all cases a far cry from the 771
observations used in Table 4. There are too few observations to obtain estimates for the 1921 cross-section. Despite
the very small samples, the e¤ect of linguistic distance from France is negative for all periods where enough data is
available, even with country ...xed e¤ects.



                                                             26
other people in their reference group have adopted, as in our theoretical model), and social learning
(agents adopt once they see enough evidence from prior adopters'outcomes to convince them that
the innovation is worth adopting). A process that is driven only by inertia decelerates the whole
time, implying that the adoption curve should be strictly concave (Young, 2009, p. 1901). Thus,
pure inertia cannot explain the logistic curve that characterizes the adoption of modern fertility
behavior.

       Unlike a process that is due to pure inertia, contagion accelerates initially and then decelerates.
However, a process that is driven only by contagion cannot accelerate beyond the ...fty percent
adoption level, and the hazard rate (the rate at which non-adopters become adopters) must be
non-increasing relative to the number of adopters (Young, 2009, p. 1901). In our curve, the
hazard rate is not uniformly decreasing relative to the number of adopters, but increases over some
intervals. Therefore, the adoption process cannot be explained by pure contagion either. Instead,
the observed pattern of adoption is consistent with a di¤usion process in which the new fertility
behavior is gradually adopted by di¤erent agents through mechanisms of social inuence (consistent
with our theoretical framework) and/or social learning.

       Results from estimating equation (22) using probit are presented in Table 4, at 20 year-intervals
from 1841 to 1941, a period that covers the bulk of the transition period. Table 4 reveals an
initially insigni...cant e¤ect of linguistic distance to French on the fertility transition status. The
e¤ect becomes signi...cantly negative in 1861, and its standardized magnitude rises to 52% in 1881,
before declining thereafter and becoming insigni...cant in 1941.34 This corresponds to the prediction
of Proposition 2. We ...nd a similar pattern when controlling for the literacy rate, the urbanization
rate, and population density (Appendix Table A8), despite a much smaller sample of only 298
regions from 8 countries.

       For a more complete view of the dynamics of the transition, Figure 3 displays graphically the
time path of the standardized e¤ect of distance from French, estimated at every date between 1831
and 1941 for which a transition occurs in some regions. The pattern in this ...gure is consistent
with Proposition 2: At the beginning of the period, only regions in France have transitioned.
The e¤ect of linguistic distance from French on the probability of having begun the transition is
therefore essentially zero. As we enter the di¤usion period, the e¤ect of linguistic distance from
French progressively becomes strongly negative (i.e. being linguistically distant is associated with

  34
       Here, our measure of standardized magnitude is the probit marginal e¤ect of linguistic distance to French,
multiplied by the standard deviation of linguistic distance, and divided by the sample mean of transition status.


                                                        27
a lower probability of starting the marital fertility transition), with the standardized e¤ect peaking
at      61:45% in 1891. As more and more regions at greater distances from France begin their
transitions, the e¤ect then goes back to zero. The U-shaped time pro...le of the e¤ect of linguistic
distance on the probability of experiencing the onset of the marital fertility transition is therefore
evidence of a di¤usion process that works in large measure through social distance.


4.2.3       Determinants of Ig

The last step in our analysis of the dynamics of the fertility transition is to estimate directly the
determinants of the level of marital fertility (Ig ), i.e. testing Proposition 3. We can once again
control for country ...xed e¤ects, the full set of geographic controls, and proxies for the intrinsic
costs and bene...ts of fertility choices. Ig is also a continuous rather than a dichotomous indicator,
so we avoid the arbitrariness of having to de...ne a transition as the earliest occurrence of a 10%
drop in Ig . The speci...cation is:

                                                      f       0
                                       Igjc =     1 LDjc   + Xjc   2   +   c   + "jc                              (23)

where Igjct is the PEFP marital fertility index in region j of country c in period . The regression
is run on separate cross-sections of regions for each 30-year period indexed by .35

       Estimation results are presented in Table 5 for all odd-numbered time periods, including the full
set of geographic controls. We ...nd a large, positive and statistically signi...cant e¤ect of linguistic
distance to France on the level of Ig , throughout the sample period. Moreover, focusing on a
common sample of 630 regions to facilitate a comparison of the e¤ect through time, the last row
of Table 5 displays the standardized magnitude of the e¤ect of linguistic distance to French going
back to Period 5 (1871-1900): the e¤ect declines as more and more regions at progressively greater
linguistic distances from France adopt new fertility behavior, consistent with Proposition 3.36

  35
       Appendix Tables A6 and A7 show the corresponding empirical estimates of the determinants of Ig , obtained
from the population-level dataset, using genetic distance to France and linguistic distance to French, respectively, as
measures of social distance. We ...nd substantively similar results to those obtained from the regional dataset. The
Appendix describes these results in detail.
  36
       In Appendix Table A9, we augment the speci...cation of equation (23) by adding the minimum linguistic distance
to regions that have already made the fertility transition. Table A9 reveals that the e¤ect of linguistic distance to
French on the level of Ig in various periods remains positive, statistically signi...cant and large in magnitude. The
e¤ect of minimum linguistic distance to regions that have already made the transition, while positive and sometimes
statistically signi...cant (in Periods 5 and 9), is much smaller in terms of standardized magnitude than linguistic



                                                           28
       Figure 4 displays the same e¤ect through time for a smaller set of 519 regions, estimated from
the same speci...cation (equation (23)), for Periods 4-12.37 The standardized e¤ect is slower to decay
to zero than in the probit regressions of the preceding subsection, which explored the determinants
of the beginning of the fertility transition. Reductions in Ig continued after that. Hence, countries
keep converging to the frontier's fertility behavior past their transition dates, and linguistic distance
to French continues to predict how far these regions are from the frontier even in the 1931-1960
period.

       In Table 6, we augment the speci...cation of equation (23) by including four additional controls
for infant mortality (time varying), population density (mid-19th century), the urbanization rate
(in 1850) and the literacy rate (in 1880). We focus on Period 5 (1871-1900), when the di¤usion
of the fertility decline was in full swing.38 This is also a period relatively close to the time when
urbanization, population density and literacy are measured. We ...nd a signi...cant role for these
proxies for the intrinsic costs and bene...ts of fertility choices. In column (1), infant mortality
enters with the expected positive sign: regions with higher infant mortality have higher total
fertility (Preston, 1978, Doepke, 2005). In column (2), we see that higher population density is
associated with lower fertility, as would be expected if population density is a proxy for technological
advancement. In column (3), a similar result is obtained for more urbanized regions. In column
(4) we ...nd a negative and signi...cant e¤ect of the literacy rate on marital fertility, echoing the
signi...cant negative e¤ect of human capital on fertility often documented in the literature (Galor,
2011, chapter 4). Columns (5) and (6) include several or all of these additional controls together.
The sample is reduced, yet the e¤ect of linguistic distance to French continues to remain signi...cant
and large in magnitude.

distance to France. This result is consistent with the extension to our theory, also shown in the Appendix, where
regions can be inuenced by both the innovation frontier (France) and by other regions that experienced the fertility
transition.
  37
       We display estimates for these 9 periods only because we again require a balanced sample of regions to meaning-
fully compare magnitudes across time, and early periods contain less data on Ig .
  38
       Appendix Tables A10 through A16 each replicate each column of Table 6 for all odd-numbered time periods. All
these show a declining standardized e¤ect of linguistic distance from French on the marital fertility index as time goes
by, even in demanding speci...cations where all controls are introduced at once and, as a result, only a small share
of the original sample of regions remains (for example, see Table A15). The e¤ects of infant mortality, urbanization,
density and literacy themselves are generally quite stable across time periods, especially when considering Periods
3-11 which have more available regional data than Period 1.




                                                           29
       In Table 7, we test whether the four proxies for the intrinsic costs and bene...ts of fertility choices
di¤used from France. The speci...cation is similar to that in (23), but the dependent variable is now
infant mortality, population density, urbanization and literacy. The speci...cations are single cross-
sections of regions, with country ...xed-e¤ects and geographic controls. We ...nd some evidence that
linguistic distance to French is positively correlated with infant mortality, with a modest magnitude.
But we ...nd no e¤ects of linguistic distance from French on levels of population density, urbanization
and literacy. Thus, there is little evidence that these fertility-reducing variables di¤used from
France (of course, they may have di¤used from another frontier). In sum, the variables capturing
the intrinsic costs and bene...ts of fertility choices have e¤ects independent from that of the di¤usion
of new fertility norms from France.

       In Table 8, we include all the geographic and linguistic distance variables not only relative to
France / French but also relative to England / English, to conduct a horserace. In all periods, the
e¤ect of linguistic distance to French is much larger in magnitude than that of linguistic distance
to English. For instance, in Period 5, when the di¤usion process was in full-swing, the standardized
e¤ect of distance from French on Ig is 51:3% while the e¤ect of linguistic distance from English is
5:7% and is statistically indistinguishable from zero. These results con...rm those obtained in Table
3 when explaining the transition date. We ...nd little evidence that the fertility transition di¤used
from the English rather than the French, and that it was therefore a by-product of the Industrial
Revolution. Instead, it was partly the result of a di¤erent cultural di¤usion process, starting from
France.39

       We conducted additional robustness tests. First, we replicated Tables 5 and 6 controlling for
the log of geodesic distance rather than its level (Appendix Tables A19 and A20). This did not
e¤ect the results. Second, we replicated Tables 5 and 6, but removing the country ...xed e¤ects, to
assess the extent to which time invariant, country-speci...c factors matter for our results (Appendix
Tables A21 and A22). Without ...xed e¤ects, the magnitude of the e¤ect of linguistic distance to
French is not materially a¤ected - it continues to be positive, signi...cant and large: within-country
variation is su¢ cient to establish our e¤ect, and it is not the case that the inclusion of country
...xed-e¤ects results in the loss of much relevant variation.
  39
       In Appendix Table A18, we conduct a similar horserace with German / Berlin. We again ...nd that linguistic
distance to French has a more statistically signi...cant and quantitatively larger e¤ect on marital fertility levels at
various dates (when magnitude is properly assessed using the standardized beta coe¢ cient).




                                                          30
5         Conclusion

To understand the fertility decline in Europe, we need to consider both cultural and economic
forces. This paper reconciles an economic approach to fertility decisions with a central role for the
di¤usion of new social norms along cultural lines.

         In our model, the transition from higher traditional fertility to lower modern fertility is the
outcome of a process of social innovation and social inuence, whereby the process of adoption
of the novel behaviors and norms depends on the social distance between early adopters and late
adopters. In our empirical analysis, we studied the determinants of marital fertility in a sample of
European populations and regions from 1831 to 1970, and tested the theoretical model using a novel
data set of ancestral linguistic distances between European regions. We found that social distance
from the innovator (France) is positively related with fertility transition date across populations
and regions, and positively related to the level of marital fertility in di¤erent periods. Moreover,
the dynamics of the fertility transition match the predictions of the model: the impact of linguistic
distance to French on fertility is higher early and at the peak of the transition period, but fades as
more and more regions adopt the modern behavior.

         The di¤usion of the fertility decline and the spread of industrialization followed di¤erent patterns
because societies at di¤erent relative distances from the respective innovators - the French and the
English - faced di¤erent barriers to imitation and adoption, and barriers were lower for societies that
were culturally and linguistically closer to the innovators. Eventually, all the regions in our sample
transitioned to lower fertility, which suggests that cultural distance from French does not capture
the direct e¤ect of persistent French cultural traits, but the e¤ect of barriers to the cultural di¤usion
of new fertility norms.40 Indeed, this paper provides evidence that the spread of new behaviors and
norms across cultural barriers was an important force behind the decline of fertility in Europe.



                                                      References

Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Cantoni, Simon Johnson and James Robinson. 2011. "The Consequences
of Radical Reform: The French Revolution," American Economic Review, 101 (7): 3286-3307.

Akerlof, George. 1997. "Social Distance and Social Decisions," Econometrica, 65 (5): 1005-27.

    40
         Similar results, which we interpret again in terms of cultural barriers, are obtained for the e¤ect of genetic
distance, presented in the Appendix.



                                                            31
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano. 2015. "Culture and Institutions," Journal of Economic
Literature, 53 (4): 898-944.

Alesina, Alberto and Bryony Reich. 2013. "Nation Building." NBER Working Paper # 18839.

Basso, Alberto and David Cuberes. 2012. "Human Capital, Culture, and the Onset of the Demo-
graphic Transition." She¢ eld Economic Research Paper Series # 2012-024, October.

Beach, Brian and Walker Hanlon. 2019. "Censorship, Family Planning, and the Historical Fertility
Transition". Working Paper, New York University.

Becker, Gary S. 1960. "An Economic Analysis of Fertility." in G .S. Becker (ed.) Demographic and
Economic Change in Developed Countries, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Becker, Sascha O., Francesco Cinnirella, and Ludger Woessman. 2010. "The Trade-o¤ between
Fertility and Education: Evidence from Before the Demographic Transition." Journal of Economic
Growth, 15 (3): 177-204.

Behrman, Jere, Hans Peter Kohler and Susan Cotts Watkins. 2002. "Social Networks and Changes
in Contraceptive Use Over Time: Evidence from a Longitudinal Study in Rural Kenya." Demogra-
phy, 39 (4): 713-736.

Behrman, Jere, Hans Peter Kohler and Susan Cotts Watkins. 2009. "Lessons from Empirical
Network Analyses on Matters of Life and Death in Africa." in P. R. Kleindorfer and Y. Wind, eds.
Network Based Strategies and Competencies, Upper Saddle River (NJ): Wharton School Publishing:
pp. 495-512.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2010. "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and Social-
ization." Chapter 9 in Handbook of Social Economics, edited by Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin and
Matt Jackson, Elsevier.

Blanc, Guillaume. 2019. "Modernization Before Industrialization: Cultural Roots and Economic
Consequences of the Demographic Transition in France." Working Paper, Brown University.

Blanc, Guillaume and Romain Wacziarg. 2019. "Change and Persistence in the Age of Moderniza-
tion: Saint-Germain-d'Anxure, 1730-1895." NBER Working Paper #25490.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Fabian Lange. 2009. "Chronic Disease Burden and the Interaction of Education,
Fertility,and Growth." The Review of Economics and Statistics. 91 (1): 52-65.

Brown, J. C. and T. W. Guinnane. 2007. "Regions and Time in the European Fertility Transition:
Problems in the Princeton Project's Statistical Methodology," Economic History Review 60 (3):
574-595.


                                               32
Chandrasekhar, Sripati. 1981. "A Dirty, Filthy Book": The Writings of Charles Knowlton and
Annie Besant on Reproductive Physiology and Birth Control and an Account of the Bradlaugh-
Besant Trial. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Coale, Ansley J. 1986. "The Decline of Fertility in Europe since the Eighteenth Century as a
Chapter in Human Demographic History." Chapter 1 in A. J. Coale and S. Cotts Watkins (eds.)
The Decline of Fertility in Europe. The Revised Proceedings of a Conference on the Princeton
European Fertility Project. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Coale, Ansley J. and Susan Coats Watkins (eds.). 1986. The Decline of Fertility in Europe.
The Revised Proceedings of a Conference on the Princeton European Fertility Project. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Coale, Ansley J. and Roy Treadway. 1986. "A Summary of the Changing Distribution of Overall
Fertility, marital Fertility, and the Proportion married in the Provinces of Europe." Chapter 2 in A.
J. Coale and S. Cotts Watkins (eds.) The Decline of Fertility in Europe. The Revised Proceedings of
a Conference on the Princeton European Fertility Project. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Daudin, Guillaume, Raphaël Franck and Hillel Rapoport. 2018. "Can Internal Migration Foster the
Convergence in Regional Fertility Rates? Evidence from 19th Century France." Economic Journal,
forthcoming.

Desmet, Klaus, Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín and Romain Wacziarg. 2012. "The Political Economy of
Linguistic Cleavages." Journal of Development Economics, 97 (2): 322-338.

Doepke, M. 2005. "Child Mortality and Fertility Decline: Does the Barro-Becker Model Fit the
Facts?" Journal of Population Economics, 18(2): 337­366.

Durlauf, Steven N. and Yannis M. Ioannides. 2010 "Social Interactions." Annual Review of Eco-
nomics, 2: 451-478.

Fearon, James. 2003. "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country." Journal of Economic Growth,
8 (2): 195-222.

Field, James Alfred. 1931. Essays on Population and Other Papers. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Fogli, Alessandra and Laura Veldkamp. 2011. "Nature or Nurture? Learning and the Geography
of Female Labor Force Participation," Econometrica 79 (4): 1103-1138.

Galor, Oded. 2011. Uni...ed Growth Theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                                 33
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav. 2002. "Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (4): 1133-1191.

Galor, Oded and David N. Weil. 2000. "Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian
Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond." American Economic Review, 90 (4): 806-
828.

Guinnane, Timothy, Barbara S. Okun, and T. James Trussell. 1994. "What do we Know About
the Timing of Historical Fertility Transitions in Europe?" Demography, 31: 1-20.

Ioannides, Yannis M. 2013. From Neighborhoods to Nations. The Economics of Social Interactions.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

La Ferrara, Eliana, Alberto Chong and Suzanne Duryea. 2012. "Soap Operas and Fertility: Evi-
dence from Brazil." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 4 (4): 1-31.

Lecce, Giampaolo and Laura Ogliari. 2019. "Institutional Transplant and Cultural Proximity:
Insights from Nineteenth-Century Prussia", Forthcoming, Journal of Economic History.

Lesthaeghe, Ron J. 1977. The Decline of Belgian Fertility, 1800-1970. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.

Livi-Bacci, Massimo 2001. A Concise History of World Population. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

Manski, Charles F. and Joram Mayshar. 2003. "Private Incentives and Social Interactions: Fertility
Puzzles in Israel", Journal of the European Economic Association, 1 (1): 181­211.

Moav, Omer. 2005. "Cheap Children and the Persistence of Poverty," The Economic Journal, 115
(500), 88-110.

Moheau, Jean-Baptiste. 1778. Recherches et Considérations sur la Population de la France. Paris:
INED and Presses Universitaires de France, 1994 reedition.

Montgomery, Mark R., John B. Casterline, Frank W. Hieland. 1998. "Social Networks and the
Di¤usion of Fertility Control" Population Council, Policy Research Division, Working Paper #119.

Munshi, Kaivan and Jacques Myaux. 2006. "Social Norms and the Fertility Transition." Journal
of Development Economics. 80: 1-38.

Murtin, Fabrice. 2013. "Long-term Determinants of the Demographic Transition, 1870-2000." The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 95 (2): 617-631.

Newson, Lesley, Tom Postmes, S.E.G. Lea, Paul Webley. 2005. "Why Are Modern Families Small?
Toward and Evolutionary and Cultural Explanation for the Demographic Transition." Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 9 (4): 360-375.

                                                34
Newson, Lesley and Peter J. Richerson. 2009. "Why Do People Become Modern? A Darwinian
Explanation." Population and Development Review, 35 (1): 117-158.

Oster, Emily. 2017. "Unobservable Selection and Coe¢ cient Stability: Theory and Validation."
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, forthcoming.

Preston, Samuel H. 1978. The E¤ ects of Infant and Child Mortality on Fertility. London: Academic
Press.

Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. 2005. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed
Human Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Squicciarini, Mara P. and Nico Voigtländer. 2015. "Human Capital and Industrialization: Evidene
from the Age of Enlightenment." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1825-1883.

Spolaore, Enrico. 2014. "Introduction" in Enrico Spolaore (ed.), Culture and Economic Growth.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg. 2009. "The Di¤usion of Development." Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 124 (2): 469-529.

Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg. 2012. "Long-Term Barriers to the International Di¤usion
of Innovations." Chapter 1 in NBER International Seminar On Macroeconomics 2011, edited by
Je¤rey Frankel and Christopher Pissarides, Cambridge (MA): NBER.

Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg. 2013. "How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Develop-
ment?" Journal of Economic Literature, 51 (2): 1-45.

Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg. 2016. "Ancestry, Language and Culture", in Victor
Ginsburgh and Shlomo Weber (eds.), The Palgrave Handbook of Economics and Language, Chapter
6, pp. 174-211, London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Tackett, Timothy. 1986. Religion, Revolution, and Regional Culture in Eighteenth-Century France:
the Ecclesiastic Oath of 1791. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

The Malthusian. 1879. 1 (1): 28.

van de Walle, Étienne. 2005. "Birth Prevention Before the Era of Modern Contraception." Popu-
lation and Societies, 418: 1-4.

Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2013. "How the West "Invented" Fertility Restriction."
American Economic Review, 103 (6): 2227-2264.

Young, Peyton. 2009. "Innovation Di¤usion in Heterogeneous Populations: Contagion, Social
Inuence, and Social Learning." American Economic Review, 99 (5): 1899-1924.

                                               35
                                               Table 1 - Summary Statistics for the Regional Dataset



Panel A. Means and Standard Deviations for the Main Variables of Interest

                    Variable                       # Obs         Mean          Std. Dev.       Min             Max
 Marital Fertility Transition date                     771       1899.096         24.989         1830            1945
 Difference in linguistic nodes to Français            775          7.495           2.827           1               10
 Geodesic distance to Paris (km)                       775       1109.641        714.633        0.000         3977.143
 Ig (1831-1860)                                        184          0.623           0.136       0.321            0.972
 Ig (1861-1890)                                        609          0.664           0.123       0.271            1.001
 Ig (1891-1920)                                        675          0.594           0.129       0.225            0.914
 Ig (1921-1950)                                        766          0.421           0.121       0.086            0.763
 Ig (1950-1970)                                        706          0.336           0.097       0.129            0.714


Panel B. Simple Correlations among the Main Variables of Interest

                                                                                                                 Marital        Difference
                                     Ig              Ig             Ig              Ig              Ig           Fertility     in linguistic
                                 1831-1860       1861-1890      1891-1920       1921-1950       1950-1970       Transition       nodes to
                                                                                                                   date          Français
 Difference in linguistic
                                       0.729           0.514           0.511          0.197          -0.080           0.521                1
 nodes to Français
 Geodesic distance to Paris
                                       0.366           0.089           0.399          0.491          -0.042           0.541           0.373
 (km)
 # of obs.                               184             609             675            766             706              771            775
Note: There are 4 regions with Ig data but no fertility transition dates. These regions, in the Balkans, have too little data to ascertain when the
transition occurred. These regions are Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo in Serbia, Podrinje (a small region of Bosnia) and Zetska (Montenegro).




                                                                         36
                Table 2 - Cross-Regional Regressions for the Marital Fertility Transition Date, with Country Fixed-Effects
                                         (Dependent variable: Marital Fertility Transition Date)

                                       (1)               (2)                   (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                    Univariate        Control for          Control for       Control for       Control for      Control for all
                                                      geography             literacy        pop. density      urbanization
# of different nodes                       2.409             2.363                 3.394             2.593             2.572              4.050
with Français                          (5.30)***        (5.11)***             (8.26)***        (3.51)***          (3.45)***         (5.69)***
Geodesic distance to Paris,                                  0.001               -0.026            -0.006            -0.009              -0.037
km                                                           (0.16)                (1.58)            (0.72)            (0.97)         (1.99)**
Literacy rate, 1880                                                              -0.057                                                  -0.057
                                                                                   (0.93)                                                 (0.67)
Population density,                                                                                -0.101                                -0.002
mid-19th century                                                                                (3.09)***                                 (0.05)
Urbanization rate, 1850                                                                                            -12.516             -11.264
                                                                                                                 (3.11)***              (1.75)*
Constant                               1,889.677         1,872.125           1,871.509         1,870.138         1,870.523          1,861.349
                                     (408.72)***       (345.88)***         (209.30)***       (212.02)***       (192.46)***        (159.43)***
 R2                                         0.70              0.72                0.74              0.72              0.74                  0.76
 # of regions                                771               771                 413               556               441                  298
 (# of countries, 1846 borders)              (25)              (25)                 (9)              (20)              (21)                   (7)
 Standardized Beta (%)                    27.298            26.775              38.748            27.682            27.335              41.922
Notes:
- Robust t-statistics in parentheses: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.
- Country fixed-effects are defined as per 1846 borders.
- Columns (2)-(6) all include additional controls for: Absolute difference in longitudes to Paris, absolute difference in latitudes to Paris,
     dummy=1 if region is barred by a mountain range from France, dummy =1 if region is contiguous with France, dummy =1 if region shares
     at least one sea or ocean with France, dummy =1 if region is landlocked, dummy =1 if region is on an island.




                                                                      37
                       Table 3 - Cross-Regional Regressions, English-French Horserace, with Country Fixed-Effects
                                         (Dependent variable: Marital Fertility Transition Date)
                                                 (1)                       (2)                     (3)                        (4)
                                           Control only for          Control for all        Control for micro-       Control for literacy,
                                          geodesic distance            distances               geography            density, urbanization
# of different nodes with Français                        2.234                     2.274                  2.410                       3.934
                                                     (4.87)***                 (4.96)***               (5.21)***                  (5.49)***
# of different nodes with English                         1.354                     1.336                  1.847                      -0.341
                                                        (1.75)*                   (1.67)*               (2.26)**                       (0.20)
Geodesic distance to London, km                          -0.025                    -0.043                 -0.050                      -0.078
                                                      (2.01)**                  (2.58)**               (2.90)***                  (2.70)***
Geodesic distance to Paris, km                            0.033                     0.043                  0.053                       0.028
                                                     (2.94)***                  (2.41)**               (2.84)***                       (0.70)
Literacy rate, 1880                                                                                                                   -0.086
                                                                                                                                       (1.07)
Population density,                                                                                                                    0.022
mid-19th century                                                                                                                       (0.53)
Urbanization rate, 1850                                                                                                             -12.212
                                                                                                                                     (1.93)*
Constant                                            1,884.775                1,882.509                1,871.968                  1,867.674
                                                  (285.71)***              (268.31)***              (266.92)***                (126.10)***
 R2                                                      0.72                     0.72                     0.72                          0.77
 N                                                        771                      771                      771                          298
 Standardized Beta, France (%)                         25.321                   25.771                   27.305                      40.715
 Standardized Beta, England (%)                         6.558                    6.472                    8.944                       -1.348
Notes:
- Robust t-statistics in parentheses: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
- Country fixed-effects are defined as per 1846 borders.
- Column (2) includes controls for: absolute difference in longitudes to London, absolute difference in latitudes to London, absolute
    difference in longitudes to Paris, absolute difference in latitudes to Paris.
- Columns (3) and (4) include all the controls in column (2) plus: dummy for contiguity to England, dummy for regions that share at least
    one sea or ocean with England, dummy for contiguity to France, dummy for regions that share at least one sea or ocean with France,
    dummy for regions barred by a mountain range to France, dummy for landlocked region, dummy for regions located on an island.
- The broadest sample of 771 regions pertains to the regions of the following 25 countries: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,
    Denmark, England and Wales, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxemburg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
    Portugal, Romania, Russia, Scotland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Yugoslavia.
                                                                       38
                                             Table 4 - Probit Regressions for Fertility Transition
                                          (Dependent variable: fertility transition status indicator)

                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                1841             1861             1881             1901             1921            1941
 # of different nodes                           -0.00002             -0.008          -0.025           -0.022             0.019          0.001
 with Français                                      (0.93)      (2.76)***        (5.44)***        (2.86)***        (3.87)***            (1.07)
 Geodesic distance to Paris,                      0.0001              0.079          -0.048           -1.036             0.197          0.004
 1000 km                                            (0.33)          (1.95)*           (0.46)      (4.80)***            (1.93)*          (0.42)
 Absolute difference in                            -0.032            -6.623          -1.823           27.183          -22.857          -0.120
 longitudes, to Paris                               (0.83)        (2.55)**            (0.28)        (2.05)**       (3.51)***            (0.24)
 Absolute difference in                            -0.016            -9.104         -11.418           48.128          -30.036          -0.969
 latitudes, to Paris                                (0.40)        (2.42)**            (1.43)      (3.02)***        (4.26)***            (1.22)
 Pseudo R2                                            0.61             0.47             0.41            0.32              0.21            0.18
 Standardized Effect of linguistic                 -0.077          -26.495          -52.331          -16.097             6.549          0.204
 distance to Français (%)
Notes:
- t-statistics in parentheses: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
- The dependent variable for year t is defined as 1 is a region has undergone the fertility transition by year t (defined as having attained a
    10% decline in Ig by date t, as in Coale and Watkins, 1986), zero otherwise.
- The table reports probit marginal effect. The standardized effect is equal to the probit marginal effect multiplied by the standard
    deviation of linguistic distance to Français, divided by the mean of the dependent variable.
- Regressions are based on a balanced sample of 771 regions from 25 countries: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
    England and Wales, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxemburg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
    Romania, Russia, Scotland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Yugoslavia.




                                                                      39
                              Table 5 - Cross-Regional Regressions for Ig through Time, with Country Fixed-Effects
                                               (Dependent variable: Index of Marital Fertility, Ig)

                                             (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)
                                          Period 1           Period 3           Period 5          Period 7          Period 9         Period 11
                                        (1831-1860)        (1851-1880)        (1871-1900)       (1891-1920)       (1911-1940)       (1931-1960)
  # of different nodes                         16.299             23.346             22.183            20.105            12.858            7.601
  with Français                            (4.24)***          (12.53)***         (11.57)***        (9.66)***          (6.68)***        (4.74)***
  Geodesic distance                              0.142              0.068              0.006             0.018            -0.008          -0.022
  to Paris, km                                   (0.55)             (1.02)             (0.10)            (0.28)            (0.25)          (0.77)
  Constant                                    578.165            494.478            468.778           375.595            55.956          191.099
                                            (5.46)***         (12.08)***         (11.66)***         (8.78)***              (1.04)      (4.59)***
 R-squared                                         0.69               0.69               0.61              0.59              0.65            0.64
 # of regions                                      184                531                659               675               766             748
 (# of countries, 1946 borders)                      (5)              (20)               (24)              (25)              (25)            (24)
 Standardized Beta on linguistic               41.074             54.865             49.900            43.141            26.431           18.354
 distance from Français (%)
 Standardized Beta (%), common               -                  -                 49.548             43.218             26.978             17.980
 sample of 630 regions (*)
Notes:
- t-statistics in parentheses: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
- All regressions include additional controls for: Absolute difference in longitudes to Paris, absolute difference in latitudes to Paris, dummy
   =1 if region is barred from France by a mountain range, dummy for contiguity to France, dummy if region shares at least one sea or ocean
   with France, dummy for landlocked region, dummy for region being on an island.
- Country fixed-effects are period-specific due to changing borders.
- Ig was multiplied by 1,000 for readability of the estimates.
- In terms of their 1946 borders, countries to which regions in the sample belong are as follows:
        - Column (1): Denmark, England and Wales, France, Netherlands, Switzerland.
        - Column (2): as in column (1) plus: Austria, Belgium, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Poland, Russia, Scotland, Sweden,
            Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, Yugoslavia.
        - Column (3): as in column (2) plus Greece, Luxemburg, Portugal, Spain.
        - Columns (4) and (5): as in columns (3) plus Bulgaria.
        - Column (6): as in columns (4) and (5) minus Czechoslovakia.
- (*): Common sample of 630 regions from the following 23 countries: Austria, Luxemburg, Belgium, Denmark, England and Wales, Finland,
   France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Scotland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Hungary,
   Romania, Yugoslavia.

                                                                         40
                         Table 6 - Ig Regressions with Country Fixed-Effects and Additional Controls, Period 5 (1871-1900)
                                                (Dependent variable: Index of Marital Fertility, Ig)
                                              (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
                                            Infant          Population      Urbanization        Literacy        All but IMR       All additional
                                           Mortality         Density           Rate                                                  controls
 # of different nodes with                      25.223           15.741           14.580             27.289           19.883               26.135
 Français                                    (8.78)***        (6.31)***        (5.55)***         (12.36)***        (6.16)***           (4.58)***
 Geodesic distance to Paris,                      0.113          -0.037           -0.003             -0.110           -0.072               -0.080
 Km                                              (0.72)           (0.58)           (0.03)             (1.42)           (0.79)               (0.42)
 Infant Mortality Rate                         355.760                                                                                   473.437
                                              (2.16)**                                                                                   (2.10)**
 Population density, mid-                                         -0.015                                               -0.009              -0.006
 19th century                                                  (3.60)***                                              (1.86)*               (0.89)
 Urbanization rate 1850                                                           -101.998                           -64.724            -130.911
 (Bairoch)                                                                       (4.60)***                          (2.04)**             (2.28)**
 Literacy rate in 1880                                                                               -0.728            -0.526              -1.020
                                                                                                   (2.31)**             (1.32)              (1.40)
 Constant                                       357.240          546.746           550.971          378.741          520.362             475.055
                                              (4.17)***       (10.58)***         (8.88)***        (3.98)***        (7.85)***           (5.28)***
 R2                                                0.61             0.64              0.66             0.67               0.66                0.66
 Number of regions                                  285              519               403              408               297                 178
 (Number of countries, 1946 borders)                 (6)             (18)              (18)              (8)                (7)                 (3)
 Standardized Beta on linguistic                 57.520           35.601            33.024           60.697           44.842               59.574
 distance from Français (%)
Notes: - t-statistics in parentheses: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
       - All regressions include additional controls for: Absolute difference in longitudes to Paris, absolute difference in latitudes to Paris,
            dummy=1 if region is barred by a mountain range from France, dummy for contiguity to France, dummy=1 if area shares at least one
            sea or ocean with France, dummy=1 if region is landlocked, dummy=1 if region is on an island.
       - Country fixed effects are defined as per 1886 political borders.
       - In terms of their 1946 borders, countries to which regions in the sample belong are as follows:
                - Column (1): Belgium, Denmark, England and Wales, France, Germany, Switzerland.
                - Columns (2) and (3): Austria, England and Wales, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxemburg, Netherlands,
                    Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Scotland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland.
                - Column (4): Austria, Belgium, England and Wales, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Spain.
                - Column (5): Austria, England and Wales, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Spain
                - Column (6): England and Wales, France, Germany.
                                                                       41
                      Table 7 - Regressions for the Economic Determinants of Fertility, with Country Fixed-Effects
                                         (Dependent variables: As displayed in the second row)

                                                 (1)                      (2)                     (3)                       (4)
                                        Infant Mortality Rate     Population Density          Urbanization               Literacy
                                        Period 5 (1871-1900)      (mid 19th century)             1850                      1880
 # of different nodes with                              0.003                 -14.447                   -0.005                   -0.260
 Français                                           (2.82)***                   (0.54)                   (0.87)                   (0.72)
 Geodesic distance to Paris,                           0.0003                  -0.872                   0.0001                   -0.041
 km                                                 (4.71)***                   (1.28)                   (0.01)               (3.28)***
 Constant                                               0.144                 386.154                    0.082                   99.229
                                                    (6.87)***                   (0.70)                   (0.57)               (6.83)***
 R2                                                       0.45                    0.02                     0.24                     0.74
 Number of regions                                        285                     520                      404                      410
 (Number of countries)                                      (6)                   (19)                     (19)                       (8)
 Standardized Beta on linguistic                       20.662                  -4.663                   -9.815                   -3.669
 distance from Français (%)
Notes:
- t-statistics in parentheses: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
- All regressions include additional controls for: Absolute difference in longitudes to Paris, absolute difference in latitudes to Paris,
    dummy=1 if region is barred by a mountain range from France, dummy for contiguity to France, dummy=1 if area shares at least one sea
    or ocean with France, dummy=1 if region is landlocked, dummy=1 if region is on an island. Country fixed effects are defined as per 1886
    political borders.
- In terms of their 1886 borders, countries to which regions in the sample belong are as follows:
        - Column (1): Belgium, Denmark, England and Wales, France, Germany, Switzerland.
        - Columns (2) and (3): Austria, England and Wales, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxemburg,
             Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Scotland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland.
        - Column (4): Austria, Belgium, England and Wales, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Spain.




                                                                   42
                          Table 8 - Regional Regressions for Ig, Horserace with England, with Country Fixed-Effects
                                               (Dependent variable: Index of Marital Fertility, Ig)
                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)              (6)
                                               Period 1         Period 3         Period 5         Period 7        Period 9        Period 11
                                             (1831-1860)      (1851-1880)      (1871-1900)      (1891-1920)     (1911-1940)      (1931-1960)
 # of different nodes with                         18.015           24.092           22.816           21.718          14.114            9.423
 Français                                       (4.21)***       (11.78)***       (11.24)***        (9.89)***       (6.86)***        (5.50)***
 # of different nodes with                           7.313            4.432            6.689          15.703            9.368          14.040
 English                                             (0.60)           (0.82)           (1.21)      (2.64)***            (1.63)      (2.86)***
 Geodesic distance to Paris,                         0.378            0.329            0.383            0.420           0.132           0.052
 km                                                  (1.39)      (2.97)***        (3.72)***        (3.75)***            (1.48)          (0.70)
 Geodesic distance to London,                       -0.827           -0.401           -0.450           -0.439          -0.162          -0.089
 km                                             (3.58)***        (3.85)***        (4.66)***        (4.18)***        (2.02)**            (1.34)
 Constant                                         595.511          470.479          490.791          381.398          35.103          157.904
                                                (5.53)***       (10.64)***       (10.96)***        (7.96)***            (0.62)      (3.55)***
 R2                                                    0.72             0.71             0.63            0.61             0.66            0.66
 Number of regions                                     184              531              659              675             766             748
 Standardized Beta, linguistic distance to         45.398           56.619           51.325           46.601          29.015           22.755
 France (%)
 Standardized Beta, linguistic distance to          5.078             3.608             5.692          13.398            7.982           13.360
 England (%)
Notes: - t-statistics in parentheses: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
       - All regressions include additional controls for: Absolute difference in longitudes to Paris, absolute difference in longitudes to
          London, absolute difference in latitudes to Paris, absolute difference in latitudes to London, dummy for contiguity to France,
          dummy for contiguity to England, dummy=1 if area shares at least one sea or ocean with France, dummy=1 if area shares at least
          one sea or ocean with England, dummy=1 if region is landlocked, dummy=1 if region is on an island, dummy=1 if region is barred by
          a mountain range from France.
       - Country fixed-effects are period-specific due to changing borders.
       - Ig was multiplied by 1000 for readability of the estimates.
       - In terms of their 1946 borders, countries to which regions belong are as follows:
              - Column (1): 5 countries as follows: Denmark, England and Wales, France, Netherlands, Switzerland.
              - Column (2): 20 countries as follows: as in column (1) plus: Austria, Belgium, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway,
                  Poland, Russia, Scotland, Sweden, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, Yugoslavia.
              - Column (3): 24 countries as follows: as in column (2) plus Greece, Luxemburg, Portugal and Spain.
              - Columns (4) and (5): 25 countries as follows: as in column (3) plus Bulgaria.
              - Column (6): 24 countries as follows: as in columns (4) and (5) minus Czechoslovakia.
                                                                      43
Figure 1 ­ Map of the Fertility Transition Dates
      (Source: Coale and Watkins, 1986)
          Figure 2  Cumulative Distribution of Fertility Transition Dates 
100%


90%


80%


70%


60%


50%


40%


30%


20%


10%


 0%
   1830   1845      1860      1875       1890       1905      1920       1935   1950
                   Figure 3  Standardized Effect of Linguistic Distance to Français on the Probability of 
                                Having Experienced the Fertility Transition (95% CI in grey)
20

10

 0

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

-70

-80




      1831
                   1841
                               1851
                                            1861
                                                         1871
                                                                      1881
                                                                                   1891
                                                                                               1901
                                                                                                            1911
                                                                                                                         1921
                                                                                                                                      1931
                                                                                                                                                1941




        This chart depicts the standardized effect of linguistic distance to Français on the probability of having experienced the fertility 
        transition, defined by a 10% decline in Ig, prior to the date on the xaxis. Estimates are obtained from crosssectional probit 
        specifications run at periodic dates between 1831 and 1941 in a balanced sample of 771 European regions.
             Figure 4: Standardized Effect of Linguistic Distance to Français on Ig, 
                     common sample (95% CI in grey; 30 year bandwidth)
 70


 60


 50


 40


 30


 20


 10


  0
 18611890     18711900      18811910      18911920     19011930      19111940     19211950      19311960     19411970

This chart depicts the standardized effect of linguistic distance to Français on marital fertility (Ig) through time, in 
overlapping samples of 30 years depicted on the xaxis. The sample is a balanced sample of 519 European 
regions.
