                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  EMPLOYER LEARNING AND THE DYNAMICS OF RETURNS TO UNIVERSITIES:
 EVIDENCE FROM CHINESE ELITE EDUCATION DURING UNIVERSITY EXPANSION

                                        Sylvie Démurger
                                        Eric A. Hanushek
                                            Lei Zhang

                                       Working Paper 25955
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25955


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We thank Jerome Adda, Yuan Jiang, Mark Rosenzweig, Michael Waldman, Jing Zhang, and Junsen
Zhang for helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sylvie Démurger, Eric A. Hanushek, and Lei Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Employer Learning and the Dynamics of Returns to Universities: Evidence from Chinese
Elite Education during University Expansion
Sylvie Démurger, Eric A. Hanushek, and Lei Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 25955
June 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. I20,I23,J2

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the return to an elite university education over a college graduate's career in contemporary
China. We find a substantial premium for graduating from an elite Chinese university at the job entry
that declines quickly in early career before starting to recover subsequently. This pattern is entirely
driven by the post-expansion cohorts who entered college after the higher education expansion that
started in 1999. It is more pronounced in coastal provinces and in economically more developed regions,
where individual skills are highly rewarded in the labor market. Both male and female elite college
graduates experience the same dynamic pattern of the elite premium, but individual skills are much
more rewarded over the entire career for females than males. The results are consistent with predictions
of asymmetric employer learning models, both at the job entry and at the mid-career when individuals
are up for promotions.


Sylvie Démurger                                         Lei Zhang
Groupe d'Analyse et de Théorie Economique               Antai College of Economics and Management
University of Lyon - CNRS                               Shanghai Jiao Tong University
93, chemin des Mouilles - B.P.167                       1954 Huashan Road
Ecully Cedex 69131                                      Shanghai, 200030
France                                                  P. R. China
sylvie.demurger@cnrs.fr                                 zlei89@gmail.com

Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu
1          Introduction

           While no one doubts that colleges and universities differ in quality, often defined by faculty
research, there is less understanding of the implications of any quality differentials for students.
Understanding differential returns to college quality proves to be a difficult research question, but this
does not stop students: as college attendance expands, competition to get into the elite universities also
intensifies. A particularly attractive laboratory for investigating the college quality-student outcome
nexus is modern China that combines a dramatic expansion of universities with both a recognized
identification of elite universities and a responsive labor market. Investigation of the impact of China's
elite universities provides insights not only about the operation of its dynamic labor market but also about
the role of employer learning in determining labor market outcomes.
           A central problem in understanding the labor market outcomes of universities is separating the
impact of the university from the selection of students into them. A second frequent problem is the
difficulty of obtaining career information for a representative sample of graduates from different
universities. And a third issue is changing overall college attendance rates that alter the labor market for
college graduates over time. This research addresses each of these challenges.
           We evaluate the economic return to attending elite Chinese universities. We focus particularly on
the dynamics of the college quality wage premium i.e., how it changes with labor market experience (the
experience profile) and how it varies over time for different cohorts (the intertemporal profile). Much of
the attention to the Chinese economy focuses on the huge shifts of industries with substantial changes in
technologies. In the background, however, the labor market in China has undergone a tremendous
transformation following the massive expansion of higher education since the late 1990s (Knight, Deng,
and Li (2017)). The surge in the supply of the college-educated labor force clearly alters the dynamics of
returns to college quality both over individual careers and across age cohorts.
           We use the 2013 urban sample from the China Household Income Project (CHIP) survey to
construct work histories for a panel of fulltime workers. We find a significant premium at job entry for
graduating from an elite university, but this premium declines quickly in the first few years on the job
before starting to rise again in a subsequent career phase. These dynamics are entirely driven by the
recent cohorts of students entering college under the regime of higher education expansion, suggesting an
increasing importance of college quality with the surge in college graduates. This pattern, which is
independent of the returns to cognitive skills, is most pronounced in economically more developed
regions.




                                                        1
        In the post-expansion cohort, males earn a labor market premium, but this male premium is
comparatively less for elite college graduates and for more skilled workers. The gender patterns are not
explained by differences in the industry, occupation, or sector of employment (government, institutions,
SOEs, etc.) of male and female college graduates.
        After reviewing related research in the next section, we describe the underlying conceptual
framework and the data base in Section 3. The empirical results in Section 4 include a series of
specification analyses and robustness checks, while Section 5 provides details of female earnings.
Conclusions are presented in Section 6.


2. Related Research
        Estimation of the returns to college quality is heavily weighted toward U.S. experiences. Black
and Smith (2004, 2006), Zhang (2009), and Hoekstra (2009), to name just a few, find significant wage
premia associated with attending an elite U.S. university, and Dale and Krueger (2002, 2014) find that
black, Hispanic, and low-income students earn significantly more if they have attended more selective
colleges. Internationally, Broecke (2012) and Anelli (2016) find similar results for the UK and Italy,
respectively. Using Chilean data, Kaufmann, Messner, and Solis (2015) find significant positive impacts
on the marital outcome of women attending an elite university and on the academic performance of
children whose parents attend an elite university. Also for Chile, Hastings, Neilson, and Zimmerman
(2014) and Zimmerman (2019), using regression discontinuity methods, find significant labor market
returns to selective colleges.
        Studies for China are quite limited. Li, Meng, Shi, and Wu (2012) and Jia and Li (2019), using
data from job offers of college students just prior to graduation, show that graduates of elite universities in
2010-2015 experience a sizable wage premium at labor force entry. Kang, Peng, and Zhu (2018), using
data from the 2014 China Family Panel Studies (CFPS), demonstrate that wage patterns for graduates
differ by subject studied and by college quality tier. These studies are unable, however, to describe either
the dynamics of the elite premium or the impact of the sharp changes in the college labor market. 1
        The most relevant literature that goes beyond the average quality premium described above is that
of employer learning about worker productivity. In the employer learning models of Farber and Gibbons
(1996) and Altonji and Pierret (2001), employers have limited information about workers' productivity at
entry into the labor market. Employers use easily observable characteristics such as the education level


1
 Zhong (2011), using data from the 2002 China Household Income Project (CHIP), finds that wages vary by the
subjective rankings of colleges and universities but returns are not monotonically related to the five quality
categories (from poor to very good) obtained from individual survey responses.


                                                        2
that are believed to be correlated with productivity for initial hiring and wage decisions, but they rely less
on such proxies for setting wages as they accumulate more information about workers' true productivity.
Testing this theory with U.S. data, both find that the returns to cognitive skills (initially unobserved to the
employer) increase over the worker's career, and Altonji and Pierret (2001) additionally find that the
return to each year of education (readily observed initially) decreases over the worker's career.
Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo (2010), however, suggest that U.S. employers get sufficient information
from college applicants but that the general learning model holds for high school graduates. Mansour
(2012) finds that employer learning about worker skills differs substantially by occupation. More
recently, Castex and Dechter (2014) find higher returns over time to educational attainment and lower
returns to cognitive skills in the U.S., a pattern they attribute to slower technological growth in recent
periods. A few international papers have also documented that college prestige serves as an entry signal
that becomes less important throughout workers' careers (Lang and Siniver (2011) for Israel; Bordon and
Braga (2017) for Chile).
         These learning models assume symmetric learning such that current and prospective employers
learn about individual productivity equally well over time, and hence education only has a signaling value
at labor market entry. A recent strand of literature, however, emphasizes asymmetric learning after the
labor market entry. If current employers have more information about a worker's ability than the general
labor market, education may play a signaling role later in the career through, for example, subsequent
promotions and associated wage premia (Bernhardt (1995); Schönberg (2007); DeVaro and Waldman
(2012); Waldman (2016)). 2
         A final area of relevant research is how labor market dynamics may play out in male-female wage
differences. Though we do not focus here on gender wage gaps, the literature on these gaps, notably
among high-skilled workers, 3 suggests a number of mechanisms by which college tiers may be
differentially important for males and for females. First, if men and women sort differently across firms
and if in the vein of Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) there are firm-specific pay premia, we may
observe gender differences in both the initial college quality premium and its dynamics (Card, Cardoso,
and Kline (2016)). For example, sorting of women into occupations, jobs, and workplaces that are more


2
  The gist of the asymmetric learning and the signaling value of education in promotion is that a worker's current
employer learns privately about the worker's abilities, whereas prospective employers try to infer information about
the worker by observing the actions of the current employer. A promotion signals higher ability, and prospective
employers will bid more for a promoted worker, which prompts the current employer to offer a large wage raise to
this worker. Thus firms generally promote less than the efficient level to avoid paying the wage premium associated
with promotions. More highly educated workers are favored in the promotion process because the wage premium
due to the promotion signal is smaller for such workers (Waldman (2016)).
3
  Part of the literature particularly documents glass-ceiling patterns, and their explanation, in OECD countries. See
Blau and Kahn (2017) for a detailed literature review on gender wage gaps.

                                                          3
family-friendly could induce gender-specific wage dynamics. Moreover, within similar firms, the
earnings dynamics may also differ by gender for various reasons including taste-based or statistical
discrimination (Altonji and Blank (1999)), gender differences in human capital accumulation, or gender
differences in negotiation skills or the willingness to compete (Hotz, Johansson, and Karimi (2018)).
           These labor market forces combine to produce what we call the "experience profile" for any
college quality premium, i.e., the pattern of the premium as it evolves over the working career.


3          Data and Analytical Structure
           Our analytical approach is motivated by this prior work indicating that employers take quality
signals from the prestige of the college but that they subsequently update these estimates of worker skills
based on performance. The application of these ideas must however take into account the rich nature of
the Chinese labor market experience with its rapidly evolving labor market and a dramatically changing
schooling system.

           For Chinese college graduates, the quality tier of their college constitutes a widely-used and
observable proxy for labor market skills. Graduates of elite universities are deemed either to have higher
innate ability (signaling model) or to have acquired more human capital in the richer learning
environment of the elite universities (human capital model). Which of the two mechanisms (the selection
of individuals with high cognitive skills versus the production of skills by schools) is behind the higher
skills of elite college graduates is not identified from labor market data. Yet, for our purposes, the
underlying mechanism does not matter. Our interest here is in how these skills, both innate and learned,
play out in the labor market.

3.1        The Chinese Context
           China's unprecedented higher education expansion began in 1999. 4 Nationwide, as shown in the
top panel of Figure 1, college admission rates increased by over 40 percent in both 1999 and 2000 and
then continued to grow at more than 10 percent per year through 2005. Because almost all college
students graduate, the lower panel of Figure 1 shows that the sharp expansion in admission translated into
large increases in the number of 4-year college graduates, starting in 2003. The number of 4-year college
graduates doubled between 1999 and 2003 and quadrupled by 2007.
           Figure 2 displays the changing distribution of admissions by college types, something that is
particularly relevant for the analysis here. 5 The vast majority of increased college admission is found in



4
    See Che and Zhang (2018) for a detailed description of the reform of the higher education system.
5
    Due to limited access, we have data only for the period of 1998 to 2006.

                                                           4
ordinary 4-year and 3-year colleges, which jumped from less than 750,000 new students in 1998 to 4.5
million in 2006. At the same time, admission to elite 4-year universities remained virtually unchanged
after 2000, increasing by at most a few thousand each year to reach just over 400,000 in 2006. The
difference in admission growth translates into a growing proportion of graduates from ordinary
universities. As a consequence, we may expect a relatively larger role played over time by the college tier
in signaling one's ability at job entry with potentially larger adjustments as employers learn about
individual productivity. This changing component of the evolution in returns is what we call the
"intertemporal profile" of the college quality premium.
         The labor market dynamics of course depend not only on the supply of varying quality graduates
but also on the demand for them. As is well-known, the Chinese economy has evolved dramatically over
the past few decades leading to considerable heterogeneity in demand both by sectors and by
geographical regions. These dynamics may be more salient for individuals working in the private sector
or in regions that experience more marketization than for those working in the public sector or in less
market-oriented regions.


3.2      2013 China Household Income Project (CHIP) Survey Data
         The 2013 China Household Income Project (CHIP) survey provides high quality data on
employment and background for a representative sample of the Chinese urban population from 14
provinces. 6 It contains detailed information on individual characteristics including gender, age, education
attainment, quality tier of college, year, province, subject of study, and score on college entrance exam
(Gaokao). The labor market information includes current salary, working hours, industry, sector,
occupation, and starting year and salary at the current job.
         Importantly, the job history information allows us to construct labor market histories with current
and starting monthly wages for the 2013 job. Monthly wage in 2013 is annual income divided by months
worked during 2013, and the survey reports directly monthly salary at the start of the current job. 7 All
monetary values are CPI-adjusted to be measured in constant 2013 Yuan. 8
         Our primary sample includes all four-year college graduates who are working full-time (at least 6
hours per day and 20 days per month). We define our post-expansion cohort as individuals born in 1980



6
  The 14 provinces include coastal, central, and western provinces at different stages of development, and they are
sampled to represent the overall economic development of China.
7
  Using hourly wage in the empirical analysis yields similar results.
8
  Regional and time price variations are accounted for by adjusting all monetary values for provincial purchasing
power differences, calculated from the urban provincial-level spatial price deflators computed by Brandt and Holz
(2006), and updated to 2013.

                                                          5
or later. They were admitted to college after the start of the higher education expansion in 1999 and
entered the labor market along with a substantially larger number of college graduates. 9
        The 2013 CHIP survey elicits self-reported information on each individual's university type and
college entrance exam (Gaokao) score. The raw Gaokao scores differ by year-province-subject (sciences
v. humanities) and are not directly comparable. We normalize them in two steps. First, because the
maximum possible score varies with the specific test, we divide individual scores by the maximum
possible score of each specific test. 10 We assume that the population distributions are comparable over
time and across provinces and subjects, which allows us to convert this percentage score into a z-score
with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. In the regression analyses we use the Gaokao z-
score as a measure of individual cognitive skills, much like AFQT scores are used in U.S. studies (Altonji
and Pierret (2001) and Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo (2010)).
        Elite universities are defined as the Project-211 universities designated by the Ministry of
Education (MOE) of China. 11 These Tier-1 universities are directly under the administration of the MOE
and comprised 116 out of the more than 2,000 institutions of higher education in China in 2006. They
receive substantially more funding and are able to hire higher-quality faculty than ordinary universities.
As one simple measure, the gap between elite universities and ordinary universities in the average share
of faculty holding a PhD degree soared from 8 percentage points in 1998 to 22 percentage points in 2006
(see Figure 3). Elite universities are highly selective and only admit students with a Gaokao score above
a threshold that is year-province-subject specific.
        The distribution by educational attainment of fulltime workers in the 2013 CHIP sample is shown
in Table 1. Although we are focused on college graduates, we report statistics for all full time workers to
highlight the trend in increasing education attainment. Consistent with our subsequent analysis, we
divide the population into pre-expansion workers (born up to 1979) and post-expansion workers (born
after 1979).
        As seen in Panel A, educational attainment in China has increased significantly: full-time workers
with less than a high school education in the post-expansion cohort are about half that of the pre-


9
  The pre-expansion cohort is individuals born between 1954 and 1979. Results are not sensitive to using 1981 as
the cut-off year for defining cohorts.
10
   For example, the maximum possible score was 640 for the humanity-oriented test and 710 for the science-oriented
test in 1989 for all provinces. It was changed to 750 in 1994 for both tests nationwide. Starting in 1999, several
provinces, such as Fujian, Guangdong, Shaanxi, and Hainan adopted different tests with a maximum possible score
of 900 for both tests. There are larger cross-province variations in more recent years as more provinces started to
experiment different test regimes. The maximum possible score is obtained from various Gaokao-related websites
such as http://edu.sina.com.cn/Gaokao/. It is missing for a small number of years and provinces, and individual
observations are therefore dropped for these years and provinces.
11
   See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_211 [accessed April 17, 2020]


                                                         6
expansion cohort (16.5 percent v 35.1 percent). With the higher education expansion from 1999 onwards,
33 percent of the post-expansion cohort has at least a 4-year college degree, an 80 percent increase over
the pre-expansion cohort. While fewer females of the pre-expansion cohort are college-educated, females
of the post-expansion cohort surpass males by more than 6 percentage points. Nevertheless, fewer females
still graduate from an elite university.
         Panel B reports public sector employment shares by education level. 12 Except perhaps at the
lowest education levels, public employment drops across the education distribution, consistent with the
growth of the private sector over the past 20 years. Similar patterns hold if employment in state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) is excluded (col. 4-6), assuming SOEs are also subject to similar, albeit lesser, market
forces than purely private firms. Post-expansion elite university graduates are relatively more likely than
other university graduates to enter public service or other governmental institutions, thus being more
protected from private market forces.
         Figure 4 plots the density of the Gaokao z-score by cohort and college quality tier. Two things
are interesting about these distributions. First, while the means differ across the two college sectors, there
is considerable score overlap between the elite and the ordinary universities. Knowing somebody
graduated from an elite university implies a higher average score but does not mean the person is
necessarily at the top of ability distribution. Second, on average there is a significantly larger disparity in
the Gaokao score between graduates of the elite and ordinary universities for the post-expansion cohort;
the means are 0.89 and 0.29 for the post-expansion cohort and 0.77 and 0.45 for the pre-expansion cohort,
respectively. These distributional patterns suggest both that there is scope for employer learning about
individual skills and that the dynamics might be quite different over time.

3.3      Empirical Models
         The focus of our empirical model is how the wages of college graduates attending an elite
university evolve over their careers relative to their peers attending an ordinary university. We start by
replicating the basic analysis of average returns to graduates from an elite institution, paralleling the most
common approach in the literature, and then move to the dynamics.

Average Returns to University Quality
         The standard approach for identifying the average returns to college quality is estimation of an
augmented Mincer equation such as:




12
   Public sector includes government agencies, all public schools/universities, hospitals, other public institutions, and
state-owned enterprises (SOEs); private sector includes all other employers, i.e., firms and non-farm small
businesses of all ownerships except for SOEs.

                                                           7
                               =
                              ln( wage j )  +  1 PE j +  2 PE 2
                                                              j +  X j +  elite j +  j                             (1)
In this simplest form (Eq. 1), ln(wagej) is the natural logarithm of monthly wage of individual j; PE
(=age-years of schooling-6) is years of potential experience in the labor market; X is a vector of control
variables; elite is an indicator equal to 1 for a graduate of an elite university and 0 otherwise; and  is a
stochastic error term.  gives the average returns to attending an elite university. In a more sophisticated

version, some measure of individual ability, Aj , is added in an attempt to purge  of the selection into

the elite schools.

Dynamic Returns to University Quality
           To estimate the dynamics of the college tier premium, we modify Eq. 1:

                        ln( wage j ) =  +  1 PE j +  2 PE 2
                                                          j +  X j +  A j + f PE (elite j ) +  j                   (2)

We allow the impact of elite schools to change over the career, and we add an ability measure, Aj .

Historically, ability, measured using a cognitive skills test, has been interpreted as an indicator of true
productivity that is observed imperfectly by the employer and thus enters into the estimation of employer
learning (Altonji and Pierret (2001), Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo (2010)).
           We start with a convenient characterization of the experience profile for the premium for elite
university graduation. We model the time path of the premium as a quadratic function in potential
experience as in Eq. 3.
                               f PE (elitei ) = 0 + 1 (elite j × PE j ) +  2 (elite j × PE 2
                                                                                           j)                      (3)

 0 measures the elite premium at job entry; 1 and 2 reflect how this premium varies over one's career
and are our estimates of the experience profile reflecting employer learning about individual productivity.
This specification differs from the linear model used by Altonji and Pierret (2001), Lang and Siniver
(2011), and other papers. If the labor market is characterized by symmetric employer learning with a
strong signaling value of an elite education, we expect f PE (elite j ) to decline monotonically. 13 If however

learning is asymmetric and an elite education has signaling values later in the career, for example, due to
higher probability of promotion and the accompanied large wage raise, we expect 2 to be non-zero and
likely positive. We also estimate Eq. 2 using other functional forms for f PE (elite j ) ; in particular, we

more flexibly estimate the experience profile of the premium with a stepwise function for years of
potential experience.




13
     In our quadratic formulation of Eq. 3, this would be consistent with 1 being negative and 2 being small or zero.

                                                             8
        For the estimation, we use the survey information to construct retrospective work histories for all
individuals, which allows us to include observations for the starting year of employment with the current
firm along with employment information for the current (2013) year. We thus track the dynamics of
wages for workers across different phases of the education and economic development of China. The use
of recall data for starting salary may introduce measurement error, which is possibly larger for the older
cohort. While we cannot test it, we believe recall error is likely less problematic here because people
might be expected to remember the first salary at the job entry (or the first salary after a job change) more
accurately than other (more recent) earnings. Differential measurement error may nonetheless contribute
to the different results for employer learning across age cohorts.
        The main challenge in interpreting the experience profile estimated from Eq. 2 is the potential
contamination from secular changes in the returns to an elite university education. Since calendar time is
positively correlated with experience, people with longer experience are generally older and have entered
the labor market in earlier years. In a simple regression without controlling for secular changes, 1 and 2
may reflect the exogenous changes in the return to an elite university education over time in addition to
any change in the return over a worker's career from employer learning.
        Several concerns about secular changes in the Chinese labor market must be dealt with. First,
with the growth of the Chinese economy and the increasing adoption of skill-biased technologies, the
overall returns to the greater skills of elite university graduates may be larger in recent years due to
increased demand for highly skilled workers. As a result, an estimated decline in returns to an elite
university education by individual experience may be capturing the lower relative demand for skills in
earlier years. This is a particular concern when comparing returns between the pre- and post-expansion
cohorts. 14 Second, as discussed above, the dramatic expansion of college graduates after 1999 could
clearly alter the overall labor market for graduates. Third, China is a large and heterogeneous country,
where both industry and university concentrations can follow significantly different time patterns across
cities and provinces. 15
        To deal with these facets of the labor market, we incorporate an estimate of exogenous labor
market conditions that directly affects educational demand in each province and year. The measure of
labor market conditions we construct is generated by the expansion of college workers over time and by
the varying relative demand for education levels across industries. We also separately estimate the wage
model for pre- and post-expansion cohorts.


14
  For a discussion of changing returns over time in China, see Liu (1998) and Zhang, Zhao, Park, and Song (2005).
15
  Of lesser importance, wages of workers who started working during the years of the planned economy saw
compressed wage structures, which could interact with career wage patterns for older workers. Our pre-expansion
sample, however, includes less than 20 percent of workers who entered their job during that period.

                                                        9
        Chinese economic policies over the relevant period provide the basis for constructing an
exogenous measure of labor market conditions affecting educated workers. China's industrial
development, at both national and regional levels, has been strongly shaped by the continued
implementation of industrial policies during the entire economic reform period. 16 These policies have
appealed to the Chinese government because they allow the government to maintain a strong control in
resource allocation through administrative approvals (Wu (2018); Jiang and Li (2018); Aghion et al.
(2015); Heilmann and Shih (2013)). Specifically, since 1989, the State Council has regularly issued and
updated general guidelines and detailed catalogues specifying industries, products, production scales, and
production processes that are encouraged, restricted, or marked to be eliminated. The encouraged
industries receive fast-track project approvals, land appropriations, bank loans, tax subsidies, and price
subsidies in electricity, transportation, and raw materials. The resulting production organization
determines to a large extent technologies that are adopted and hence employment composition in each
industry at a given period. 17
        The central government's guidelines help shape regional industrial structure primarily for two
reasons. First, the emphasis on production scale and agglomeration implies that large, incumbent firms
are favored and new firms face high entry barriers. Thus, provinces that already have large firms in
encouraged industries have greater advantages in expanding further, and vice versa. Second, the
guidelines also stipulate regional industrial development priorities. For example, provinces in the central
region have been encouraged to develop modern agricultural production and natural resource-intensive
manufacturing industries in accordance with their endowments, whereas coastal provinces have been
encouraged to continue to expand and upgrade export-oriented industries.
        Our measure of relevant local conditions in the labor market follows a Bartik-type projection that
combines the nationwide educational distribution by industry with province-specific industrial
employment composition (see Bartik (1991), Blanchard and Katz (1992)). We construct a series of time-
varying province-specific educational demands for both high school and university graduates.
Specifically, the projected provincial employment for workers with education level k in province r in year
                                                                                                       k
  ^ k ) is the nationwide fraction of employees with education level k in industry i in year t ( L / L )
t(Ert                                                                                             it  it


weighted by the province-specific distribution of local employment by industry ( lirt / lrt ):




16
   China's industrial policies are modelled on similar policies adopted by the Japanese government in the 1950s and
1960s, which provided various government supports to targeted industries, in particular large firms in the name of
economies of scale (Beason and Weinstein (1996)).
17
   Che and Zhang (2018) document that subsequent to the higher education expansion, firms in the manufacturing
sector employ more college-educated workers and are able to adopt more advanced technologies.

                                                        10
                                                         lirt Lk
                                               ^k
                                               E
                                               =rt     i l
                                                              × it
                                                               Lit
                                                                                                                  (4)
                                                           rt

                                                           k
The nationwide education composition by industry ( Lit / Lit ) captures both the relative supply of labor

force with different education levels and the contemporaneous demand for workers with the different
skills relevant to the technology each industry is using at a given point in time. The province-industry

weights ( lirt / lrt ) then aggregate the demand for different types of skills in a province based on the local

industrial structure.
                                                               ^ k , provides an exogenous portrait of how
         In the cross-section, our local skill demand measure, Ert

differing industrial compositions across provinces imply varying demand for specific skill classes of
workers (defined by education level). Over time, the measure incorporates the expansion of higher
education coupled with the production changes by industries to utilize more skilled workers, and this is
mapped into individual provincial demands. 18
         The Hukou registration system also helps in the identification of the effects of elite education and
of employer learning. China had restricted internal migration through the household registration system
(Hukou) since the 1950s. While barriers to migration have been reduced since the mid-1980s, restrictions
on labor mobility, especially across provinces, remain tight (Au and Henderson (2006); Chan and Zhang
(1999); Chan (2019)). First, without a local Hukou, one is ineligible to work for certain sectors,
industries, and occupations such as, for example, the state sector and monopolistic industries (Au and
Henderson (2006); Song and Li (2013); Ma (2018)). 19 Second, even though people may be hired on
short-term contracts without a local Hukou, they are not eligible for local public services including basic
public education for children, 20 health care, and public pension. Since these programs are administered
by provincial governments, this poses big obstacles for migration across provinces. The Hukou
restrictions appear to have a larger impact on cross-province migration of skilled workers than that of the
unskilled workers (Appleton, Song, and Xia (2014)). Thus, this national Chinese system historically has
acted to limit migration and labor market adjustments outside of industrial development in each province.




18
   Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2019) introduce cautions about identification issues with the use of Bartik
instruments in different settings. The general governmental control of regional industrial allocations in our reduced
form analysis, however, suggests less concern here.
19
   Each year, the government sets quotas of new Hukou and allocates them to employers for them to hire new
college graduates. The allocation favors employers in industries encouraged by the industrial policies. Non-state
sector employers may obtain Hukou quotas if, for example, they are big taxpayers (Ma (2018)).
20
   While basic education is directly financed by city governments, children can only take the college entrance exam
and be admitted to college from the province (based on the province quota) of their Hukou.

                                                         11
           The national industrial intensity of education usage ( Lk
                                                                   it / Lit ) is constructed from the Urban

Household Survey (UHS) which was conducted by the Statistic Bureau of China for 1988-2009. 21 The
survey data are representative of registered residents in the urban area, i.e., people with Hukou and
excluding migrants. Since migrant workers disproportionately work in the informal sector, our
constructed industrial education composition is only for formal sector employees. In a parallel manner,

we construct provincial employment, lirt / lrt , for just formal sector employment from data in various

issues of the China Statistic Yearbook and the China Labor Statistic Yearbook. Since migrant workers in
general have lower education levels, our constructed provincial education composition for formal sector
employees is likely to overestimate the overall percentage of college-educated labor force and
underestimate that of those with low education levels. Nevertheless, the education distribution of the
formal sector employment is most relevant for our study since college educated individuals are highly
concentrated in the formal sector.
           Figure 5 plots the time series of our projected education demand of formal sector employees
nationwide. The fractions with a middle school education and less decrease over the entire period and
become quite flat in the most recent years, while the fraction with a college education or above increases
over time. Interestingly, the fraction stopping with a high school education increases up to the late 1990s
and then declines, concurrent to the implementation of the higher education expansion policy.
           We estimate Eq. 2 for the overall sample and for different cohorts in order to compare how the
dynamics of the college quality premium and returns to individual skills differ before and after the
dramatic increase in the supply of college graduates due to the higher education expansion policy. In
robustness analyses, we further estimate the model for individuals working in different regions and in
different sectors and consider potential gender heterogeneity.


4          Empirical Results
           This section begins with estimates of the average elite-university premium. It then turns to
estimates of the dynamics of the premium with experience using the historical job data for full-time
employees. All regressions control for city fixed effects.

4.1        Average elite premium
           We first estimate a simple Mincer equation (Eq. 1) of log monthly wage using the cross-section
data of the 2013 CHIP and highlight differences for the pre- and post-expansion cohorts. For full-time
employees in 2013, the results in columns 1-3 of Table 2 are broadly consistent with prior estimates of


21
     We extrapolate data for 1980-1987 and 2010-2013.

                                                        12
returns to schooling in the Chinese labor market. The cross-sectional return to each year of schooling is
7.7 percent while being higher for the post-expansion cohort (9.3 percent) than for the pre-expansion
cohort (6.9 percent). Considering nonparametric estimates to each schooling level (columns 4-6), even
though average rates increase, the return to a 4-year university education is smaller for the post-expansion
cohort than for the pre-expansion cohort, consistent with the dramatic increase of workers with tertiary
education.
        We introduce labor market differences related to elite university education and to the Gaokao
score in Table 3. The estimated average return to an elite university education is 10.6 percent for the pre-
expansion cohort and 18.9 percent for the post-expansion cohort. This tremendous increase across cohorts
suggests a much larger role played by college tier in the current labor market and is the starting point of
our empirical analyses in the next sections. Additionally, the return to the Gaokao score is large (0.19)
and significant for the post-expansion cohort, but much smaller and insignificant for the pre-expansion
cohort (0.043). Once Gaokao score is controlled for, the average return to an elite university becomes
insignificant, whereas Gaokao score continues to be a significant determinant of wages. The cross-
sectional results also indicate that neither Gaokao score nor graduating from an elite school has a
systematic impact on earnings for the pre-expansion cohort. At this point, it might be natural to conclude
that graduation from elite universities provides little useful information to the market. 22 But of course the
cross-sectional estimates represent an amalgam of different factors, and the estimated elite effects must be
tracked over the career.

4.2     Dynamics of elite premium and returns to individual skills
        Since the Gaokao score cannot generally be directly observed by the employers, college quality
may play a more critical role in signaling ability for the post-expansion cohort, when the mean differences
across college tiers is large (Figure 4). At the same time, employer learning models suggest that this
signaling role is likely to evolve over the career as individual quality is better observed.
        Table 4 reports the baseline estimates of how returns to an elite university education change with
labor market experience. All estimates are based on the sample of 4-year college graduates where the
constructed employment histories are used to form panel data on the evolution of wages over the current
employment spell. The dependent variable is log wages, and standard errors are clustered by province. 23



22
   These results are similar to those in Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo (2010) who conclude that firms are able to
observe the productive skills of college graduates at hiring and that uncertainty only enters for high school
graduates.
23
   The small number of clusters raises concerns about the best way to estimate standard errors (see Angrist and
Pischke (2009) and Cameron and Miller (2015)). Given the form of our empirical model, it is not feasible to use the
wild cluster resampling, but we report different critical values for the clustered standard errors below.

                                                        13
        The first three columns provide estimates from the most stripped down model of return dynamics,
first for all workers and then separately for the pre-expansion and the post-expansion cohorts. The
estimated coefficient for the elite university dummy reflects the returns to an elite university education at
job entry (  0 ); it is insignificant for the pre-expansion cohort but much larger and statistically significant

for the post-expansion cohort. The interactions between the elite university dummy and the quadratic
function of potential experience describe changes in the elite premium with increased potential
experience. The estimates are close to zero and insignificant for the pre-expansion cohort (col. 2), and
significant, both economically and statistically, for the post-expansion cohort (col. 3). The estimates
indicate a sharp decline in the return to elite universities at the early stage of career, but they do not allow
for other, correlated influences on wages.
        The remaining columns introduce our projected time and province specific employment demand
for educated labor based on the provincial industrial composition (  ). The clearest picture of wage
dynamics is found in column 6. 24 The estimated elite premium at job entry and its subsequent changes
with experience are significant just for the post-expansion cohort, and the magnitude of the estimates is
quite close to those in column 3. 25 The estimates on the linear and quadratic term for the post-expansion
cohort of -0.069 and 0.005 indicate that the premium to an elite university education declines rapidly in
the first six to seven years of the career but recovers to some extent later in the career. 26
        The estimated premium to male workers is 18.9 percent for the pre-expansion cohort, but one
third smaller for the post-expansion cohort. We return to the gender disparity below. The estimates also
indicate that in provinces with a larger demand for skilled labor, wages of college graduates are higher,
and its magnitude is somewhat larger for the pre-expansion cohort.
        Because we focus on the starting salary for the current job, job changing could bias our estimated
dynamics. If elite university graduates are more likely to switch to better-paid jobs in the early stage of
careers, we could underestimate the initial decline in the elite premium, and vice versa if ordinary
university graduates change jobs more often. In our panel, 30 percent of the pre-expansion cohort have




24
   The number of observations reduces slightly for the pre-expansion cohort because the information for creating the
predicted demand for college educated labor force is unavailable for the very early years when some of the oldest
individuals started at their current job. Results in columns 1-2 are robust when we restrict the sample to those in
columns 4-5.
25
   Cameron and Miller (2015) suggest in this case using critical values for t(13), which would imply p-values of
0.0003, 0.024, and 0.027 for estimates on the elite dummy and interactions between the elite dummy and the
potential experience and its square (column 6 of Table 4).
26
   The estimates in Table 4 use all observations. Because of some missing career information (for 54 of the 772
post-expansion workers), this involves an unbalanced panel. If we rely on just the balanced panel, the dynamics of
the elite college premium are qualitatively the same.

                                                         14
changed firms over their careers, with 28 percent for the elite university graduates and 31 percent for the
ordinary university graduates. For the post-expansion cohort, the overall firm-changing rate is 22 percent,
with 16 percent and 23 percent for the elite and the ordinary university graduates respectively. In order to
gauge the potential bias, columns 7 and 8 present estimates for individuals who are still working in their
first firm. The estimates on the interactive terms between the elite dummy and potential experience and its
square are almost identical to those in columns 5 and 6, indicating that our results are not driven by
endogenous firm switching.
        The elite premium for the pre-expansion cohort is small, statistically insignificant, and constant
over the career. Thus, we focus on the post-expansion cohort for the remainder of the analysis in order to
understand better the employer learning component.
        Employers may have access at the hiring point to additional information beyond the applicant's
college tier to help determine wages. While not observed by economists, this may include information
listed in the resume or revealed during interviews such as courses taken, GPA, and professional
certificates obtained. If this information is positively correlated with the university type, the estimated
elite university premium at job entry and its later changes may in part be due to these unmeasured skills,
leading us to overestimate the role played by the university tier in the employer's decisions.
        We introduce the Gaokao score, which we interpret as being partially a measure of skills that
employers may observe or infer at hiring. 27 From the first column of Table 5, when the Gaokao z-score
and interactions with potential experience and its square are added, the estimated elite premium falls by
23 percent (compared to col. 6 in Table 4). 28 The Gaokao z-score is positive and significant both
economically and statistically, and the estimated returns are virtually constant over the career.
Nonetheless, the dynamic pattern of the elite premium over experience remains quite similar to that in
column 6 of Table 4. The results are robust to restricting the sample to individuals who have never
changed firms (column 2).
        Prior individual test scores have been interpreted in much of the employer learning literature as
indicating true but unobserved ability, and the increase in their importance over time is a measure of the
amount of employer learning. Thus, for example, estimating that the earnings impact of AFQT scores is



27
   The Gaokao score has, for example, been found to be positively correlated with college GPA and other
performance measures that employers may elicit at hiring (Li, Meng, Shi, and Wu (2012)).
28
   The number of observations in Table 5 is reduced by about 18 percent because of missing Gaokao z-scores.
About half of the missing Gaokao z-scores comes from missing individual survey data. The other half reflects
missing information on the maximum possible Gaokao score, which is collected from the internet and is needed for
the normalization and comparison of scores. About 10 percent of ordinary university and 5 percent of elite
university graduates, respectively, are missing Gaokao scores. For robustness we estimate the models in Table 4
using the same sample as in Table 5, and the results are statistically indistinguishable.

                                                       15
constant over time for college graduates leads Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo (2010) to conclude that
worker ability is perfectly observed for college graduates. In our estimation, with the separate quality
proxy of graduation from an elite university, the career pattern of the elite premium is a better measure of
the amount of employer learning. 29
         Ceteris paribus, a one standard deviation increase in the Gaokao score is related to a wage
increase of 14.6 percent, and importantly this is not statistically different for graduates of elite and
ordinary universities (col. 3). Additionally, the results still hold when we restrict the sample to
individuals who have never changed firms (col. 4).
         The quadratic estimates in Table 5 indicate that the elite premium declines quite quickly through
about the sixth year of potential experience and then starts to rise (col. 3). As a more flexible alternative,
we estimate the pattern of the elite premium with a stepwise function in potential experience. Figure 6
plots the evolution of the elite premium with the same controls as in column 6 of Table 4. 30 The elite
premium declines quickly up to the fifth year of potential experience, a result consistent with prior
findings in the employer learning literature where most employer learning of worker productivity occurs
quickly. 31 Controlling for Gaokao score reduces the estimated elite premium by roughly 10 percentage
points over the entire career path, consistent with the estimate in Table 5 where returns to measured skills
do not change over the career. 32
         These estimates are not fully consistent with a symmetric learning model. The turnaround of the
elite premium at the mid-career is more consistent with asymmetric learning and a promotion signaling
model (DeVaro and Waldman (2012); Waldman (2016)). This predicts that, ceteris paribus, better
educated individuals (elite university graduates here) are more likely to be promoted and hence
experience later wage increases.
         Our survey data allow us to go further into firm learning dynamics. We create an indicator
variable promotion that equals 1 if an individual is currently in at least a mid-level manager position or
professional rank and equals 0 otherwise. Elite and ordinary university graduates with less than five years
of potential experience have similarly low and insignificantly different probabilities of having been


29
   This interpretation is closer to that of Bordon and Braga (2017) who look at the impact of elite universities in
Chile along with university admission scores.
30
   Specifically, we include interactive terms between the elite dummy and a series of indicators for 1-2 years, 3-5
years, 6-10 years, and 11-16 years of potential experience. All estimates on the interactive terms are significant at
the 5 percent level or above. Full regression results are available from the authors upon request.
31
   Lange (2007) finds that it takes on average three years for any expectation errors of employers about worker
productivity to decline by approximately 50 percent.
32
   Potentially stronger social networks of the elite graduates might enable these students both to receive lucrative job
offers at the entry and to receive promotions at the mid-career (Granovetter (1973); Montgomery (1991)), but
models of social network alone do not appear to be sufficient to explain the entire dynamics of the wage growth.

                                                          16
promoted ­ 13 percent and 19 percent, respectively. After five years, however, promotion rates for elite
graduates rises to 53 percent, significantly larger (at 1 percent level) than the 39 percent for ordinary
university graduates. This pattern continues to hold in regression analyses that control for gender, Gaokao
score, and city fixed effects. 33 Since we do not have information on the exact timing of individual
promotions, this is not a direct test of the promotion signaling model, but it does suggest that the signaling
role of an elite university education evolves over the career in a more complex manner and warrants
further study.
         The pattern of the elite premium and the returns to measured skills might reflect differential
patterns of occupational and industry choices across university types, but that does not appear to be the
case. In Table 6, we include a full set of fixed effects for the industry, occupation, and sector of
employment to investigate the potential channels for the wage dynamics. 34 The results for both the elite
premium dynamics and the returns to Gaokao score are unchanged, and they are robust to changing the
estimation sample to individuals who have never changed firms. In other words, the initial elite premium
combined with its variation due to employer learning appears to be a pervasive fact of the urban Chinese
labor market and holds within broad occupational and industry categories.
         As a robustness check, we estimate the models of Table 5 controlling for individual fixed effects,
where identification solely comes from within-individual differences. 35 This approach relies heavily on
the two observations of career data for each individual, but it offers the possibility of removing
individual-specific factors that are constant over time including ability, motivation, family background,
and the like. The key employer learning components reported in Table 7 are similar to those in Table 5.
Similarly, the impact of Gaokao scores shows no significant pattern over time. In short, while this is not
a strong test, there is no evidence that employer learning effects are driven by unmeasured individual
characteristics.

4.3 Variations by Degree of Marketization and Sector
         The underlying model behind this analysis is that employers are driven by profit maximization
that pushes them to pay wages in line with productivity. Given China's vast regional heterogeneity in


33
   The estimation results are available from the authors upon request.
34
   Sectors include government agencies, public institutions, state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and firms and small
businesses of all other ownerships. The sample size changes slightly across the columns because not all individuals
report all information about the industry, occupation, and sector of their jobs. Occupation and industry are identified
essentially at the one-digit level. Industries include: Agriculture and mining; Electricity, gas & water;
Manufacturing; Construction; Transport, storage, post and telecom & IT; Wholesale and retail trade and catering
services; Finance and insurance; Real estate; Social services; Health, education, culture & research; and Party and
Government organs and social organizations. Occupations include: Leading cadres; Professional and technical staff;
Office workers; Service workers; and Production workers.
35
   The main effects of elite college attendance and Gaokao score are subsumed by the individual fixed effect.

                                                          17
economic and market forces, we might expect spatial heterogeneity in the dynamics of wage setting.
Here we consider variations in returns to skills and in the elite university premia, again for the post-
expansion cohort; in the next section, we consolidate discussion of the estimated male-female wage
differential.
          To assess the influence of differential market forces, we estimate the basic model of Table 6 for
the post-expansion cohort in different geographical regions defined by alternative measures of local
economic development (Table 8). We first compare coastal and inland regions, where the coastal regions
are more economically developed and have more competitive markets. 36 While the picture of the elite
university premium in coastal regions mirrors that seen in the previous employer learning models in both
magnitude and statistical significance (col. 1), the estimates for the less developed inland region (col. 2)
are much smaller in magnitude and statistically insignificant. Further, the estimate of returns for the
Gaokao score is large (0.209) and significant at the 1 percent level for the coastal region but is much
smaller (0.112) for the inland region, even though still significant at the 10 percent level.
          The remaining columns of Table 8 use alternative, more city-specific measures of development:
the share of services in output (col. 3-4) and the share of agriculture in output (col. 5-6) where more
services and less agriculture are signs of greater economic development. Uniformly, more economically
developed cities show large initial premia for elite university graduates but also rapid employer learning
about individual productivity. More skilled individuals (as measured by Gaokao score) also receive
strong returns in these cities. Less developed cities (col. 4 and 6) show very low returns for Gaokao
scores and, while the patterns of elite premia seen before hold, the estimates are all statistically
insignificant.
          Table 9 turns to how wage settings may vary with foreign direct investment (FDI). The size of
the foreign sector is measured by the value-added share of foreign-owned firms in a city in the first two
columns and by the percentage of foreign-owned firms relative to the total number of firms in a city in the
remaining two columns. While the results for the elite premia do not systematically vary across the cities
by the concentration of FDI, the returns to Gaokao scores are systematically stronger and statistically
significant in the top half of the foreign investment distribution but not the bottom half.
          To summarize, estimates in Tables 8 and 9 generally suggest that skills are more highly valued at
locations with more developed economy and market. Further, the patterns of significant elite university
premia with strong and asymmetric employer learning are much more prevalent in the more developed
cities.


36
  The coastal region includes Beijing, Jiangsu, Shandong, and Guangdong provinces in our sample. The inland
region includes the remaining 10 provinces: Shanxi, Liaoning, Anhui, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Chongqing, Sichuan,
Yunnan, and Gansu.

                                                      18
        A final way of viewing wage setting in China is to compare the labor market dynamics in the
public and private sectors. A natural hypothesis is that the private sector employers, under more
competitive pressure, will set wages based more on individual productivity, and hence the dynamics of
the elite university premium should be more pronounced. Table 10 reports the estimation results where
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are alternately treated as more like private firms (col. 2) versus more like
public firms (col. 3). The public sector includes just purely government agencies and public institutions
such as schools, universities, and hospitals (col. 1).
        Estimates for the impact of college tier follow the previous patterns ­ more competitive
employers initially bid for elite graduates but then quickly adjust wages to observed productivity.
Interestingly, both public and private employers consistently provide high returns to skills (Gaokao
score). The strong estimate for the public sector is consistent with the general observation that public
sector employers are also highly selective in hiring. For example, applicants need to pass a written exam
and then go through rounds of interviews to receive a civil service job offer, and the competition has
become more intense since the higher education expansion. Schools, universities, and hospitals with
better performance get better reputations and in turn receive more resources from both the government
and private contributions. They therefore have a strong incentive to hire highly capable individuals.


5       Heterogeneity by Gender
        The above analyses indicate a significant gender wage gap of 14 percent for college graduates as
a whole (Table 4, column 4). For subsamples, we find that the gender wage gap is generally smaller for
the post-expansion cohort (Table 4, col. 5 versus 6), and for this post-expansion cohort it becomes
insignificant in the subsample of coastal provinces (Table 8, column 1), is generally smaller in more
developed regions (Tables 8 and 9), and is insignificant in government agencies and public institutions.
        It is possible to explore further how gender enters into wage setting (Table 11). The elite premia
results show little gender-specific variation with experience, even when industry, occupation, and sector
employment is taken into account. This, combined with higher elite premium at job entry for women,
generates higher returns for an elite education for women over the entire career (Col. 1-3). More
interestingly, as seen in col. 4, the returns to Gaokao scores for females are roughly twice the size as those
for males (0.232 vs 0.107), a finding that is robust to controlling for the industry, occupation, and sector
of job (column 5) and independent of elite university status. These results suggest that highly-skilled
women, identified by graduating from an elite university, by showing high individual abilities, or by both,
are greatly valued in the labor market and rewarded for their skills. This contrasts with the literature on
glass ceilings in OECD countries where significant gender wage gaps among highly-skilled men and
women are usually found (Blau and Kahn (2017). Moreover, elite educated women tend to work


                                                         19
proportionally more in coastal provinces, where the gender wage gap is found to be insignificant, than
non-elite educated women. 37
         Of course, there is the other side. The opposite holds for less-skilled women. For them, the wage
gap gets very large.


6        Conclusion
         The Chinese labor market has undergone a remarkable transformation over the past two decades.
While the rapid growth of the economy is well-known, the transformation of the labor force is less
appreciated. Beginning in 1999, the government instituted a dramatic expansion of higher education
admissions. This expansion altered the role and importance of elite universities and provides a unique
opportunity to look at employer learning in the labor market.
         Using a representative sample of urban workers, we examine how the market changed with the
expansion of colleges and universities. At the same time, we control for exogenous changes in the
demand for skills due to technological progress in the Chinese economy, taking advantage of the
remaining planned features of the economy arising from government industrial policies and the Hukou
restrictions. We use employment histories to construct a panel data set that permits identifying both elite
college premia at entry and the dynamics of these premia as employers have a chance to observe actual
productivity of workers. We also incorporate a more general skill measure ­ the Gaokao score that is
used in college selection.
         We find a substantial premium to attending an elite university, but this premium erodes rather
quickly as the employer learns about the worker's capabilities. It increases again at the mid-career,
suggesting asymmetric learning about skills across employers. These patterns hold strongly for post-
expansion workers entering the labor market after the higher education expansion, but not for pre-
expansion workers. They also appear more clearly in the more competitive parts of the Chinese economy.
         The labor market also rewards measured skills, and these returns to skill are larger for women
than for men. Including explicit measures of skills does not, however, change the dynamics of the elite-
college premium. Moreover, the labor market returns to skills and to attending an elite college are found
across the economy and are not restricted to specific industries, occupations, or employment sectors
(public or private).




37
   As elite universities are disproportionately located in coastal provinces, especially in Beijing, Shanghai, and
Jiangsu province, most elite graduates also tend to be found working in coastal provinces.

                                                           20
References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis. 1999. "High wage workers and high wage
      firms." Econometrica 67, no. 2 (March): 251-333.
Aghion, Philippe, Jing Cai, Mathias Dewatripont, Luosha Du, Ann Harrison, and Patrick Legros. 2015.
       "Industrial Policy and Competition." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, no. 4
       (October): 1-32.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. "Race and gender in the labor market." In Handbook of
         Labor Economics: Elsevier: 3143-3259.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Charles R. Pierret. 2001. "Employer learning and statistical discrimination."
         Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, no. 1 (February): 313-350.
Anelli, Massimo. 2016. "The Returns to Elite College Education: A Quasi-Experimental Analysis."
        CESifo Working Paper NO. 6076. Munich: CESifo (September).
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's
        companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Appleton, Simon, Lina Song, and Qingjie Xia. 2014. "Understanding Urban Wage Inequality in China
       1988­2008: Evidence from Quantile Analysis." World Development 62(October): 1-13.
Arcidiacono, Peter, Patrick Bayer, and Aurel Hizmo. 2010. "Beyond signaling and human capital:
        Education and the revelation of ability." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, no.
        4 (October): 76-104.
Au, Chun-Chung, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2006. "How migration restrictions limit agglomeration and
       productivity in China." Journal of Development Economics 80, no. 2 (August): 350-388.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
        Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Beason, Richard, and David E. Weinstein. 1996. "Growth, Economies of Scale, and Targeting in Japan
       (1955-1990)." The Review of Economics and Statistics 78, no. 2 (May): 286-295.
Bernhardt, Dan. 1995. "Strategic Promotion and Compensation." The Review of Economic Studies 62, no.
       2 (April): 315-339.
Black, Dan A., and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2004. "How robust is the evidence on the effects of college quality?
        Evidence from matching." Journal of Econometrics 121, no. 1-2 (July-August): 99-124.
Black, Dan A., and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2006. "Estimating the Returns to College Quality with Multiple
        Proxies for Quality." Journal of Labor Economics 24, no. 3: 701-728.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence F Katz. 1992. "Regional evolutions." Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity 1: 1-75.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2017. "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and
        Explanations." Journal of Economic Literature 55, no. 3: 789-865.
Bordon, Paola, and Breno Braga. 2017. "Employer Learning, Statistical Discrimination and University
       Prestige." (mimeo) Available at SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2966167 (accessed
       4/12/2020).
Brandt, Loren, and Carsten Holz. 2006. "Spatial Price Differences in China: Estimates and Implications."
        Economic Development and Cultural Change 55, no. 1 (October): 43-86.




                                                    21
Broecke, Stijn. 2012. "University selectivity and earnings: Evidence from UK data on applications and
       admissions to university." Economics of Education Review 31, no. 3 (June): 96-107.
Cameron, A. Colin, and Douglas L. Miller. 2015. "A Practitioner's Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference."
      Journal of Human Resources 50, no. 2 (Spring): 317-372.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline. 2016. "Bargaining, Sorting, and the Gender Wage
       Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women *." The Quarterly Journal
       of Economics 131, no. 2 (May): 633-686.
Castex, Gonzalo, and Evgenia Kogan Dechter. 2014. "The Changing Roles of Education and Ability in
        Wage Determination." Journal of Labor Economics 32, no. 4 (October): 685-710.
Chan, Kam Wing. 2019. "China's Hukou System at 60: Continuity and Reform." In Handbook on Urban
       Development in China, edited by Ray Yep, Jun Wang, and Thomas Johnson. Cheltenham and
       Camberley, UK: Edwar Elgar: 59-79.
Chan, Kam Wing, and Li Zhang. 1999. "The Hukou System and Rural-Urban Migration in China:
       Processes and Changes." The China Quarterly 160(December): 818-855.
Che, Yi, and Lei Zhang. 2018. "Human Capital, Technology Adoption and Firm Performance: Impacts of
        China's Higher Education Expansion in the Late 1990s." The Economic Journal 128, no. 614:
        2282-2320.
Dale, Stacy Berg, and Alan B. Krueger. 2002. "Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective
        College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables." Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 117, no. 4: 1491-1527.
Dale, Stacy Berg, and Alan B. Krueger. 2014. "Estimating the Effects of College Characteristics over the
        Career Using Administrative Earnings Data." Journal of Human Resources 49, no. 2 (March 31,
        2014): 323-358.
DeVaro, Jed, and Michael Waldman. 2012. "The Signaling Role of Promotions: Further Theory and
      Empirical Evidence." Journal of Labor Economics 30, no. 1 (January): 91-147.
Farber, Henry S., and Robert Gibbons. 1996. "Learning and Wage Dynamics." The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 111, no. 4 (November): 1007-1047.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift. 2019. "Bartik Instruments: What, When, Why,
      and How." NBER Working Paper No. 24408. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
      Research (November).
Granovetter, Mark S. 1973. Getting a job: A study of contacts and careers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       University Press.
Hastings, Justine S., Christopher A. Neilson, and Seth D. Zimmerman. 2014. "Are Some Degrees Worth
       More than Others? Evidence from college admission cutoffs in Chile." NBER Working Paper
       19241. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research (September).
Heilmann, Sebastian, and Lea Shih. 2013. "The Rise of Industrial Policy in China, 1978-2012." Harvard-
       Yenching Institute Working Paper Series Cambridge, MA: Harvard University (January).
Hoekstra, Mark. 2009. "The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings: A
       Discontinuity-Based Approach." Review of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 4: 717-724.
Hotz, V. Joseph, Per Johansson, and Arizo Karimi. 2018. "Parenthood, Family Friendly Workplaces, and
       the Gender Gaps in Early Work Careers." NBER Working Paper No. 24173. Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research (June).



                                                   22
Jia, Ruixue, and Hongbin Li. 2019. "The Value of Elite Universities in China." Working Paper (February
        9).
Jiang, Feitao, and Xiaoping Li. 2018. "China's Industrial Policies during the Economic Reform of the
        Past Forty Years." Management World 10(in Chinese): 73-85
Kang, Lili, Fei Peng, and Yu Zhu. 2018. "Returns to higher education subjects and tiers in China -
       Evidence from the China Family Panel Studies." GLO Discussion Paper No. 238. Maastricht:
       Global Labor Organization (GLO).
Kaufmann, Katja, Matthias Messner, and Alex Solis. 2015. "Returns to Elite Higher Education in the
      Marriage Market: Evidence from Chile." IGIER (Innocenzo Gasparini Institute for Economic
      Research) Milan: Bocconi University (July).
Knight, John, Quheng Deng, and Shi Li. 2017. "China's expansion of higher education: The labour
        market consequences of a supply shock." China Economic Review 43(April): 127-141.
Lang, Kevin, and Erez Siniver. 2011. "Why is an elite undergraduate education valuable? Evidence from
       Israel." Labour Economics 18, no. 6 (December): 767-777.
Lange, Fabian. 2007. "The Speed of Employer Learning." Journal of Labor Economics 25, no. 1: 1-35.
Li, Hongbin, Lingsheng Meng, Xinzheng Shi, and Binzhen Wu. 2012. "Does attending elite colleges pay
       in China?" Journal of Comparative Economics 40, no. 1 (February): 78-88.
Liu, Zhiqiang. 1998. "Earnings, Education, and Economic Reforms in Urban China." Economic
        Development and Cultural Change 46, no. 4 (July): 697-725.
Ma, Xinxin. 2018. "Labor market segmentation by industry sectors and wage gaps between migrants and
       local urban residents in urban China." China Economic Review 47(February): 96-115.
Mansour, Hani. 2012. "Does Employer Learning Vary by Occupation?" Journal of Labor Economics 30,
      no. 2 (April): 415-444.
Montgomery, James D. 1991. "Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Toward an Economic
      Analysis." The American Economic Review 81, no. 5 (December): 1408-1418.
Schönberg, Uta. 2007. "Testing for Asymmetric Employer Learning." Journal of Labor Economics 25,
       no. 4: 651-691.
Song, Jin, and Shi Li. 2013. "China's Integrated Urban-Rural Hukou Reform and Occupation
        Distribution." World Economy 7: 28-47 (in Chinese).
Waldman, Michael. 2016. "The dual avenues of labor market signaling." Labour Economics 41(August):
      120-134.
Wu, Jinglian. 2018. The Progression of the Chinese Economic Reform: Encyclopedia of China Publishing
       House (in Chinese).
Zhang, Junsen, Yaohui Zhao, Albert Park, and Xiaoqing Song. 2005. "Economic returns to schooling in
        urban China, 1988 to 2001." Journal of Comparative Economics 33, no. 4 (December): 730-752.
Zhang, Lei. 2009. "A value-added estimate of higher education quality of US states." Education
       Economics 17, no. 4 (December): 469 - 489.
Zhong, Hai. 2011. "The impact of population aging on income inequality in developing countries:
       Evidence from rural China." China Economic Review 22, no. 1 (June): 98-107.
Zimmerman, Seth D. 2019. "Elite Colleges and Upward Mobility to Top Jobs and Top Incomes."
      American Economic Revew 109, no. 1: 1-47.


                                                   23
Figure 1: College Admission and Graduation
     .4
     .3
     .2
     .1
     0




          1995                      2000                        2005                        2010
                                                         year

                                          annual growth rate of college admission
                                          annual growth rate of GDP
     4
     3
     2
     1
     0




          1995                      2000                        2005                        2010
                                                         year

                         college admission, in million                 college graduates, in million




Notes: The top panel plots the annual growth rate of college admission, equal to the increase in the number of
students admitted to 3- or 4-year regular colleges between the current year and previous year divided by the number
for the previous year, and the annual growth rate of GDP. The bottom panel depicts the total number of students (in
million) admitted to regular 4-year programs in colleges and universities and the total number of graduates from
regular 4-year college programs. Data come from various issues of China Statistics Yearbook and China Education
Statistics Yearbook.


                                                           24
Figure 2: College Admission by College Type

                       Admissions by college type (in thousands), 1998-2006
 2500




 2000




 1500




 1000




   500




     0
            1998        1999        2000        2001        2002        2003        2004        2005        2006

              Elite Univ.       Ordinary 4-yr Univ.         Public 3-yr Univ.        Private (4-yr & 3-yr) Univ.


Notes: The figure depicts the total annual number of students admitted (in thousands) by college type. The college
types are elite universities, ordinary 4-year universities, public 3-year universities and private universities (offering
both 3-year and 4-year programs). Data come from the Ministry of Education of China.




                                                            25
Figure 3: College Inputs by College Type

                    % faculty holding a PhD degree by college type, 1988-2006
 30



 25



 20



 15



 10



  5



  0
         1998         1999        2000        2001        2002        2003        2004        2005         2006

              Elite Univ.       Ordinary 4-yr Univ.        Public 3-yr Univ.        Private (4-yr & 3-yr) Univ.


Notes: The figure depicts the share of faculty with a PhD degree by college type. The college types are elite
universities, ordinary 4-year universities, public 3-year universities and private universities (offering both 3-year and
4-year programs). Data come from the Ministry of Education of China.




                                                           26
Figure 4: Distribution of Gaokao Score




Notes: The sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan and a four-year college
degree, aged 20 to 60. The post-expansion cohort sample refers to individuals born in or after 1980; the pre-
expansion cohort sample to individuals born between 1954 and 1979. The Gaokao score is normalized first by the
maximum possible score of each test and then transformed to a z-score with mean zero and standard deviation of
one. Authors' calculation from the China Household Income Project 2013. Maximum scores come from various
Gaokao-related websites.




                                                       27
Figure 5: Projected Employment Demand for Educated Labor in the Formal Sector in
Urban China (Nationwide Aggregates)




Notes: The province-specific education demand as a weighted sum of nationwide education distribution by industry
weighted by the province-specific industrial employment composition (see text, Eq. 4). Both measures are for
formal sector employees only. For the national aggregate education demand, the weight is the nationwide industrial
employment composition. National education distribution by industry is calculated from the Urban Household
Survey conducted by the Statistic Bureau of China. Provincial employment distribution by industry comes from
various issues of China Statistics Yearbook and China Labor Statistics Yearbook.




                                                        28
Figure 6: Elite University Premium By Potential Experience for the Post-expansion
Cohort


                                           Elite Premium
 0.45

  0.4

 0.35

  0.3

 0.25

  0.2

 0.15

  0.1

 0.05

    0
                0                   1-2                3-5                6-10              11-16

                                 w/o Gaokao control            control for Gaokao



Notes: The figure depicts the coefficient estimates of interaction terms between the elite dummy and indicators for
0, 1-2, 3-5, 6-10, and 11-16 years of potential experience, using controls similar to those in column 6 of Table 4 and
column 1 of Table 5. Full regression results are available from the authors upon request. The panel data sample
includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan and a four-year college degree, aged 20 to
60. The post-expansion cohort sample refers to individuals born in or after 1980. Dependent variable is the natural
logarithm of monthly CPI-adjusted wage, measured in 2013 and in the year when one starts the current job.




                                                          29
Table 1: Distribution of Education Attainment and Employment Sector (percent)
Panel A: Educational Distribution by Age Cohort (in %)
                                                      Pre-expansion cohort               Post-expansion cohort
       Education level            Total       Total           Female       Male      Total      Female            Male
   Primary school or less          4.6         6.0              7.1         5.1        1.2           1.4           1.0
       Middle school              25.2        29.2             29.1        29.2       15.3          14.4          16.3
        High school               18.2        20.5             20.3        20.6       12.4          12.0          12.8
   Technical high school          11.7        10.5             11.7         9.7       14.7          12.7          16.6
    Technical college             17.8        15.6             15.0        16.0       23.3          24.7          22.0
         University               22.5        18.3             16.9        19.4       33.1          34.8          31.4
   University breakdown
      Elite university            16.9        17.4             14.7        19.0       16.4          15.3          17.5
     Ordinary university          83.1        82.6             85.3        81.0       83.6          84.7          82.5

Panel B: Public Sector Share of Employment by Education
                                                                                  % of public sector workers in
                                             % public sector
                                                                                   government and institutions
         Education level             Total       Pre-            Post-            Total       Pre-        Post-
                                               expansion       expansion                  expansion expansion
 Primary school or less               13.0       12.8            16.1              5.2         5.6         0.0
 Middle school                        24.4       27.0            11.9              7.3         7.7         5.2
 High school                          37.8       41.9            21.2             13.8        15.5         6.5
 Technical high school                47.6       56.1            32.3             22.1        26.6        14.1
 Technical college                    58.9       67.6            44.3             32.3        40.6        18.5
 University                           73.3       80.8            63.0             52.8        61.9        40.2
      University breakdown
 Elite university                     69.4       72.2            66.7             43.4       46.0          40.9
 Ordinary university                  62.0       72.0            52.6             39.5       50.4          29.3

Notes: The sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour, aged 20 to 60.
The post-expansion cohort sample refers to individuals born in or after 1980; the pre-expansion cohort sample
individuals born between 1954 and 1979. Public sector includes government agencies, institutions, and state-owned
enterprises (SOEs). The three columns on the right exclude SOEs. Authors' calculation from the China Household
Income Project 2013.




                                                         30
Table 2: Mincer Returns to Individual Skills
                            1             2            3            4              5             6
                                         Pre-        Post-                        Pre-         Post-
                           All                                     All
                                     expansion    expansion                   expansion     expansion
 PE                    0.051***      0.023***     0.062***      0.054***      0.033***      0.066***
                         [0.003]       [0.006]     [0.012]        [0.003]       [0.006]       [0.012]
 PE2                   -0.001***     -0.000***      -0.001      -0.001***     -0.001***     -0.002***
                         [0.000]       [0.000]     [0.001]        [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.001]
 Male                  0.290***      0.348***     0.165***      0.298***      0.352***      0.167***
                         [0.013]       [0.015]     [0.023]        [0.013]       [0.015]       [0.023]
 Years of schooling    0.077***      0.069***     0.093***
                         [0.003]       [0.003]     [0.006]
 Primary school                                                 -0.189***     -0.183***      -0.244**
                                                                  [0.039]       [0.042]       [0.115]
                                                                -0.113***     -0.102***     -0.174***
 Middle school
                                                                  [0.021]       [0.023]       [0.050]
 Technical high                                                 0.092***      0.140***         -0.045
 school                                                           [0.024]       [0.028]       [0.047]
                                                                0.278***      0.298***      0.170***
 Technical college
                                                                  [0.021]       [0.026]       [0.041]
 University                                                     0.540***      0.525***      0.454***
                                                                  [0.022]       [0.026]       [0.043]
 Constant               6.369***     6.816***      6.195***     7.151***      7.385***      7.341***
                         [0.053]      [0.110]       [0.108]       [0.038]       [0.095]       [0.078]
 City fixed effects        Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Observations             9,166        6,550         2,616         9,166         6,550          2,616
 R-squared                0.273        0.295          0.27         0.284         0.312          0.265

Notes: The sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour, aged 20 to 60.
The post-expansion cohort sample refers to individuals born in or after 1980; the pre-expansion cohort sample
individuals born between 1954 and 1979. Dependent variable is the natural logarithm of monthly CPI-adjusted
wage in 2013. Explanatory variables include potential experience (PE=Age-years of schooling-6) and its square
(PE²), a dummy for male workers, the number of years of education or dummies for the education level reached
(Primary education, Middle school education, Technical high school education, Technical college education,
University education, with High school education being the reference), and city fixed effects. Robust standard
errors are in brackets. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       31
Table 3: Average Elite Premium for College Graduates
                     1           2            3            4           5            6           7            8              9
                                pre-        post-                     pre-        post-                     pre-          post-
                    all                                   all                                   all
                             expansion    expansion                expansion    expansion                expansion      expansion
 Elite           0.142***     0.106**     0.189***                                           0.091*        0.081          0.058
                  [0.040]     [0.052]      [0.066]                                           [0.048]      [0.062]        [0.081]
 Gaokao z-                                             0.110***      0.043      0.190***    0.094***       0.037        0.174***
 score                                                  [0.027]     [0.034]      [0.047]     [0.027]      [0.034]        [0.054]
 PE              0.071***     0.054**     0.094***     0.078***     0.054*      0.102***    0.077***      0.058**       0.101***
                  [0.008]     [0.023]      [0.034]      [0.008]     [0.028]      [0.037]     [0.009]      [0.028]        [0.037]
 PE2             -0.001***    -0.001**     -0.004**    -0.002***    -0.001**     -0.004*     -0.002***    -0.001**       -0.004*
                  [0.000]     [0.001]      [0.002]      [0.000]     [0.001]      [0.002]     [0.000]      [0.001]        [0.002]
 Male            0.142***    0.192***     0.128***     0.156***    0.194***     0.149***    0.153***     0.192***       0.147***
                  [0.030]     [0.041]      [0.046]      [0.034]     [0.049]      [0.050]     [0.034]      [0.049]        [0.050]
 Constant        7.815***    7.984***     7.844***     7.785***    8.063***     7.761***    7.763***     7.981***       7.751***
                  [0.059]     [0.249]      [0.131]      [0.065]     [0.293]      [0.144]     [0.065]      [0.299]        [0.146]
 City fixed
                    Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 effects
 Observations      1,474        718          756        1,163         550          613        1,163         550           613
 R-squared         0.361       0.335        0.362       0.394        0.359        0.435       0.397        0.361         0.436

Notes: The sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour and a four-
year college degree, aged 20 to 60. The post-expansion cohort sample refers to individuals born in or after 1980; the
pre-expansion cohort sample individuals born between 1954 and 1979. Dependent variable is the natural logarithm
of monthly CPI-adjusted wage in 2013. Explanatory variables include a dummy variable (Elite) for elite university
graduates, the Gaokao score (normalized first by the maximum possible of the test one took, and then to a z-score
with mean zero and standard deviation of one), potential experience (PE=Age-years of schooling-6) and its square
(PE²), a dummy for male workers, and city fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in brackets. Significance
levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                         32
Table 4: Dynamic Returns to Elite Universities
                            1              2            3           4            5              6             7             8
                                         Pre-         Post-                     Pre-          Post-         Pre-          Post-
                             All     expansion     expansion         All     expansion     expansion     expansion    expansion
  Elite                   0.245*        0.259      0.326***       0.220*       0.041       0.346***        0.145       0.393***
                          [0.146]      [0.220]       [0.067]      [0.123]     [0.211]        [0.071]      [0.179]       [0.059]
  Elite x PE               -0.014       0.000       -0.066**       -0.017      0.002        -0.069**       0.005      -0.072***
                          [0.012]      [0.016]       [0.027]      [0.011]     [0.017]        [0.027]      [0.015]       [0.028]
  Elite x PE2              0.000        -0.000       0.005**      0.001*       0.000         0.005**       -0.000       0.005**
                          [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.002]      [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.002]      [0.000]       [0.002]
  PE                     0.110***     0.143***     0.096***      0.048***      0.024       0.058***        0.036       0.048***
                          [0.007]      [0.010]       [0.015]      [0.006]     [0.016]        [0.011]      [0.024]       [0.012]
  PE2                   -0.002***    -0.003***      -0.003**    -0.001***     -0.001*        -0.002*       -0.001        -0.001
                          [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.001]      [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.001]      [0.001]       [0.001]
  Male                     0.041      0.148***     0.109***      0.136***    0.189***      0.124***      0.151***        0.084*
                          [0.032]      [0.032]       [0.042]      [0.025]     [0.024]        [0.040]      [0.029]       [0.049]
   ^ COL                                                         0.023***    0.033***      0.013***      0.030***      0.015***
   Ert                                                            [0.002]     [0.003]        [0.005]      [0.006]       [0.004]

  Constant              7.362***      6.753***     7.614***     6.410***      6.228***     6.964***      6.199***     6.867***
                         [0.053]       [0.070]      [0.058]      [0.079]       [0.061]      [0.258]       [0.104]      [0.254]
  City fixed effects       Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
  Excluding firm
                           No            No           No           No            No           No              Yes       Yes
  changers
  Observations            2,829         1,341        1,488        2,818         1,330        1,488            914       1,163
  Number of
                          1,494         723           771         1,494         723           771             505       601
  individuals

Notes: The panel data sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour and
a four-year college degree, aged 20 to 60. The post-expansion cohort sample refers to individuals born in or after
1980; the pre-expansion cohort sample individuals born between 1954 and 1979. Dependent variable is the natural
logarithm of monthly CPI-adjusted wage, measured in 2013 and in the year when one starts the current job.
Explanatory variables include a dummy variable indicating elite university graduates (Elite), potential experience
(PE=Age-years of schooling-6) and its square (PE²), interaction terms between Elite and potential experience (PE
                                                                                                       COL
and PE²), a dummy for male workers, time-varying province-specific demand for college graduates ( E
                                                                                                  ^
                                                                                                    rt       , as a
percentage of total labor demand), and city fixed effects. Columns 7 and 8 replicate columns 5 and 6 for the sample
of individuals who have never changed firms. Robust standard errors clustered at province level are in brackets.
Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        33
Table 5: Dynamic returns to elite university and to measured skills (post-expansion
cohort)
                                                 1                  2                3                  4
  Elite                                     0.266***          0.328***           0.251**           0.346***
                                             [0.098]            [0.069]           [0.121]            [0.104]
  Elite x PE                                -0.081**          -0.088***         -0.089***          -0.089***
                                             [0.035]            [0.029]           [0.033]            [0.028]
  Elite x PE2                                0.006**           0.006**          0.007***           0.006***
                                             [0.003]            [0.003]           [0.003]            [0.002]
  Gaokao z-score                            0.195***          0.177***          0.146***           0.172***
                                             [0.056]            [0.064]           [0.055]            [0.061]
  Gaokao z-score x PE                         -0.012              0.005
                                             [0.017]            [0.024]
  Gaokao z-score x PE²                         0.001             -0.001
                                             [0.001]            [0.002]
  Elite x Gaokao z-score                                                           0.055             -0.013
                                                                                 [0.092]            [0.094]
  PE                                        0.060***          0.054***          0.058***           0.056***
                                             [0.011]           [0.012]           [0.012]            [0.010]
  PE2                                         -0.001            -0.000            -0.001             -0.001
                                             [0.001]           [0.001]           [0.001]            [0.001]
  Male                                      0.138***           0.091*           0.138***              0.089
                                             [0.046]           [0.055]           [0.045]            [0.055]
   ^ COL
   Ert                                      0.012**           0.012***           0.012**           0.012***
                                             [0.005]           [0.005]           [0.005]            [0.005]
  Constant                                  6.982***          6.942***          6.989***           6.946***
                                             [0.274]           [0.266]           [0.276]            [0.266]
  City fixed effects                           Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
  Excluding firm changers                      No                Yes                No                Yes
  Observations                                1,215              946              1,215               946
  Number of individuals                        626               486               626                486

Notes: The panel data sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour and
a four-year college degree, aged 20 to 60. The post-expansion cohort sample refers to individuals born in or after
1980. Dependent variable is the natural logarithm of monthly CPI-adjusted wage, measured in 2013 and in the year
when one starts the current job. Explanatory variables include a dummy variable indicating elite university
graduates (Elite), potential experience (PE=Age-years of schooling-6) and its square (PE²), interaction terms
between Elite and potential experience (PE and PE²), the Gaokao z-score (normalized first by the maximum
possible score of the test one took, and then to a z-score with mean zero and standard deviation of one) and its
interaction with Elite, PE and PE², a dummy for male workers, time-varying province-specific demand for college
                COL
graduates ( E
            ^
              rt      , as a percentage of total labor demand), and city fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4 replicate columns
1 and 3 for the sample of individuals who have never changed firms. Robust standard errors clustered at province
level are in brackets. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                             34
Table 6: Dynamic returns to elite university and returns to measured skills within
Industry, Occupation, and Sector (post-expansion cohort)
                                          1               2               3               4              5
  Elite                              0.282***        0.259***        0.285***        0.250***        0.277***
                                      [0.094]         [0.077]         [0.092]         [0.076]         [0.064]
  Elite x PE                        -0.089***       -0.095***       -0.088***       -0.092***        -0.079**
                                      [0.033]         [0.029]         [0.033]         [0.030]         [0.032]
  Elite x PE2                        0.007***        0.007***         0.006**        0.007***         0.005*
                                      [0.003]         [0.002]         [0.003]         [0.002]         [0.003]
  Gaokao z-score                     0.156***        0.158***        0.165***        0.159***        0.174***
                                      [0.058]         [0.057]         [0.061]         [0.058]         [0.058]
  PE                                 0.058***        0.057***        0.058***        0.056***        0.051***
                                      [0.012]         [0.011]         [0.012]         [0.011]         [0.015]
  PE2                                  -0.001          -0.001          -0.001          -0.001          0.000
                                      [0.001]         [0.001]         [0.001]         [0.001]         [0.001]
  Male                               0.129***        0.142***        0.129***         0.127**         0.095*
                                      [0.047]         [0.052]         [0.044]         [0.053]         [0.055]
   ^ COL
   Ert                              0.012***        0.012***         0.012**         0.012***        0.012***
                                     [0.005]         [0.004]         [0.005]          [0.004]         [0.004]
  Constant                          0.012***        0.012***         0.012**         0.012***        0.012***
                                     [0.005]         [0.004]         [0.005]          [0.004]         [0.004]
  City fixed effects                   Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
  Industry fixed effects               Yes             No               No              Yes             Yes
  Occupation fixed effects             No              Yes              No              Yes             Yes
  Sector fixed effects                 No              No              Yes              Yes             Yes
  Observations                        1,213           1,191           1,215            1,189            932
  Number of individuals                625             612             626              611             478

Notes: The panel data sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour and
a four-year college degree, born in or after 1980. Model specifications are the same as that in column 6 of Table 4
except with added control of Gaokao z-score, and with industry, occupation, and sector fixed effects added
separately in columns 1-3 and jointly in column 4. Column 5 replicates column 4 for the sample of individuals who
have never changed firms. Robust standard errors clustered at province level are in brackets. Significance levels:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        35
Table 7: Dynamic returns to elite university and to measured skills (post-expansion
cohort), controlling for individual fixed effects
                                            1                  2                3                  4
  Elite x PE                            -0.066*           -0.096**          -0.078**           -0.098**
                                        [0.035]            [0.032]           [0.035]            [0.035]
  Elite x PE2                            0.005*            0.007**           0.006**            0.007**
                                        [0.003]            [0.003]           [0.002]            [0.003]
  Gaokao z-score x PE                    -0.019              0.003
                                        [0.027]            [0.032]
  Gaokao z-score x PE²                    0.001             -0.001
                                        [0.002]            [0.003]
  PE                                      0.033              0.005             0.027              0.005
                                        [0.022]            [0.022]           [0.023]            [0.023]
  PE2                                    -0.002             -0.001            -0.001             -0.001
                                        [0.001]            [0.001]           [0.001]            [0.001]
   ^ COL
   Ert                                 0.024**            0.034***           0.024**          0.035***
                                        [0.011]            [0.010]           [0.010]           [0.009]
  Constant                             6.361***           5.866***          6.350***          5.827***
                                        [0.510]            [0.460]           [0.505]           [0.445]
  Individual fixed effects                Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
  Observations                           1,215               946              1,215              946
  Number of individuals                   626                486               626               486

Notes: The same as Table 5. Columns 2 and 4 replicate columns 1 and 3 for the sample of individuals who have
never changed firms. Robust standard errors clustered at province level are in brackets. Significance levels: ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                         36
Table 8: Returns to elite university and skills by region and characteristics (post-expansion cohort)
                                                     1              2                3               4             5               6
                                                                                median          <median        <median          median
                                                  coastal         inland         service         service      agriculture      agriculture
                                                                                   share           share          share            share
                      Elite                      0.376***         0.179         0.287***          0.226        0.312***           0.278
                                                  [0.050]        [0.177]         [0.078]         [0.152]        [0.075]          [0.202]
                      Elite x PE                -0.123***         -0.047       -0.104***          -0.071      -0.137***           -0.038
                                                  [0.031]        [0.059]         [0.034]         [0.071]        [0.038]          [0.059]
                      Elite x PE2                0.009***         0.003          0.007**          0.006        0.010***           0.002
                                                  [0.002]        [0.005]         [0.003]         [0.005]        [0.003]          [0.004]
                      Gaokao z-score             0.209***        0.112*         0.274***          0.034        0.240***           0.048
                                                  [0.056]        [0.059]         [0.037]         [0.062]        [0.044]          [0.057]
                      PE                         0.077***       0.044***        0.068***        0.050**        0.098***           0.020
                                                  [0.013]        [0.010]         [0.012]         [0.020]        [0.017]          [0.023]
                      PE2                          -0.002         -0.001          -0.002          -0.001       -0.004**           0.001
                                                  [0.001]        [0.001]         [0.001]         [0.001]        [0.002]          [0.002]
                      Male                         -0.001       0.242***         0.078**        0.198**         0.126**         0.156***
                                                  [0.060]        [0.038]         [0.032]         [0.083]        [0.058]          [0.054]
                      ^ COL
                      E                           0.011*         0.011*         0.013***          0.009          0.011*          0.013**
                       rt
                                                  [0.007]        [0.007]         [0.005]         [0.007]        [0.006]          [0.006]
                      Constant                    0.011*         0.011*         0.013***          0.009          0.011*          0.013**
                                                  [0.007]        [0.007]         [0.005]         [0.007]        [0.006]          [0.006]
                      City fixed effects            Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
                      Observations                  529            686              616             599            563              652
                      Number of individuals         268            358              315             311            288              338

Notes: The panel data sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour and a four-year college degree, born in or after
1980. Each column is a separate regression estimated on different samples. Columns 1 and 2 are samples of individuals from respectively, coastal provinces
(Beijing, Jiangsu, Shandong, Guangdong) and inland provinces (Shanxi, Liaoning, Anhui, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Chongqing, Sichuan, Yunnan, Gansu); columns
3 and 4 are samples of cities where the share of GDP from the service sector is above or below the national median in 2011; columns 5 and 6 are samples of
cities where the share of GDP from the agricultural sector is below or above the national median in 2011. Model specifications are the same as that in column 6
of Table 4, with added control of Gaokao z-score. Robust standard errors clustered at province level are in brackets. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.


                                                                               37
Table 9: Returns to elite university by regional external investment (post-expansion
cohort)
                                           1                   2                   3                  4
                                      median              <median             median             < median
                                     FDI VA %            FDI VA %          FDI number %        FDI number %
  Elite                                0.214**             0.401**            0.309***             0.246
                                       [0.094]             [0.169]             [0.052]            [0.213]
  Elite x PE                         -0.088***             -0.103*           -0.109***             -0.075
                                       [0.032]             [0.057]             [0.026]            [0.065]
  Elite x PE2                           0.006*              0.008*            0.008***             0.006
                                       [0.003]             [0.004]             [0.003]            [0.005]
  Gaokao z-score                      0.267***              0.015             0.244***             0.046
                                       [0.037]             [0.049]             [0.038]            [0.062]
  PE                                  0.064***            0.049***            0.076***           0.039***
                                       [0.011]             [0.019]             [0.012]            [0.013]
  PE2                                   -0.001              -0.001              -0.002             -0.001
                                       [0.001]             [0.001]             [0.001]            [0.001]
  Male                                  0.070*            0.210***              0.042            0.248***
                                       [0.042]             [0.063]             [0.049]            [0.046]
   ^ COL
   E                                   0.012**              0.011              0.011*             0.011*
    rt
                                       [0.006]             [0.007]             [0.006]            [0.006]
  Constant                             0.012**              0.011              0.011*             0.011*
                                       [0.006]             [0.007]             [0.006]            [0.006]
  City fixed effects                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes
  Observations                           608                 607                 604                611
  Number of individuals                  310                 316                 307                319

Notes: The panel data sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour and
a four-year college degree, born in or after 1980. Each column is a separate regression estimated on different
samples. Columns 1 and 2 are samples of cities whose value-added share from foreign-owned firms (FDI) is above
or below the national median in 2011, and columns 3 and 4 are samples of cities where the fraction of foreign-
owned firms is above or below the national median in 2011. Model specifications are the same as that in column 6
of Table 4, with added control of Gaokao z-score. Robust standard errors clustered at province level in brackets.
Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       38
Table 10: Returns to elite university and skills by job sector (post-expansion cohort)
                                             1                        2                         3
                                  Government agencies+
                                    public institutions         private + SOE             private firms
  Elite                                    0.149                   0.358***                 0.394***
                                         [0.174]                    [0.096]                  [0.143]
  Elite x PE                              -0.047                  -0.124***                -0.149***
                                         [0.059]                    [0.033]                  [0.054]
  Elite x PE2                              0.002                   0.011***                  0.011**
                                         [0.004]                    [0.003]                  [0.005]
  Gaokao z-score                         0.173*                    0.206***                 0.192***
                                         [0.100]                    [0.060]                  [0.074]
  PE                                       0.041                   0.070***                 0.061***
                                         [0.031]                    [0.012]                  [0.015]
  PE2                                     -0.000                  -0.002***                   -0.001
                                         [0.002]                    [0.001]                  [0.001]
  Male                                     0.037                   0.185***                  0.165**
                                         [0.060]                    [0.055]                  [0.075]
   ^ COL
   E                                    0.019***                     0.008                     0.006
    rt
                                         [0.006]                    [0.005]                  [0.007]
  Constant                              0.019***                     0.008                     0.006
                                         [0.006]                    [0.005]                  [0.007]
  City fixed effects                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes
  Observations                              496                       719                       435
  Number of individuals                     255                       371                       224

Notes: The panel data sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour and
a four-year college degree, born in or after 1980. Column 1 is estimated from the sample of individuals working in
the public sector, i.e., government agencies and public institutions; column 2 employs the sample of individuals
working in the private sector (domestic private firms and foreign owned firms) and state owned enterprises (SOEs);
and column 3 employs the sample of individuals working in the private sector. Model specifications are the same as
that in column 6 of Table 4, with added control of Gaokao z-score. Robust standard errors clustered at province
level in brackets. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        39
Table 11: Heterogeneity of wage determination by gender (post-expansion cohort)
                                       1                 2                  3                4                 5
  Elite                           0.378***          0.369***          0.333***          0.291***          0.251***
                                   [0.121]            [0.104]           [0.098]           [0.093]           [0.077]
  Elite x PE                      -0.081**          -0.091***         -0.093***         -0.090***         -0.093***
                                   [0.040]            [0.033]           [0.030]           [0.033]           [0.030]
  Elite x PE2                      0.005*           0.007***          0.007***          0.007***          0.007***
                                   [0.003]            [0.003]           [0.002]           [0.003]           [0.002]
  Male x Elite                      -0.175           -0.153*             -0.163
                                   [0.166]            [0.082]           [0.102]
  Male x PE                         -0.013
                                   [0.026]
  Male x PE²                         0.001
                                   [0.002]
  Male x Elite x PE                 -0.013
                                   [0.058]
  Male x Elite x PE²                 0.002
                                   [0.004]
  Gaokao z-score                  0.164***          0.165***          0.159***          0.232***          0.236***
                                   [0.057]           [0.056]           [0.056]           [0.048]           [0.038]
  Male x Gaokao z-score                                                                 -0.125**          -0.140**
                                                                                         [0.060]           [0.069]
  PE                              0.064***          0.058***          0.056***          0.058***          0.056***
                                   [0.019]           [0.012]           [0.011]           [0.012]           [0.012]
  PE2                               -0.002            -0.001            -0.001            -0.001            -0.001
                                   [0.001]           [0.001]           [0.001]           [0.001]           [0.001]
  Male                             0.209**          0.174***          0.166***          0.191***          0.188***
                                   [0.088]           [0.053]           [0.061]           [0.052]           [0.062]
   ^ COL
   E                               0.011**           0.012**          0.011***           0.012**          0.011***
    rt
                                   [0.005]           [0.005]           [0.004]           [0.005]           [0.004]
  Constant                        6.971***          6.981***          7.079***          6.978***          7.081***
                                   [0.287]           [0.275]           [0.437]           [0.272]           [0.429]
  City fixed effects                 Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
  Industry, Occupation and
                                     No                No                Yes               No                Yes
  Sector fixed effects
  Observations                      1,215             1,215             1,189             1,215             1,189
  Number of individuals              626               626               611               626               611

Notes: The panel data sample includes all full-time workers with hourly wage between 1 and 100 Yuan per hour and
a four-year college degree, born in or after 1980. Model specifications are similar to Table 5, column 1, additionally
controlling for interactive terms between the male dummy and PE, PE2, Elite dummy, PE x Elite (columns 1-3), and
PE x Gaokao z-score (columns 4-5). Columns 3 and 5 replicate columns 2 and 4 with industry, occupation and
sector fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at province level in brackets. Significance levels: *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          40
