                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                          SURVEYING BUSINESS UNCERTAINTY

                                           David Altig
                                       Jose Maria Barrero
                                        Nicholas Bloom
                                         Steven J. Davis
                                         Brent H. Meyer
                                        Nicholas Parker

                                       Working Paper 25956
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25956


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2019, Revised February 2020


Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta nor those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information
was disclosed. We are indebted to Mike Bryan, who played an instrumental role in launching the
Survey of Business Uncertainty, to Emil Mihaylov for excellent research assistance, and to our
survey team: Grayson McAlister, Mea Resea Homer, Angelica Martini, Andres Carrillo-
Rodriguez, Diana Basnakian, J., Alex Fields, Isabella Webber, Ethan Nadeau, Albert Hunecke,
Mehak Ahmed, Paris Stroud, Luke Owens, Alexander Rangazas, J. Breuer, Nicholas Kogan,
Daniel Brown, Brianna Goodrum, and Emilio Rodriguez. We thank Tatsuro Senga for input about
related Japanese surveys and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
and the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support. Finally, we thank
our editor, Wilbert van der Klaauw and two anonymous referees for many helpful comments that
greatly improved the paper.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25956.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by David Altig, Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Brent H. Meyer,
and Nicholas Parker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Surveying Business Uncertainty
David Altig, Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Brent H. Meyer, and Nicholas
Parker
NBER Working Paper No. 25956
June 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. D20,E0

                                           ABSTRACT

We elicit subjective probability distributions from business executives about their own-firm
outcomes at a one-year look-ahead horizon. In terms of question design, our key innovation is to
let survey respondents freely select support points and probabilities in five-point distributions over
future sales growth, employment, and investment. In terms of data collection, we develop and
field a new monthly panel Survey of Business Uncertainty. The SBU began in 2014 and now
covers about 1,750 firms drawn from all 50 states, every major nonfarm industry, and a range of
firm sizes. We find three key results. First, firm-level growth expectations are highly predictive of
realized growth rates. Second, subjective uncertainty is highly predictive of forecast errors and the
magnitude of future forecast revisions. Third, subjective uncertainty rises with the firm's absolute
growth rate in the previous year and the extent of recent news about its growth prospects. We
aggregate over firm-level forecast distributions to construct monthly indices of business
expectations (first moment) and uncertainty (second moment) for the U.S. private sector.

David Altig                                       Steven J. Davis
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta                   Booth School of Business
1000 Peachtree St. NE                             The University of Chicago
 Atlanta, GA 30309                                5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Dave.Altig@atl.frb.org                            Chicago, IL 60637
                                                  and NBER
Jose Maria Barrero                                Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu
Av. Camino a Santa Teresa #930
Col. Heroes de Padierna                           Brent H. Meyer
CP. 10700.                                        Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Alc. Magdalena Contreras                          brent.meyer@atl.frb.org
CDMX
Mexico                                            Nicholas Parker
jose.barrero@itam.mx                              Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
                                                  Atlanta
Nicholas Bloom                                    United States
Stanford University                               nicholas.parker@atl.frb.org
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu
Introduction

       Uncertainty is a fundamental fact of economic life. Businesses and households grapple

with uncertainty in forming plans and making decisions. The extent and nature of uncertainties

change over time, sometimes gradually and sometimes abruptly, altering the outlook for decision

makers and affecting their choices. Recent history offers some vivid examples: the 9/11 terrorist

attacks, the Global Financial Crisis, banking and sovereign debt crises in the Eurozone, the June

2016 Brexit referendum, and a dramatic escalation of trade policy tensions under the Trump

Administration. These examples underscore the need for sound, flexible measures of uncertainty,

so that we can better understand and model the relationship of perceived uncertainty to economic

decisions, outcomes, and performance.

       We would like to track the uncertainty that agents perceive in their external environments

and the uncertainty they perceive about own future outcomes, e.g., a firm's future sales. A standard

approach maintains rational expectations and some form of stationarity, so that past conditional

volatility can serve as the basis for inferences about uncertainty over future outcomes. Examples

include Bloom (2009), Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2011), Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015), and

Colacito et al. (2018). Another approach treats the dispersion in point forecasts as a proxy for

uncertainty (e.g., Bachmann, Elstner and Sims, 2013). Scotti (2016) uses surprises in economic

data releases to proxy for uncertainty. Yet another approach relies on newspapers and other text

sources to construct uncertainty measures, as in Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016), Handley and Li

(2018) and Hassan et al. (2019). Datta et al. (2017) offer an extensive overview of various

approaches, with a focus on measuring uncertainty in the external environment.

       While valuable, these approaches may not adequately capture the subjective uncertainty

that agents perceive, which presumably is what drives their decisions. There is a now-large body



                                                                                                  1
of evidence that subjective expectations deviate systematically from the expectations implied by

rational expectations with full use of available information.1 In addition, many of the most

prominent empirical proxies for uncertainty pertain to distinct theoretical concepts and differ in

their statistical properties (Kozeniauskas et al., 2018). These observations argue for a measurement

approach that gets directly at the uncertainty agents perceive without invoking assumptions about

rationality, information, and stationarity.

        We ­ a group of researchers at the Atlanta Fed, Chicago Booth and Stanford ­ set out in

2013 to develop and field a new survey instrument to measure the perceived uncertainty of senior

decision makers in U.S. firms. In doing so, we built on earlier work that elicits subjective beliefs

from households, as in Dominitz and Manski (1997) and Manski (2004).2 We spent about a year

on initial field testing of various question designs, conducting cognitive interviews, and creating

the Survey of Business Uncertainty (SBU). Since 2014, the SBU has collected subjective

probability distributions over own-firm future outcomes from a panel of business executives. We

send them surveys each month and recruit new firms over time, with the aim of collecting long

response histories for many firms. As of October 2019, we have data for 1,743 firms drawn from

all 50 states, every major nonfarm industry, and a wide range of firm sizes.




1
  Examples include Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015) and Bordalo et al. (2019) for professional
forecasters, Malmendier and Tate (2005), Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2013), Gennaioli, Ma and
Shleifer (2016) and Barrero (2018) for firm managers, Barber and Odean (2001), Bailey et al. (2011),
Puetz and Ruenzi (2011) and Akepanidtaworn et al. (2019) for investors and mutual fund managers, and
Roszypal and Schlaffmann (2017) for consumers.
2
  Manski (2004) is an early advocate of measuring subjective expectations by asking survey respondents
to assign probabilities to pre-specified outcomes. Most of this work surveys households and consumers.
The University of Michigan Survey of Consumers (www.sca.isr.umich.edu) has long asked households
to assign probabilities to binary outcomes defined over family income, job loss, inflation, and more. The
New York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations (www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/sce)
includes questions with a similar structure and questions that elicit probabilities over multiple pre-
specified outcomes, e.g., bins defined by inflation rate intervals.
                                                                                                        2
       Our core survey questions elicit five-point subjective probability distributions over each

firm's own future sales growth, employment, and capital expenditures. The look-ahead horizon is

four quarters or twelve months, depending on the outcome variable. Survey respondents freely

select five support points and then assign probabilities to each. This approach affords great

flexibility for the respondent, allowing for high or low expected growth, uncertain or predictable

outlooks, and negative or positive skew in the distribution over future outcomes. It also avoids

anchoring, because our question format specifies neither the location nor spread of the support

points. Respondents nearly always update their subjective distributions across consecutive

surveys, usually by modest amounts. This result suggests that they are attentive to the survey and

actively updating their responses as their perceptions change over time.

       Using the subjective probability distributions, we measure expected future outcomes and

the uncertainty surrounding those outcomes for each firm. Since the SBU includes questions about

past and current outcomes, we can readily relate subjective forecast distributions to realized

outcomes. Mean growth rate forecasts are highly predictive of realized growth rates in the firm-

level data, even after conditioning on firm and time fixed effects. Subjective uncertainty is highly

predictive of absolute forecast errors. In addition, when firms express greater uncertainty about

future outcomes, they make larger forecast revisions in the future. So, what drives subjective

uncertainty? We show that it exhibits a pronounced V-shaped relationship to the firm's recent past

growth, echoing similar results in Bachmann et al. (2018) and Bloom et al. (2017). Exploiting the

panel dimension of the SBU, we show that subjective uncertainty also rises with the extent of

recent news about the firm's growth prospects, as measured by the magnitude of its most recent

forecast revision. Barrero (2019) provides additional evidence on the properties of the subjective

probability distributions in SBU data, which we summarize in Section 3.



                                                                                                  3
       We also use SBU data to construct time series of the cross-firm average subjective

expectations of employment growth, sales growth, and investment rates and the corresponding

average subjective uncertainty levels. We began publishing these indices in November 2018 at

www.frbatlanta.org/research/surveys/business-uncertainty, and they are now carried by Haver

Analytics, Bloomberg, and the St. Louis Fed's FRED database (http://fred.stlouisfed.org).

       The SBU differs from earlier surveys of beliefs and expectations in key respects: an

innovative question design for eliciting subjective probability distributions, a focus on outcomes

at the respondent's own firm, a monthly sampling frequency, and broad coverage of the U.S.

nonfarm private sector. For example, the quarterly Duke CFO Survey elicits perceptions of

aggregate uncertainty in the form of 80 percent confidence intervals for future S&P 500 returns

and, more recently, for U.S. GDP growth. See Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2013) and

cfosurvey.org. Surveys in Germany and Japan collect data on the expectations of firm-level

variables. See Bachmann and Elstner (2015), Massenot and Pettinichi (2018), Tanaka et al. (2019)

and Chen et al. (2019). While these surveys do not elicit subjective probability distributions, the

ifo Business Tendency Survey collects quarterly data on the best- and worst-case sales growth

scenarios of German firms (Bachman et al., 2018). The closest forerunner to the SBU is the Bank

of Italy's Survey on Investment in Manufacturing, which has elicited subjective probability

distributions at an annual frequency for decades (Guiso and Parigi, 1999). The SBU is also closely

related to the Atlanta Fed's monthly Business Inflation Expectations (BIE) Survey. We conducted

our initial field testing of SBU questions as part of the BIE's special question series.

       Although a young survey, the SBU approach to eliciting subjective probability

distributions from business managers has already been adopted in several other surveys with large-

scale institutional backing. The U.S. Census Bureau put questions with the SBU design to about



                                                                                                 4
50,000 manufacturing plants as part of the Management and Organizational Practices Survey

(Bloom et al., 2017). Since August 2016, the Bank of England and University of Nottingham have

fielded a monthly U.K. Decision Maker Panel Survey that follows the SBU closely, and which has

proved especially useful in assessing business expectations and uncertainty related to Brexit

(Bloom et al., 2018a). The British Office for National Statistics put questions that follow the SBU

design to about 25,000 firms in 2017 as part of the new U.K. Management and Expectations Survey

(Awano et al., 2018). Statistical agencies in China and Japan have also developed and fielded

surveys of business managers that incorporate the SBU question design for eliciting subjective

probability distributions over own-firm and aggregate outcomes.3

        We enhance the value of the SBU by collecting additional information from our survey

participants alongside our core data on past, current, and future outcomes. Special questions each

month elicit (a) subjective probability distributions over other firm-level or aggregate outcomes,

(b) information about the firm's characteristics or information processes, or (c) the perceived

effects of specific economic and policy developments on the firm's own outcomes. In February

2018, for example, we asked whether and how the 2017 Tax Cut and Jobs Act caused firms to

revise their capital investment plans for 2018 and 2019. In 2019, we posed several questions about

the past and prospective effects of trade policy developments on investment, employment and

sales. Aggregating over the firm-level responses to these questions yields survey-based estimates

for the causal effects of policy developments. See Altig et al. (2019bc).



3
  The China Employer-Employee Survey (CEES) fielded SBU-type questions to 1,700 manufacturing
firms in 2018 and is slated to gather the corresponding realizations in 2020. See Section 2 in Bloom et al.
(2018b) for a description of the CEES. The Social Research Institute of Japan put three-point versions of
the SBU questions to managers at about 13,600 manufacturing plants in 2017 and is now planning a
second wave. Japan's Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry used the SBU question design
in a 2017 survey to elicit subjective probability distributions over own-firm and aggregate outcomes.
These Japanese surveys are not yet the subject of a paper in circulation, to our knowledge.
                                                                                                          5
       Section 1 describes the SBU and our approach to eliciting subjective forecast distributions.

Section 2 explains how we measure firm-level expectations, uncertainty, and forecast errors.

Section 3 relates subjective beliefs to future outcomes, forecast errors, and past outcomes. It also

provides information about how firms update their beliefs over time. Section 4 presents activity-

weighted average measures of business expectations and uncertainty. Section 5 presents additional

results, including evidence that the shape of SBU subjective forecast distributions has predictive

value for realized growth rates and the sign of forecast errors.



1. The Survey of Business Uncertainty

       A. Core Question Design

       The SBU elicits subjective probability distributions from business executives about own-

firm future outcomes. To fix ideas, consider a discrete probability distribution over, say, the future

sales growth rates of a firm. Suppose the distribution has N support points, {( },
                                                                                 (*+ , with


associated probabilities {( },
                             (*+ . Given survey response values for these support points and


probabilities, we can calculate the respondent's (mean) forecast of the sales growth rate as

                      () =  ,
                            (*+ (  (                                                (1)

and his or her subjective uncertainty as the standard deviation,

          () = [,             9 +/9
                (*+ ( (( - ()) ]    .                                                     (2)

       Of course, we don't know how respondents conceptualize future possibilities. They may

think in terms of fewer or more support points, or in terms of a continuous distribution. Given our

focus on firm-level outcomes, subjective distributions are likely to differ greatly across

respondents in terms of location, scale, and shape and perhaps over time for individual firms. These

observations argue for a question design that gives much flexibility to the respondent. In this


                                                                                                    6
regard, note that discrete distributions with few support points are highly flexible. A distribution

with N=5 allows nine degrees of freedom, more than enough to approximate most common

parametric distributions4. It also accommodates symmetric and asymmetric, single- and multi-

mode, thin and fat-tailed distributions and those with wide or narrow support.

        Several other considerations figure in our thinking about SBU question design. First, we

require questions that respondents can comprehend and answer without undue burden. Much of

our field testing and early analysis of survey responses focused on comprehension, as discussed in

the Online Appendix. In addition, we conducted face-to-face cognitive interviews with small

groups of SBU panel members (4-6 respondents per group), which also helped us assess

comprehension. Second, business executives place a high value on their time. Thus, we aim for a

short survey instrument with an average completion time of about five minutes. To help meet this

goal, we split the panel into three groups, each of which rotates through the full set of core

questions every three months.5 One group gets the employment questions in any given month, one

gets the sales questions, and one gets the investment questions. Third, the SBU is a self-

administered, web-based survey, which requires questions that elicit answers without intervention

by an enumerator or other survey representative.

        These considerations led us to a survey instrument in which respondents freely assign

values to five discrete support points and then assign probabilities to each. Figure 1a and 1b display

the core SBU employment and sales growth questions. The Online Appendix displays the

investment questions. For each topic, the survey first asks for the current outcome in levels. Next,



4
  While respondents choose 5 support points and 5 probabilities, there are 9 degrees of freedom because
the probabilities must sum to 100.
5
  Early on, we split the panel into two groups and asked more questions each month. We shifted to the
three-group design in May 2019 to maintain short response times. See the Online Appendix for details.


                                                                                                          7
it asks about recent past outcomes ­ e.g., employment twelve months ago or the sales growth rate

over the past twelve months. Then it asks the respondent to specify five future outcomes, ranked

from lowest to highest, looking twelve months ahead for employment and from the current quarter

to four quarters hence for the sales growth rate. Finally, the survey elicits probabilities for each of

the five respondent-provided support points on the subjective distribution.

       A series of field tests and cognitive interviews before launching the SBU revealed that

business decision makers are willing and able to express beliefs about their firm's outlook in terms

of discrete probability distributions with freely chosen support points. We began a new round of

cognitive interviews in late 2019 to gather information about forecasting methods in use by our

panelists and to solicit their thoughts about our survey instrument. Forecasting methods vary across

firms but typically rely on some combination of the firm's sales history, conversations with key

customers about anticipated product demand, and attention to industry trends and policy

developments that could affect demand or costs. Interviewees report little difficulty in responding

to our forecast distribution questions, even when their internal forecasting methods do not parallel

our question design. This pattern fits with longstanding evidence that consumers can express

uncertainty about future events using subjective probabilities (e.g., Manski, 2004).

       Our approach accords well with how business managers are taught to conceptualize

uncertain future outcomes. To document this claim, we reviewed three top-selling textbooks in

corporate finance, a subject with heavy enrollments in business schools. Nearly 75 percent of the

examples and exercises about risk or uncertainty in these books specify discrete scenarios or

probability distributions to formalize uncertainty.6 Since more than 70 percent of our panel


6
 The three textbooks are Principles of Corporate Finance by Richard A. Brealey, Stewart C. Myers;
Corporate Finance by Stephen Ross, Randolph Westerfield, Jeffrey Jaffe and Bradford Jordan; and
Corporate Finance by Jonathan Berk and Peter DeMarzo. The second most-common approach uses a
parametric distribution with one or two parameters, which is not flexible enough for our purposes.
                                                                                                     8
members are CEOs, CFOs, or have some other finance-related title, most are likely to be

comfortable conceptualizing uncertainty in a manner that relates easily to our question design.

       Many surveys that elicit subjective probability distributions over future economic

outcomes use pre-specified bins or support points, as in the Philadelphia Fed's Survey of

Professional Forecasters. That approach may work well when the researcher and respondents have

a common understanding about the plausible range of outcomes for the variable of interest, say

inflation or GDP. However, it is ill-suited for a survey of firm-level outcomes, given that firms

differ enormously in the central tendency and dispersion of their likely future outcomes. Our

approach also avoids anchoring effects associated with pre-specified ranges or support points. By

allowing free choice of support points and probabilities, we also let the respondent determine the

shape of the forecast distribution. In contrast, Bachmann et al. (2018) create subjective

distributions by imposing a triangular shape from "lowest" to "highest" scenarios.

       Ours is not the only question design that gives flexibility to the respondent, accommodates

great heterogeneity in subjective distributions, and avoids anchoring. The "unfolding brackets"

approach presents survey respondents with a sequence of questions to elicit quantiles of the

subjective distribution. For example, one can first pose a question that elicits the median of the

subjective distribution over the growth rate of future sales, then pose two questions to elicit the

75th and 25th percentiles, and so on. See, for example, Juster and Suzman (1995) and Hurd (1999).

Relative to unfolding brackets, our approach offers two advantages. First, it yields a shorter survey

instrument with fewer questions. Eliciting five quantiles via unfolding brackets requires a sequence

of five questions, whereas our design elicits a five-point distribution in two questions. Given our

respondents are senior executives, a longer survey would tax their patience further and likely lower




                                                                                                   9
response rates and sample retention. Second, as noted above, our approach aligns well with how

managers are taught to conceptualize uncertainty in terms of scenario planning.

       We close our discussion of question design with a detail that has important effects on

response accuracy. Our forward-looking questions elicit beliefs about the level of future

employment but the growth rate of future sales. Respondents tend to think in these terms.

Moreover, field testing revealed that asking about the level of future sales yields more response

errors of two types: adding or dropping a digit when entering values for support points, and the

inconsistent use of units across surveys ­ or even in the same survey. For example, a respondent

might switch from quarterly to annual sales or thousands to millions of dollars. While we

developed methods to detect and correct these sorts of response errors, we also experimented with

question formulation to reduce the incidence of such errors. As of September 2016, we settled on

a formulation that asks about past and future sales growth rates and the level of sales in the current

quarter. The Online Appendix presents earlier incarnations of our sales-related questions.

       B. Sampling, Panel Recruitment, and Response Rates

       We obtain lists of randomly selected firms and their senior executives from an affiliate of

Dunn & Bradstreet, a supplier of business information and research. In turn, we sample from these

lists to recruit panel members, working with a team of research assistants at the Atlanta Fed. We

aim for a panel of firms that is reasonably well balanced across industries and regions. We

deliberately oversample larger firms and, to a lesser extent, firms in cyclically sensitive industries.

The recruitment process continues, as we build and refresh the SBU panel over time. Each month,

we deliver the survey link to panel members via email and let them fill it out over a two-week

period on their own time.




                                                                                                    10
        During the period from June 2014 to June 2018, approximately 42 percent of potential

contacts reached via telephone agreed to join the panel. Among those who joined, 62 percent

responded to the survey at least once. In any given month, about 43 percent of continuing panel

members respond to the survey.7 These high response rates in a voluntary survey of business

executives reflect the resources we devote to sample recruitment and maintenance. As of August-

October 2019, we receive about 360 completed survey responses per month. The median survey

completion time is 4.4 minutes, and the mean is 7.6 minutes.8 See the Online Appendix for more

information about recruitment and response rates.

        C. Survey Development, Testing, Data Cleaning, and Sample Mix

        We began fielding trial SBU questions in October 2013 as part of the Atlanta Fed's monthly

Business Inflation Expectations (BIE) Survey, which samples firms in the Sixth Federal Reserve

District (Florida, Georgia, Alabama, and parts of Tennessee, Mississippi, and Louisiana). In July

2014, we launched the SBU as a separate national survey, originally known as the Decision Maker

Survey. Over the past six years, we experimented with several aspects of our question design: pre-

selected support points, fewer support points, interval bins in place of support points, fixed

probabilities for respondent-chosen support points or bins, and other matters. We also fielded

questions that elicit subjective probability distributions over future profit margins and unit cost

growth. While the profit margin and unit cost questions yield interesting data, they are hard to

formulate in a uniform manner that works well across all industries. Their inclusion also makes it



7
  These response rates refer to the period from September 2016 (the last major change in core survey
questions) to October 2018.
8
  These statistics pertain to the period since May 2019, when we began asking about only one core topic
(sales, employment, or investment) per panel group per month. Median and mean survey completion
times before May 2019 are 5.5 and 8.7 minutes, respectively. In computing these statistics, we winsorize
completion times at the 90th percentile to deal with respondents who open the survey tool and set it aside
for a spell (possibly days) before returning to the tool and completing their responses.
                                                                                                        11
harder to meet our completion-time targets, so we ultimately dropped them from our core

instrument. See the Online Appendix for a more detailed discussion of SBU survey development

and testing. The last major change to the core SBU questions occurred in September 2016.

       The SBU sample covers all 50 states, all major nonfarm industries, and a range of employer

size categories, as documented in the Online Appendix. Relative to the industry distribution of

nonfarm private employment, the SBU sample materially over represents Durable Manufacturing

and Finance & Insurance. It under represents Health Care & Social Assistance and Leisure &

Hospitality. The employment share of small firms in the SBU sample is much lower than in the

U.S. private sector, especially for firms with fewer than 20 employees. The SBU covers very few

firms less than five years old for three practical reasons: lags in the identification of new firms by

Dunn & Bradstreet, our infrequent purchase of business lists for cost reasons, and lags in our

sampling from the lists we purchase.

       All SBU data are subject to automatic review and cleaning algorithms, with further manual

review of extreme outliers. Firms with more than 1,000 employees undergo manual reviews as a

matter of routine. Extreme outliers and potentially anomalous responses of large firms are

evaluated for consistency with historical responses and publicly available information. When

manual reviews are inconclusive, we may contact the respondent for clarification. See the Online

Appendix for more information and Altig et al. (2019a) for a full discussion.



2. Measuring Subjective Expectations, Uncertainty, and Forecast Errors

       This section explains how we use the raw SBU data to compute firm-level forecasts (mean

expectations), the subjective uncertainty around the forecasts, realized outcomes, and forecast




                                                                                                   12
errors. For the sake of concreteness, we focus on sales growth rates in describing the measurement

mechanics. The mechanics differ somewhat for investment rates, as we discuss.

        Each respondent supplies future sales growth rate values, ( , at support points =

1,2,3,4, 5, and the associated probabilities, ( . We interpret the ( values as conventional

growth rates ­ i.e., percent changes on the initial value. As a preliminary step, we re-express

                                                                                    L     9EFGHIJK
conventional growth rates as arc percentage changes using the formula, ( =            . This
                                                                           EFGHIJK M9             L


growth rate measure is symmetric about zero, bounded between -2 and 2, and equal to log changes

up to a second-order Taylor series approximation. Growth rates computed in this manner aggregate

exactly when combined with suitable weights, given by the simple mean of initial and (expected)

terminal levels. This approach to growth rate measurement and aggregation is standard in the

literature on business-level dynamics. See, for example, Davis and Haltiwanger (1999).

        Given support points, ( , and probabilities, ( , we compute mean expectations and

subjective uncertainty as in (1) and (2). We compute the realized growth rate from  to  +  as

                                               TUV  FGHI   WFGHIT
                               R,RMS = (+/9)XFGHI                         ,     (3)
                                                           TUV MFGHIT Y


where R is reported sales at . The error in the q-quarter ahead forecast at month  is

                  ()[              [
                    R = R,RM\[ - ()R ,                                                      (4)

where () is defined by (1). For employment, we compute arc percentage changes from

the reported and forecasted employment levels.9 When absolute forecast errors exceed one for

sales or employment growth rates, we manually review the underlying responses and use the firm's

history of responses to correct obvious mistakes such as missing or extra zeros, or the mixing of



9
 For sales growth rates (and investment rates), we work with observations that are j=4 quarters apart. For
employment growth rates, we work with observations that are j months apart, where j ranges from 10 to
14. When j12, we re-state the employment growth rate in annualized terms.
                                                                                                       13
annual and quarterly sales figures. If we find no obvious mistake, we flag the observation as a

likely response error and exclude it from our analysis of forecast errors.

       In September and October 2017 and again in February and March 2019, we asked firms to

report the book value of their capital stock (property, plant, and equipment). Starting in May 2019,

we query firms every few months about book value capital stock. When available, we use the

book-value capital stock as the denominator in the investment rate, I/K. When unavailable, we

interpolate or extrapolate the capital stock based on the firm's reported values in other periods. If

that, too, is unavailable, we use a regression-based imputation. The numerator values in the I/K

ratio come directly from our core question about capital expenditures.

       Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the support points and corresponding probabilities

in our SBU data. Mean outcomes vary widely across support points, ranging for example from

-0.106 to 0.115 for 12-month employment growth rates. The mean probability mass assigned to

the middle support point is about 40 percent for each outcome variable, with a mean mass of about

10 percent in each tail. Standard deviations are sizable for both support point and probability

values. Table 2 reports summary statistics for forecast means, subjective uncertainty, and realized

outcomes. The data exhibit considerable heterogeneity across firms in terms of realized outcomes,

forecast means, and subjective uncertainty. This heterogeneity is useful for analysis and reassuring

in light of much previous work on the heterogeneity of realized firm-level outcomes.



3. Properties of Subjective Distributions, Uncertainty, and Forecast Errors

       We now document several properties of the firm-level subjective forecast distributions.

Our analysis sample covers SBU survey waves from October 2014 to October 2019. For the sake

of brevity, we focus on results for sales growth rates. Results are very similar and often sharper



                                                                                                  14
for employment growth rates, as shown in the Online Appendix. Many qualitatively similar

patterns hold for investment rates as well.

Mean Forecasts Predict Realized Growth Rates

        Figure 2 provides evidence that firm-level mean sales growth rate forecasts have predictive

power for realized growth rates at a four-quarter look-ahead horizon. Each panel displays a bin

scatter of firm-level values for R,RM\[ in (3) against the corresponding four-quarter ahead

mean forecasts at t, given by ()[
                                R in (1). Each panel also reports results for the


underlying firm-level regression.

        Panel (a) shows a strong positive relationship in the raw data. The OLS slope coefficient

on the mean expectation is 0.59 with a firm-clustered standard error of 0.08, soundly rejecting the

null of a unit slope coefficient. We are mindful, however, that measurement errors in the firm-

level expected growth rates are likely to impart a downward bias in the OLS slope coefficient.10

Indeed, using the value of the middle support point to instrument for the firm's mean expected

sales growth rate yields a coefficient of 0.87 (0.13), insignificantly different from one.

Alternatively, using the mean employment growth rate forecast as an instrument yields a

coefficient of 1.12 (0.49). In short, IV regressions provide little evidence against the hypothesis of

unbiased mean forecasts. These results are consistent with Barrero (2019), who also finds little

evidence of unconditional bias in firm-level mean forecasts using SBU data.

        Mean firm-level forecasts continue to have predictive power for realized sales growth rates

when we add controls for time and firm fixed effects, as shown in Panels (b) and (c) of Figure 2.




10
  Measurement errors can arise because the respondent's (mean) forecast is truly noisy, because our
question design elicits a noisy representation of the respondent's true forecast distribution, or for more
mundane reasons ­ e.g., a respondent who mistypes when entering support point values or probabilities.
                                                                                                         15
The average of a firm's mean sales growth rate forecasts also has strong predictive content for the

average of its realized sales growth rates, as shown in Panel (d).

Subjective Uncertainty Predicts the Magnitude of Forecast Errors

        Figure 3 provides evidence that subjective uncertainty, as measured by (2), is highly

predictive of the absolute value of the forecast errors in (4). Panel (a) shows a strong, positive

relationship in the raw data. Including time fixed effects has little impact on the fitted relationship,

as seen in Panel (b). Including firm effects as well weakens the relationship, but still yields a

positive, significant relationship of error magnitudes to uncertainty. In other words, changes in

firm-level subjective uncertainty are predictive of changes in the magnitude of firm-level forecast

errors. We conclude that our measure of subjective uncertainty captures more than persistent cross-

firm differences in uncertainty. The cross-firm relationship of absolute forecast errors to subjective

uncertainty is indeed a strong and prominent feature of the SBU data, as shown in Panel (d).

Subjective uncertainty also falls with firm size and age, as shown in the Online Appendix. These

patterns are reassuring, given that growth rate dispersion and volatility fall with firm size and age.

See, for example, Davis and Haltiwanger (1992), Caves (1998), and Davis et al. (2006).

        While there is strong evidence that subjective uncertainty predicts the magnitude of

forecast errors, it does not follow that firms accurately perceive the (expected) magnitude of their

errors. Barrero (2019) examines this issue using SBU data. To do so, he samples from the

subjective forecast distributions to generate the implied distribution of forecast errors. This implied

distribution is much narrower than the actual distribution of forecast errors: The average magnitude

of actual forecast errors is four times larger than the average magnitude of implied errors. Barrero

also shows that over confidence about forecast precision holds for large and small firms but tends

to fall with firm size. Ben-David et al. (2013) find that CEOs are over confident about the precision



                                                                                                     16
of their forecasts of returns on the S&P 500. Taken together, these studies say that senior managers

appear overconfident about their forecast precision with respect to developments at their own firms

and in the broader economy.

Respondents Update Reported Beliefs Often, Usually by Small Amounts

        We now investigate how individual respondents update their forecast distributions over

time.11 Table 3 shows that nearly all respondents provide a different forecast distribution in month

t for each outcome than they provided 2 or 3 months earlier in their previous survey response. For

example, 95.7 percent of sales growth responses involve different support points between nearest

surveys, and 94.7 percent involve different probabilities. Over 99 percent of the sales responses in

consecutive surveys imply revisions to the first and second moments of the subjective probability

distributions. Clearly, respondents do not supply a "boilerplate" distribution each month without

thinking. Instead, they nearly always modify their reported subjective probability distributions.

        To get a handle on how much they revise reported beliefs, we compute the cosine similarity

of their support point and probability vectors between nearest same-topic surveys. For any pair of

vectors  and ' in b , cosine similarity is the cosine of the angle between them:

                                                       g  
                                          cos() =
                                                      

where "" denotes the inner product and  is the Euclidean norm of  . Cosine similarityranges

from -1 to 1. Two vectors pointing in exactly the same direction (for which  = 0) have cos() =

1, orthogonal vectors have cosine = 0, and vectors pointing in exactly opposite directions have



11
   Reputational concerns and attention-seeking behavior can lead professional forecasters to distort their
reported beliefs in ways that yield herding or extreme forecasts. See, for example, Lamont (2002) and
Marinovic et al. (2013). Because SBU respondents are anonymous and forecast own-firm outcomes, there
is no reason to anticipate such behavior in our setting. Thus, we focus on the frequency, magnitude, and
character of forecast revisions.


                                                                                                       17
cosine = -1. Accordingly, higher cosine similarity means that two vectors are more similar in the

geometric sense of pointing in more similar directions.

        Table 4 reports the mean of cosine similarity values across surveys 2 or 3 months apart for

the same firm. The mean cosine values are mostly between 0.84 and 0.89 and significantly different

from 1. The cosine similarity of support points for future investment is larger at 0.976, yet still

significantly different from one. Thus, we find clear evidence that respondents update their forecast

distributions between surveys, while on average maintaining broadly similar responses (since the

mean similarity is much closer to 1 than 0). For future investment, respondent support points are

much more similar across nearest surveys. This result suggests that anticipated investment is

revised less often than sales and employment growth expectations.

        Table 5 quantifies the persistence of reported beliefs by fitting AR(1) models to subjective

expectations and uncertainty of firm-level sales growth rates. The raw panel regressions in

columns (1), (4), and (7) and the specifications with time fixed effects in (2), (5), and (8) show

autocorrelations of just under 0.5 for subjective expectations and somewhat above 0.6 for

subjective uncertainty. These results suggest that shocks to firm-level sales growth rate

expectations decay by about one-half between nearest surveys and by about one-third for

subjective uncertainty. Autocorrelations are smaller at less than 0.2 when we also condition on

firm effects, but still positive and statistically significant.

Subjective Uncertainty Predicts the Magnitude of Future Forecast Revisions

        Having established that SBU respondents actively revise their reported beliefs, we next

show that more uncertain respondents make more extensive forecast revisions over time. To do

so, we first compute cosine similarity values of the forecast distribution support points for sales

growth rates in months t and t+2 (or t+3). Figure 4a shows a bin scatter of this measure of forecast



                                                                                                  18
revision magnitude on the vertical scale against the subjective uncertainty of sales growth rates in

month t. The underlying firm-level regression has a coefficient of -0.96 (.12), which says that

greater subjective uncertainty at t predicts more extensive forecast revisions in the sense that

support point vectors shift more between t and t+2 (or t+3). Figure 4b shows that greater subjective

uncertainty also predicts more extensive revisions to forecast distribution probabilities. The

statistical relationship is highly significant in both panels, but the slope coefficient is much larger

in panel (a). That is, firms facing greater uncertainty about their sales growth outlook tend to revise

support points more than probabilities when asked about the outlook 2 or 3 months later.

       Figure 5 shows that firms reporting greater uncertainty today also make larger future

revisions to their mean expectations. The figure plots the absolute change in sales growth rates

expectation from t to t+2 (or t+3) against subjective uncertainty about the sales growth rate at t.

The positive relationship says that more uncertain firms make larger revisions to their expectations

in the next survey about the same topic. The link between subjective uncertainty and future

revisions holds in the raw data and when controlling for firm and time fixed effects.

Do Revisions in Mean Expectations Predict Future Forecast Errors?

       We now consider whether revisions in mean expectations predict future forecast errors,

following Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015). In particular, we regress the error in the sales

growth rate forecast formed at t in equation (4) on a constant and same-firm changes in forecast

means, ()[       [
         RWS - ()R , for  = 2or3. The regression, which has 2,177


firm-level observations, yields a slope coefficient of 0.29 (0.1) and an R-squared value of 0.004.

The positive slope suggests that business executives over extrapolate from recent news in forming

expectations about the future growth of their firms. They are both too optimistic in the wake of

good news, and too pessimistic in the wake of bad news.


                                                                                                    19
        Measurement error in the reported mean expectations could also drive the positive slope

coefficient in this regression. In this regard, note that ()[
                                                            R enters both the dependent


and independent variables in the regression. Partly motivated by concerns about measurement

error, Barrero (2019) presents a broader range of tests and concludes that over extrapolation is a

feature of managerial beliefs in SBU data. Gennaioli, Ma and Shleifer (2016) present evidence that

points to over extrapolation in the expectations reported in the Duke Survey of CFOs.

Subjective Uncertainty Has a V-shaped Relation to Past Growth and News about Future Growth

        Subjective uncertainty is associated with larger revisions in future beliefs (Figures 4 and

5), but what drives subjective uncertainty? To throw light on this matter, Figure 6 displays two bin

scatters with ()[
                R , uncertainty about the q-quarter ahead forecast at t, on the vertical axis.


Panel (a) relates this measure of subjective uncertainty to RW+9,R , the realized sales growth

rate over the previous year. Firms with greater absolute growth rates in the past year report higher

subjective uncertainty, yielding a pronounced V-shaped pattern. This result is consistent with

models in which firms have stochastic volatility ­ they go through periods of higher and lower

volatility. So large recent sales shocks are associated with higher levels of current volatility, and

hence higher future uncertainty.

        We can assess this stochastic volatility interpretation directly by exploiting the panel

structure of the SBU. To do so, panel (b) relates subjective uncertainty at t to the absolute value of

the firm's most recent forecast revision given by o()[       [
                                                     RWS - ()R o, for  =


2or3. Again, we see a pronounced V shape.12




12
  In unreported results, subjective uncertainty at t also has a V-shaped relation to the error in mean sales
growth rate forecast formed one year-earlier. This relationship is noisier than the ones shown in Figure 6
and is derived from a smaller sample.
                                                                                                          20
       Next, we nest these two effects in a single regression model. Specifically, we regress

subjective uncertainty at t on a constant, the firm's absolute growth rate over the previous year,

and the absolute value of its most recent forecast revision. This regression, which has 4,722

observations, yields a coefficient of 0.131 (0.013) on oRW+9,R o and a coefficient of 0.239

(.026) on o()[       [
             RWS - ()R o, for  = 2or3. The R-squared value is 0.294.


That is, subjective uncertainty rises with the firm's absolute growth rate in the recent past and with

the magnitude of its recent forecast revisions. Using employment counterparts to the sales

measures yields very similar regression results, with an R-squared value of 0.282. These results

say that subjective uncertainty is high in the wake of large recent changes to the firm's activity

level and in the wake of big news about its future growth prospects. Both effects are present in the

data, and neither drives out the other in our regression specifications.



4. Indices of Business Expectations and Uncertainty for the US Economy

       This section describes how we use SBU data to construct indices of business expectations

and uncertainty. Our approach is to compute size-weighted averages of first and second moments

in the firm-level subjective forecast distributions. As before, the look-ahead horizon is twelve

months for employment growth and four quarters for sales growth and investment.

       In constructing the indices, we winsorize firm-level mean forecasts and subjective

uncertainty values at the 1st and 99th percentiles in the fixed period from January 2015 to December

2018. In averaging the winsorized values over firms, we weight by the firm's employment level,

top coded at 500. The top coding of activity weights reflects our judgment based on long




                                                                                                   21
experience in analyzing business-level data. Outliers and errors for large firms can seriously distort

sample-average quantities, more so for samples of modest size and for higher-order moments.13

        Figure 7 displays smoothed expectation and uncertainty indices for sales and employment

growth rates.14 We have about 50 firm-level responses per topic per month before September 2016

and 150 thereafter. To generate index values that reflect similar observation counts per month, we

smooth as follows: From November 2016 onwards, we use a three-month lagged moving average;

in August 2016 and earlier, we use a nine-month lagged moving average; and for September and

October 2016, we use a seven-month and five-month lagged moving average, respectively.

        The first-moment indices in the left panel of Figure 7 show expected one-year growth rates

of less than 1 percent in 2015 and most of 2016 for employment and less than 2 percent for sales.

Expected growth rises through early 2018 for employment and through late 2018 for sales,

reaching 5 percent near the end of 2018. Growth rate expectations fall thereafter but stay above 2

percent for employment and near 4 percent for sales by October 2019. The second-moment indices

in the right panel show falling subjective uncertainty about future growth rates through the middle

of 2017, except for an upswing in sales growth uncertainty around the November 2016 election.

Since early 2017, the cross-firm average subjective uncertainty measures have settled into narrow

ranges near 3 percent for sales and 4 percent for employment.



13
   Our raw sales indices show a marked level and volatility break in September 2016, when we revised the
formulation of our sales questions. To adjust for this break, we first compute the time-series mean and
standard deviation of the employment expectation index values in the "pre" period (before September
2016) and the "post" period (September 2016 to December 2018). Second, we compute the pre-to-post
ratio of means and the pre-to-post ratio of standard deviations for employment expectations. Last, we
adjust the pre-period sales expectation index values, so that the pre-to-post ratios of means and standard
deviations for the sales expectation index match the corresponding ratios for the employment expectations
index. We take the same approach in adjusting the subjective uncertainty index values for sales growth.
14
   The corresponding indices for I/K, shown in the online appendix, are much noisier. Greater noisiness in
the I/K series could reflect the lumpiness of firm-level investment (especially with our modest sample
size), our heavy use of imputed values for firm-level capital stocks, or weaknesses in our question design
for capital expenditures. Evaluating and improving our forward-looking I/K measures is on our agenda.
                                                                                                       22
       The recent stability of our subjective uncertainty measures may seem surprising in light of

the extraordinary rise in trade policy uncertainty since March 2018. (Baker, Bloom and Davis

(2019) review several pieces of evidence). As part of our special question series, we asked SBU

panel members about trade policy developments in January, July, August and September of 2019.

The resulting data show mounting concerns about tariff hikes and trade policy tensions and

evidence of their negative effects on employment, sales and investment. The effects are modest in

size, however, and a majority of SBU panel members report little direct exposure to trade policy

developments (Altig et al., 2019bc). Taken together, Figure 7 and our earlier reports suggest two

conclusions. First, other sources of business-level uncertainty diminished after early 2018, muting

or offsetting the impact of rising trade policy uncertainty. Second, trade policy developments

contributed to the falling growth rate expectations in 2018 and 2019.

       To our knowledge, there are no alternative time-series measures for the United States that

quantify the same concepts as our SBU indices. So, we turn to some admittedly imperfect

comparisons. The Duke University Survey of CFOs at U.S. firms includes the following question:

"Relative to the previous 12 months, what will be your company's PERCENTAGE CHANGE [in

revenues] during the next 12 months. (e.g., +3%, 0%, -2%, etc.)?" That is, the Duke survey elicits

the expected change in growth rates from the past year to the year ahead. In contrast, the SBU

yields the expected growth rate in the year ahead. Nevertheless, one might expect the two surveys

to yield positively correlated first-moment indices. That turns out to be the case, as seen in the left

panel of Figure 8. We plot the revenue-weighted mean in month t of firm-level responses to the

Duke survey question above alongside our SBU sales growth rate expectations index at t. The two

series exhibit broadly similar movements over our sample period.




                                                                                                    23
        The right panel in Figure 8 shows our sales growth uncertainty index alongside a smoothed

version of the one-year-ahead VIX, which measures the volatility of the S&P 500 implied by

options set to expire one year hence.15 We focus on the VIX because it is well known, widely used,

and often seen as a proxy for broad economic uncertainty. In fact, the VIX is better understood as

measuring the expected magnitude over the option horizon of news about the stock market value

of larger, listed firms.16 Despite the conceptual differences, Figure 8 reveals that our uncertainty

index correlates positively with the VIX, especially since late 2016.

        The comparisons in Figure 8 suggest that our SBU indices respond to economic

developments in a manner that is broadly similar to other model-free indicators of expected growth

rates and economic uncertainty, namely the Duke CFO Survey and the VIX. Like the SBU, these

other sources are available in (near) real time and, in the case of the Duke Survey, pertain to

forecasts of own-firm outcomes.

        In closing this section, we wish to stress the preliminary nature of our SBU indices. The

current SBU sample is modest in size and excludes younger firms. We continue to expand the

sample and refine our data auditing and cleaning methods. Like any startup survey, we need many

years (or large in-sample moves) before we can confidently assess the predictive value of the

aggregate SBU indices. Nevertheless, the predictive value of our firm-level subjective forecast

distributions, as documented in Section 3, provides grounds for optimism in this regard.




15
   Since the SBU is in the field during the second and third week of the month, we take the value of the
one-year VIX on the 15th of the month. If the 15th is not a trading day, we use the 16th, 14th, 17th, 13th, 18th,
or 12th in that order. We smooth the resulting monthly one-year VIX series using the same procedure as
for our SBU indices.
16
   These firms account for about a quarter of private sector employment, and they differ systematically
from the economy as a whole on several dimensions. In particular, listed firms skew toward bigger, older,
capital-intensive, skill-intensive and multinational firms. See Davis (2017). Changes in the mix of listed
firms and their leverage choices also affect the VIX.
                                                                                                              24
5. Additional Results and Robustness Checks

The Shape of SBU Forecast Distributions Has Predictive Value

       Section 3 shows that first and second moments of SBU forecast distributions have

predictive value for realized future growth rates (Figure 2), the magnitude of future forecast errors

(Figure 3), and the extent of future forecast revisions (Figures 4 and 5). We now investigate

whether other aspects of SBU forecast distributions ­ beyond first and second moments ­ have

predictive value for firm-level outcomes.17

       We first ask how skewness in subjective forecast distributions relates to skewness in

realized outcomes over the forecast horizon. To do so, we sort the firm-level observations into

quartiles defined by the Fisher-Pearson skewness coefficients of the subjective forecast

distributions. For each quartile, we compute the mean value of the subjective skewness coefficients

and the skewness coefficient of realized growth rates over the forecast horizon. Figure 9 displays

a scatter plot of these two measures. For employment growth rates, skewness in realized outcomes

rises strongly with prior subjective skewness. For sales growth rates, the relationship is similar

except for the anomalous second quartile. Overall, Figure 9 suggests that skewness in the

subjective forecast distribution portends skewness in the distribution of realized outcomes.

       In a second exercise, we ask whether the shape of the subjective forecast distribution has

predictive value for the sign of forecast errors in the firm-level data. To do so, we regress the sign

of the forecast error in (4) on a constant and the fraction of mass in the subjective forecast
                                              [
distribution on support points greater than ()R . We test whether the coefficient on

this fraction is positive and statistically significant. To see the logic, suppose the subjective and


17
   The skewness of cross-sectional outcomes is known to covary in interesting ways with aggregate
outcomes. See, for example, Guvenen et al. (2014) on cyclicality in the skewness of individual-level
earnings shocks and Salgado et al. (2019) on the cyclicality of skewness in firm-level growth rates.


                                                                                                   25
true distributions are the same. Then the probability of a positive forecast error, as defined in (4),

rises with the mass on support point values greater than ()[
                                                           R.


        Running this regression on 3,037 firm-level observations yields an estimated slope

coefficient of 0.034, with a firm-clustered standard error of 0.051. Adding time effects to control

for common components in the forecast errors yields a slightly larger slope coefficient, but one

that remains statistically insignificant. Thus, there is little evidence that the shape of the subjective

forecast distribution over the growth rate of sales helps predict the sign of forecast errors. However,

when we repeat the test for employment growth rates, we find strong evidence that the shape of

the subjective forecast distribution predicts the sign of forecast errors. The regression, which has

3,692 firm-level observations, yields an estimated slope coefficient of 0.089 with a firm-clustered

standard error of 0.046. Including time effects yields a slightly larger slope coefficient.

        Finally, the Online Appendix shows that the third moment of SBU forecast distributions

has marginal predictive value for realized growth rates and the absolute value of forecast errors

when conditioning on the first two subjective moments. This pattern holds for both sales and

employment growth rates and is especially strong for sales. While interesting as more evidence

that the shape of SBU forecast distributions has predictive value for firm-level outcomes, the

interpretation of these additional results is unclear. If the subjective and true forecast distributions

were identical, higher moments of the subjective distribution would have no marginal predictive

power for (mean) realized growth rates after conditioning on the subjective first moment. Thus,

the marginal predictive value of subjective skewness for realized growth rates is evidence about

the nature of systematic differences between subjective and true forecast distributions.

        In summary, we find strong evidence across various exercises of predictive content in the

shape of SBU forecast distributions over employment growth rates. The evidence of predictive


                                                                                                      26
content in the shape of SBU forecast distributions over sales growth rates is weaker. We leave it

for future research to explain why.

Do Repeat Applications of the Survey Instrument Affect Responses?

        Repeated application of a survey instrument can influence how a respondent thinks about

the survey questions, affecting his or her responses over time. Binder (2019), for example, finds

that inflation forecasts and inflation uncertainty decline with the number of previous responses

among participants of the New York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations. Patterns like these

raise questions about how to interpret the survey data and their properties.

        To investigate this matter in the SBU, we regress the natural logarithm of subjective

uncertainty on the respondent's number of previous survey completions as of month t.18 We control

for time effects, because the average number of completions among respondents at t covaries with

calendar time. We include firm effects to isolate within-firm variation. The results, reported in

Table 6, reveal no statistically significant evidence of survey application effects. Moreover, the

point estimates imply tiny effects. For example, the coefficient in column (2) says ten previous

survey completions lowers the log of subjective uncertainty by -0.03. This effect is about 1 percent

of the dependent variable mean value and 3 percent of its standard deviation. Unreported results

for mean expectations also reveal no evidence of survey application effects.

        Figure 10 reports results for a nonparametric specification that allows an unrestricted

relationship between the firm's reported value of log subjective uncertainty and its number of

previous completions. As before, we include firm and time fixed effects in the specification. As

seen in the left panel of Figure 10, there is weak evidence of small negative survey application

effects when we do not activity weight the firm-level observations. The effect appears to settle in


18
  Logging yields a more normally distributed outcome variable, but similar results hold when using
unlogged subjective uncertainty as the dependent variable.
                                                                                                     27
over about nine completions and then stabilize at a value about 5-6 percent as large as the mean of

the dependent variable and 20-25 percent of its standard deviation. The activity-weighted results

in the right panel of Figure 10 show no indication of survey application effects.19

        In summary, Table 6 and Figure 10 support three inferences. First, there is little evidence

against the null that repeated survey applications have zero effect on survey responses. Second,

the point estimates imply tiny survey application effects. Third, large survey application effects

are quite unlikely, given the precision of the point estimates. We conclude that survey application

effects on reported responses are not a major concern in the SBU.

The Impact of Replacing Discrete with Continuous Distributions

        To this point, we have interpreted survey responses literally in calculating subjective

moments. As remarked in Section 1.A, we don't know how respondents conceptualize uncertainty.

Instead of a mass point at the "worst" case in a five-point distribution, for example, the respondent

might contemplate a range of bad outcomes. Rather than a discrete distribution, respondents might

think in terms of continuous or mixed distributions. To get some sense of whether this issue matters

much, we now interpret responses as approximations to an underlying continuous distribution.

        Let ( and( denote support points and probabilities in the raw survey data for  =

1,2,3,4,5. Assume that these survey responses derive from the following continuous density:

                  +              3+ - 9 + + 9
                       ,for  z          ,     { ,  
               9 - +                2      2
                (                (W+ + ( ( + (M+
     () =                ,for  z        ,        {,  = 2,3,4, (5)
          ((M+ - (W+ )/2            2       2
               |                  } + | 3| - }
                    ,for   z            ,       ~.
             | - }                   2      2




19
  This pattern suggests that repeated application of the survey instrument has modest negative effects on
the subjective uncertainty reported by small firms.
                                                                                                       28
Equation (5) specifies five adjoining uniform density segments. The leftmost segment is centered

at + , the "worst" forecast outcome in the raw survey data. It extends leftward from + by

(+ - 9 )/2 units and rightward by (9 - + )/2. Given its length, the height of the density

segments is selected to exhaust, + , the mass assigned to the "worst" outcome in the raw data. The

next segment extends from (+ + 9 )/2 to (9 + \ )/2 and so on, with the height of each density

segment selected to exhaust the corresponding mass point in the raw data. In other words, equation

(5) takes the mass assigned to each support point in the raw data and spreads it uniformly in

symmetric interval around the support point.

       Figure 11 compares the first and second moments generated from (5) to the corresponding

moments computed directly from the SBU data. The two approaches to moment calculation yield

nearly identical results over almost the entire range of sales growth rates in the data. Only for the

1st and 99th quantiles of log subjective uncertainty do we see notable deviations between the

discrete and continuous interpretations of the data. In the Online Appendix, we also show that

continuous and discrete interpretations of SBU data perform equally well with respect to the

predictive value of mean expectations for realized growth rate outcomes. The discrete

interpretation performs slightly better with respective to the predictive value of subjective

uncertainty for the magnitude of absolute forecast errors. These results suggest that the five-point

probability distributions elicited by the SBU are not an important source of approximation errors.

How Does Sample Composition Affect Our Expectation and Uncertainty Indices?

       The SBU is a panel survey with entry and attrition over time. That raises the possibility

that sample mix changes could materially impact movements in the first- and second-moment

indices in Section 4. To explore this matter, we fit employment-weighted regressions of the form,

           R =  + R + R ,                                                             (6)


                                                                                                  29
where R is a measure of growth rate expectations or subjective uncertainty for firm  in month

,  is a vector of firm fixed effects, and R is a vector of time effects. The estimated R constitute

a time series of employment-weighted outcomes that control for changes in the mix of firms in the

sample. Dropping  in (6) and refitting an employment-weighted regression, the estimated R

recover the original indices described in Section 4.

       Figure 12 displays the results of fitting (6) ­ with and without firm fixed effects ­ for sales

growth rate expectations and subjective uncertainty about sales growth rates. Controlling for

sample composition has a sizable impact on the evolution of the expectations and uncertainty

indices until late 2016 but matters little thereafter. In this regard, we note that our sample has

become larger and more representative of the U.S. industry distribution over time. These sample

improvements may explain why sample composition effects have diminished over time.



Concluding Remarks

       We develop and field a new panel survey of business executives that elicits subjective

forecast distributions over own-firm future outcomes. In terms of question design, our key

innovation lets survey respondents freely select support points and probabilities in five-point

distributions. In terms of data collection, our monthly panel Survey of Business Uncertainty covers

about 1,750 firms drawn from all 50 states, every major nonfarm industry, and a range of firm

sizes. We continue our efforts to expand the panel, improve the quality of SBU data, and better

understand how business managers conceptualize uncertainty and form forecasts.

       SBU respondents update their forecast distributions frequently, usually by small amounts.

When respondents express greater uncertainty today, they make larger future revisions to the

support points and probabilities in their forecast distributions. These patterns suggest that


                                                                                                   30
respondents are attentive to the survey, and that they supply meaningful data. Indeed, we show

that the subjective forecast distributions have predictive power for firm-level sales and

employment growth rates in multiple respects: Mean expectations are predictive of realized growth

rates. Subjective uncertainty (the standard deviation of the forecast distribution) is predictive for

the magnitude of future forecast errors and the extent of future forecast revisions.

       We also develop evidence about the conditions that lead to high subjective uncertainty over

own-firm future outcomes. Specifically, subjective uncertainty has a pronounced V-shaped

relation to the firm's recent past growth rate and to the firm's most recent revision to its expected

growth rate. In other words, large recent changes and large recent forecast revisions lead to high

forward-looking uncertainty. As the sample grows and firm-level response histories lengthen, the

SBU will become increasingly useful for analyzing the determinants of subjective uncertainty and

other aspects of belief formation and revision.

       Finally, we use the SBU micro data to build monthly indices of aggregate U.S. business

expectations and uncertainty for sales growth rates, employment growth rates, and investment rates

at a one-year look-ahead horizon. We began publishing these indices in November 2018, and they

are now carried by Bloomberg, FRED, and Haver Analytics. We regard these indices as works in

progress, but we hope they will aid policymakers and analysts in assessing the outlook for the US

economy and the extent of uncertainty about the outlook.




                                                                                                  31
References

Altig, David, Jose Maria Barrero, Nick Bloom, Mike Bryan, Steven J. Davis, Brent Meyer, and
        Nick Parker, (2019a. "The Survey of Business Uncertainty: Data Audit and Edit
        Methodology," Technical Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
Altig, David, Nick Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Brent Meyer and Nick Parker, 2019b. "Tariff
        Worries and U.S. Business Investment, Take Two," Macroblog, Federal Reserve Bank of
        Atlanta, 25 February.
Altig, David, Jose Maria Barrero, Nick Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Brent Meyer, and Nick Parker,
        2019c. "New Evidence Points to Mounting Trade Policy Effects on U.S. Business
        Activity," Macroblog, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 1 November.
Akepanidtaworn, Klakow, Rick Di Mascio, Alex Imas and Lawrence Schmidt, 2019. "Selling
      Fast and Buying Slow: Heuristics and Trading Performance of Institutional Investors,"
      working paper.
Awano, Gaganan, Nicholas Bloom, Ted Dolgy, Paul Mizen, Rebecca Riley, Tatsuro Senga, John
     Van Reenend, Jenny Vyas and Philip Wales, 2018. "A Firm-Level Perspective on Micro-
     and Macro-level Uncertainty," ESCoE Discussion Paper 2018-10, July.
Bachmann, Ruediger, Kai Carstensen, Stefan Lautenbacher and Martin Schneider, 2018.
     "Uncertainty and Change: Survey Evidence of Firms' Subjective Beliefs," working
     paper.
Bachmann, Ruediger and Stefan Elstner, 2015. "Firm optimism and pessimism," European
     Economic Review, 79 (October), 297-325.
Bachmann, Ruediger, Stefan Elstner and Eric R. Sims, 2013. "Uncertainty and economic
     activity: Evidence from business survey data," American Economic Journal:
     Macroeconomics, 5, no. 2, 217-49.
Bailey, Warren, Alok Kumar and David Ng, 2011. "Behavioral biases of mutual fund
        investors," Journal of Financial Economics, 102, no. 1, 1-27.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom and Steven J. Davis, 2016. "Measuring economic policy
       uncertainty," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, no. 4, 1593-1636.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom and Steven J. Davis, 2019. "The Extraordinary Rise in Trade
      Policy Uncertainty," VOX CEPR Policy Portal, 17 September.
Barrero, Jose Maria, 2019. "The Micro and Macro of Managerial Beliefs," working paper,
       Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México.
Barber, Brad and Terrance Odean, 2001. "Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and
       common stock investment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, no. 1, 261-292.
Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham, J. R. and Campbell R. Harvey, 2013. "Managerial
      Miscalibration," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, no. 4, 1547-1584.
Binder, Carola C., 2019. "Panel Conditioning in the Survey of Consumer Expectations," working
       paper.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2009. "The impact of uncertainty shocks," Econometrica, 77, no. 3, 623-685.

                                                                                              32
Bloom, Nicholas, Philip Bunn, Scarlet Chen, Paul Mizen, Pawel Smietanka, Greg Thwaites and
      Garry Young, 2018a. "Brexit and uncertainty: insights from the Decision Maker
      Panel," Fiscal Studies, 39, no. 4, 555-580.
Bloom, Nicholas, Hong Cheng, Mark Duggan, Hongbin Li and Franklin Qian, 2018b. "Do CEOs
      Know Best? Evidence from China," NBER Working Paper No. 24760.
Bloom, Nicholas, Steven J. Davis, Lucia Foster, Brian Lucking, Scott Ohlmacher and Itay
      Saporta Ecksten, 2017. "Business-Level Expectations and Uncertainty," working paper.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta and Andrei Shleifer, 2019. "Diagnostic
       Expectations and Stock Returns," Journal of Finance, 74, no. 6, 2839-2874.
Caves, Richard E., 1998. "Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and
       Mobility of Firms," Journal of Economic Literature, 36 (December), 1947-1982.
Chen, Cheng, Tatsuro Senga, Chang Sun and Hongyong Zhang, 2019. "Uncertainty, Imperfect
       Information and Learning in the International Market," working paper.
Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012. "What can survey forecasts tell us about
       information rigidities?" Journal of Political Economy, 120, no. 1, 116-159.
Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015. "Information rigidity and the expectations
       formation process: A simple framework and new facts," American Economic
       Review, 105, no. 8, 2644-78.
Colacito, Riccardo, Mariano M. Croce, Liu, Yang Liu and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2018. "Volatility
       risk pass-through," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 25276.
Davis, Steven J., 2017. "Policy Uncertainty vs. the VIX: Streets and Horizons," proceedings of
       the Federal Reserve Board Workshop on Global Risk, Uncertainty and Volatility,
       Washington, DC. At https://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/steven.davis/speaking.html.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 1992. "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
       Employment Reallocation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, no. 3 (August), 819-
       863.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 1999. "Gross job flows," Handbook of Labor Economics,
       Volume 3, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Elsevier Science B.V.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda, 2006. "Volatility and
       dispersion in business growth rates: Publicly traded versus privately held firms," NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual, 21, 107-179.
Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F. Manski, 1997. "Using expectations data to study subjective
      income expectations," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92, no. 439, 855-
      867.
Datta, Deepa, Juan M. Londono, Bo Sun, Daniel O. Beltran, Thiago R.T. Ferreira, Matteo M.
       Iacoviello, Mohammad R. Jahan-Parvar, Canlin Li, Marious Rodriguez and John H.
       Rogers, 2017. "Taxonomy of Global Risk, Uncertainty, and Volatility Measures," Board
       of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers
       Number 1216.


                                                                                             33
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesus, Pablo Guerron-Quintana, Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez, and Martin
      Uribe, 2011. "Risk matters: The real effects of volatility shocks," American Economic
      Review, 101, no. 6, 2530-61.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Yueran Ma and Andrei Shleifer, 2016. "Expectations and investment," NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual, 30, 379-431.
Guiso, Luigi and Giuseppe Parigi, 1999. "Investment and demand uncertainty," Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 114, no. 1, 185-227.
Guvenen, Fatih, Serdar Ozkan and Jae Song, 2014. "The nature of countercyclical income
      risk," Journal of Political Economy, 122, no. 3, 621-660.
Handley, Kyle and J. Frank Li (2018). "Measuring the Effects of Firm Uncertainty on Economic
      Activity: New Evidence for One Million Documents," University of Michigan.
Hassan, Tarek A., Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent and Ahmed Tahoun, 2019. "Firm-level
      political risk: Measurement and effects," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, no. 4
      (November), 2135-2202.
Hurd, Michael D., 1999. "Anchoring and Acquiescence Bias in Measuring Assets in Household
       Surveys," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 19, 111-136.
Jurado, Kyle, Sydney Ludvigson and Serena Ng, 2015. "Measuring uncertainty," American
       Economic Review, 105, no. 3, 1177-1216.
Juster, F. Thomas and Richard Suzman, 1995. "An Overview of the Health and Retirement
        Study," Journal of Human Resources, 30, S7-S56.
Kozeniauskas, Nicholas, Anna Orlik and Laura Veldkamp, 2018. "What are uncertainty
      shocks?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 100 (December), 1-15.
Lamont, Owen, 2002. "Macroeconomic forecasts and microeconomic forecasters," Journal of
      Economic Behavior and Organizations, 48, no. 3, 265-280.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Geoffrey Tate, 2005. "CEO overconfidence and corporate investment,"
     Journal of Finance, 60, no. 6, 2661-2700.
Marinovic, Ivan, Marco Ottaviani and Peter Sorensen, 2013. "Forecasters' Objectives and
      Strategies," in Graham Elliot and Allan Timmerman, editors, Handbook of Economic
      Forecasting, Volume 2, Part B, 690-720.
Manski, Charles F. 2004. "Measuring expectations," Econometrica, 72, no. 5, 1329-1376.
Manski, Charles F. 2018. "Survey measurement of probabilistic macroeconomic expectations:
      progress and promise." NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 32, 411-471.
Massenot, Baptiste and Yuri Pettinicchi, 2018. "Can firms see into the future? Survey evidence
      from Germany," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 145, 66-79.
Puetz, Alexander and Stefan Ruenzi, 2011. "Overconfidence among professional investors:
       Evidence from mutual fund managers," Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 38,
       nos. 56, 684-712.
Rozsypal, Filip and Kathrin Schlafmann, 2017. "Overpersistence bias in individual income
      expectations and its aggregate implications," CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP12028.

                                                                                              34
Salgado, Sergio, Fatih Guvenen and Nicholas Bloom, 2019. "Skewed business cycles," National
      Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 26565.
Scotti, Chiara, 2016. "Surprise and uncertainty indices: Real-time aggregation of real-activity
        macro-surprises," Journal of Monetary Economics, 82, 1-19.
Tanaka, Mari, Nicholas Bloom, Joel M. David and Maiko Koga, 2019. "Firm Performance and
      Macro Forecast Accuracy," Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.




                                                                                                  35
                            Table 1: Summary Statistics for
                           Support Points and Probabilities
                                                                           Support Point Outcomes
                               Employment Growth Rate,                        Sales Growth Rate,                   Investment Rate (I/K),
        Support Point               Next 12 Months                             Next 4 Quarters                        4 Quarters Ahead
                               Mean                SD                     Mean                 SD                 Mean                   SD
              1                -0.106            0.166                    -0.042              0.123               0.047                0.143
              2                -0.049            0.111                     0.001              0.087               0.073                0.203
              3                 0.014            0.080                     0.044              0.075               0.110                0.293
              4                 0.067            0.095                     0.081              0.086               0.152                0.390
              5                 0.115            0.124                     0.121              0.111               0.213                0.522
              N                          7064                                        7159                                    6433
                                                                        Support Point Probabilities (%)
                                Employment Growth Rate,                       Sales Growth Rate,                      Investment Rate,
        Support Point                  Next 12 Months                          Next 4 Quarters                        4 Quarters Ahead
                                  Mean                 SD                 Mean                 SD                 Mean                   SD
              1                  10.875               9.438               12.438             11.399              12.770                12.310
              2                  18.318               9.621               18.799              9.346              18.793                 9.200
              3                  41.480              17.801               37.921             15.710              38.340                16.079
              4                  19.238              11.158               19.933             10.514              19.334                10.586
              5                   9.459               6.879               10.387              7.119              10.316                7.356
              N                             7064                                     7159                                    6433
     Notes: The upper panel reports means and standard deviations of the five support points in the subjective probability distributions over future
     own-firm employment growth rates, sales growth rates, and investment rates. The lower panel reports means and standard deviations for the
     corresponding probabilities. The sample includes all responses between 10/2014 and 10/2019 for which we can construct an expectation.




          Table 2: Summary Statistics for Forecast Means,
              Subjective Uncertainty, and Realizations
                                                                           (1)        (2)        (3)      (13)      (14)       (15)      (16)      (17)
Firm-Level Variables                                                        N        mean        sd       p10       p25        p50       p75       p90

Mean Employment Growth Rate Forecast, Next 12 Months                     7,064       0.009     0.080     -0.050    -0.011     0.006     0.033     0.078
Employment Growth Rate Uncertainty, Next 12 Months                       7,067       0.058     0.064      0.014    0.022      0.038     0.065     0.117
Realized Employment Growth Rate, Next 12 Months                          3,871       0.023     0.162     -0.133    -0.043     0.011     0.082     0.187

Mean Sales Growth Rate Forecast, Next 4 Quarters                         7,159       0.041     0.079     -0.016     0.011     0.035     0.067     0.118
Sales Growth Rate Uncertainty, Next 4 Quarters                           7,160       0.044     0.048      0.010    0.016      0.028     0.052     0.095
Realized Sales Growth Rate, Next 4 Quarters                              3,091       0.050     0.262     -0.250    -0.063     0.047     0.175     0.353

Mean Expected Investment Rate (I/K), 4 Quarters Ahead                    6,433       0.115     0.296     0.005      0.013     0.035     0.088     0.240
Uncertainty about Investment Rate (I/K), 4 Quarters Ahead                6,432       0.042     0.105     0.002      0.005     0.013     0.033     0.086
Realized Investment Rate (I/K), 4 Quarters Ahead                         7,186       0.091     0.253     0.001      0.008     0.024     0.067     0.180

Current Sales (Millions of Dollars)                                       7,377      35.738 106.600 0.735 2.625 7.500 21.300 74.450
Current Employment                                                       17,387     401.185 999.226 17.000 58.000 139.000 288.000 700.000
Employment Growth Rate, Past 12 Months (Reported)                         7,488       0.021 0.123 -0.095 -0.018 0.017 0.069 0.143

Notes: This table reports summary statistics computed using data from SBU survey waves between 10/2014 and 10/2019. We winsorized
the firm-level variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles before computing the summary statistics.




                                                                                                                                                          36
   Table 3: What fraction of respondents update their probability distributions for a
                given outcome between nearest same-topic surveys?
   Respondents Revising Their:                                                                        Fraction (SE)                     N
   Vector of Probabilities for Employment 12 Months Ahead                                             0.947 (0.005)                   4,665
   Vector of Probabilities for Sales Growth Next 4 Quarters                                           0.947 (0.005)                   4,786
   Vector of Probabilities for Investment 4 Quarters Ahead                                            0.947 (0.006)                   4,639
   Vector of Support Points for Employment 12 Months Ahead                                            0.959 (0.004)                   4,665
   Vector of Support Points for Sales Growth Next 4 Quarters                                          0.957 (0.004)                   4,786
   Vector of Support Points for Investment 4 Quarters Ahead                                           0.971 (0.004)                   4,639
   Employment Growth Expectations for Next 12 months                                                  0.993 (0.002)                   4,519
   Employment Growth Uncertainty for Next 12 months                                                   0.993 (0.003)                   4,519
   Sales Growth Expectations for Next 4 quarters                                                      0.993 (0.002)                   4,757
   Sales Growth Uncertainty for Next 4 quarters                                                       0.993 (0.002)                   4,757
   Investment Rate Expectations for 4 quarters ahead                                                  0.982 (0.005)                   4,552
   Investment Rate Uncertainty for 4 quarters ahead                                                   0.988 (0.004)                   4,552
Notes: The top half of the table reports the fraction of respondents who provide different probabilities or support points between nearest same-
topic surveys (i.e., in month t relative to month t-2 or t-3) for each of the three topics covered by the SBU. The bottom half reports the fraction of
respondents whose subjective expectations and subjective uncertainty measures change between nearest same-topic surveys. Standard errors in
parentheses, clustered by firm. The sample includes all survey waves from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




       Table 4: Cosine similarity between responses in nearest
                         same-topic surveys
                                                                                            Mean Cosine Similarity
     Vectors of Responses                                                                 between vectors reported in                   N
                                                                                         months t and t+2 (or t+3) (SE)
     Vector of Probabilities for Employment 12 Months Ahead                                         0.883 (0.004)                    4,661
     Vector of Probabilities for Sales Growth Next 4 Quarters                                       0.884 (0.004)                    4,786
     Vector of Probabilities for Investment 4 Quarters Ahead                                        0.878 (0.004)                    4,639
     Vector of Support Points for Employment Growth 12 Months Ahead                                 0.844 (0.005)                    4,500
     Vector of Support Points for Sales Growth Next 4 Quarters                                      0.885 (0.053)                    4.715
     Vector of Support Points for Investment 4 Quarters Ahead                                       0.976 (0.008)                    4,634

   Notes: This table reports the mean cosine similarity across the response vectors respondents provide in consecutive
   survey waves, i.e. the cosine between the vector provided in month t and the vector provided in month t+2 or t+3 when
   the respondent next receives the survey for the same topic. For each pair of consecutive responses for a given topic, we
   compute the cosine similarity between the vectors of probabilities and outcomes the respondent provides, and then we
   compute the mean cosine similarity. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered by firm. The sample includes all SBU
   responses between 10/2014 and 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                  37
                Table 5: Autocorrelations of Growth Rate
                      Expectations and Uncertainty
                             (1)         (2)        (3)              (4)          (5)        (6)                (7)          (8)        (9)
                             Sales Growth Expectations,               Sales Growth Uncertainty,                log(Sales Growth Uncertainty,
Dependent Variable                    q to q+4                                 q to q+4                                   q to q+4)


Lag Dependent Variable    0.482***      0.484***     0.193***      0.631***       0.630***    0.146***    0.696***       0.695***     0.132***
                           (0.035)       (0.035)      (0.052)       (0.026)        (0.027)     (0.028)     (0.016)        (0.017)      (0.020)
Date FE                                     Y            Y                            Y           Y                          Y            Y
Firm FE                                                  Y                                        Y                                       Y

Observations                  4,757        4,757         4,601       4,759         4,759         4,603        4,758        4,758        4,602
R-squared                     0.253        0.267         0.479       0.462         0.501         0.689        0.507        0.533        0.714
Firms                          752          752           596         752           752           596          752          752          596
Notes: This table estimates the autocorrelations of sales growth expectations and uncertainty looking four quarters ahead, with and without firm
and date fixed effects. Data are from the SBU and include all survey waves between 10/2014 and 10/2019. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
clustered by firm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




            Table 6: Subjective Uncertainty Is Unaffected by
              the Number of Previous Survey Completions
                                                            (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)
                                                                            log of Subjective Uncertainty over:
                                                             Sales Growth,         Employment Growth,           Investment Rate,
    Dependent Variable                                      Next 4 Quarters           Next 12 Months            4 Quarters Ahead

    No. of Previous Responses                             -0.004         -0.003          -0.001       -0.005          0.005          -0.015
                                                         (0.004)        (0.005)         (0.003)      (0.004)         (0.009)        (0.012)
    Firm FE                                                 Y              Y               Y            Y               Y              Y
    Date FE                                                 Y              Y               Y            Y               Y              Y
    Employment-weighted                                                    Y                            Y                              Y

    Mean of Dependent Variable                            -3.541        -3.711          -3.245        -3.497          -4.371        -4.474
    SD of Dependent Variable                              0.880         0.807           0.834         0.773           1.537         1.427

    Observations                                             6,791          6,588          6,712         6,703         6,196          6,042
    Within R-squared                                       3.04E-04       2.22E-04       7.62e-05      7.01E-04      1.85E-04       1.21E-03
    R-squared                                                0.709          0.695          0.796         0.742         0.707          0.681
    Notes: We regress the natural logarithm of subjective uncertainty about employment growth over the next 12 months, sales growth over
    the next four quarters, and the firm's investment rate four quarters hence on the firm's number of previous survey responses using data
    from SBU survey waves between 10/2014 and 3/2019. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
    p<0.1




                                                                                                                                               38
Figure 1: SBU Excerpts, September 2016 Onwards
            1a. Employment Questions




                                                 39
1b. Sales Questions




                      40
                                                                   Figure 2: Subjective Expectations
                                                                          Predict Realizations
                                                                             Figure 2a
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 2b
                                                                         Raw Panel                                                                                                          Time Fixed Effects
                                       .2




                                                                                                                                     .2
               Realized Sales Growth




                                                                                                            Realized Sales Growth
                                       .1




                                                                                                                                     .1
                                       0




                                                                                                                                     0
                                       -.1




                                                                                                                                     -.1
                                              -.2         -.1            0           .1          .2    .3                                                             -.2           -.1         0              .1        .2     .3
                                                                   Expected Sales Growth                                                                                                   Expected Sales Growth
                                              Coeff. = .585, S.E. = .084, R^2 = .026, N = 3037                                                                        Coeff. = .575, S.E. = .086, Within R^2 = .046, N = 3037




                                                                             Figure 2c                                                                                                                 Figure 2d
                                                                Firm & Time Fixed Effects                                                                                                           Cross Section
                        .2




                                                                                                                                Mean by Firm Realized Sales Growth
                                                                                                                                                                     .2
Realized Sales Growth
                        .1




                                                                                                                                                                     .1
                        0




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                     -.1
                        -.1




                                                    -.1              0                    .1           .2                                                                   -.1                0                    .1               .2
                                                                  Expected Sales Growth                                                                                                  Mean by Firm Expected Sales Growth
                                             Coeff. = .477, S.E. = .119, Within R^2 = .282, N = 2913                                                                        Coeff. = 1.00, S.E. = .229, R^2 = .045, N = 514


                                        Notes: This figure shows bin-scatter plots of sales growth expectations for the next 4 quarters on the horizontal axis against measured
                                        sales growth over the ensuing 4 quarters on the vertical axis. Figure 2a shows the relationship in the raw panel data. Figure 2b adds
                                        time effects. Figure 2c controls for both firm and time fixed effects. Figure 2d shows the relationship in the cross section, showing the
                                        mean-by-firm expected sales growth on the horizontal axis and mean-by-firm realized sales growth on the vertical axis. The reported
                                        statistics below each sub-figure figure correspond to the population OLS regression, reporting firm-clustered standard errors. Data are
                                        from all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     41
                                           Figure 3: Subjective Uncertainty Predicts
                                                   Absolute Forecast Errors
                                                           Figure 3a                                                                                                          Figure 3b

                                                           Raw Panel                                                                                                       Time Fixed Effects
                          .35




                                                                                                                                              .35
                          .3
Absolute Forecast Error




                                                                                                       Absolute Forecast Error
                                                                                                                                              .3
                          .25




                                                                                                                                              .25
                          .2




                                                                                                                                              .2
                          .15




                                                                                                                                              .15
                          .1




                                                                                                                                              .1
                          .05




                                                                                                                                              .05
                                 0              .05             .1              .15             .2                                                  -.05         0           .05           .1            .15   .2
                                                      Subjective Uncertainty                                                                                              Subjective Uncertainty
                                Coeff. = .931, S.E. = .100, R^2 = .048, N = 3037                                                                    Coeff. = 1.12, S.E. = .108, Within R^2 = .057, N = 3037.




                                                              Figure 3c                                                                                                        Figure 3d
                                                      Firm and Time Effects                                                                                                  Cross Section
                          .35




                                                                                                                                              .35
                                                                                                       Mean by Firm Absolute Forecast Error
                          .3




                                                                                                                                              .3
Absolute Forecast Error
                          .25




                                                                                                                                              .25
                          .2




                                                                                                                                              .2
                          .15




                                                                                                                                              .15
                          .1




                                                                                                                                              .1
                          .05




                                                                                                                                              .05




                                -.05             0              .05              .1             .15                                                  0               .05           .1              .15         .2
                                                      Subjective Uncertainty                                                                                       Mean by Firm Subjective Uncertainty
                                Coeff. = .386, S.E. = .148, Within R^2 = .004, N = 2913.                                                             Coeff. = 1.27, S.E. = .239, R^2 = .082, N = 511



                                Notes: This figure shows a bin-scatter plots of subjective uncertainty (i.e. the SD of respondents' subjective probability distribution) over
                                sales growth for the next 4 quarters on the horizontal axis, against the respondent's absolute forecast error for sales growth over the
                                ensuing 4 quarters on the vertical axis. Figure 3a shows the relationship in the raw panel. Figure 3b controls time effects. Figure 3c adds
                                firm effects. Figure 3d shows the relationship in the cross section, plotting mean-by-firm subjective uncertainty on the horizontal axis
                                against the mean-by-firm absolute forecast error on the vertical axis. The statistics below each figure correspond to the population OLS
                                regression, reporting firm-clustered standard errors. Data are from all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                               42
                                                                                                          Figure 4. Subjective uncertainty in month t predicts the
                                                                                                               extent of forecast revisions in the next survey
                                                                                                Figure 4a. Revising the Vector of Support Points                                                                                                                  Figure 4b. Revising the Vector of Probabilities
                                                  Cos(Supp. Points t+2, Supp. Points t)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cos(Probabilities t+2, Probabilities t)
                                                                                          .95




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .95
                                                                                          .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .9
                                                                                          .85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .85
                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .8
                                                                                          .75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .75
                                                                                          .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .7
                                                                                                0            .05         .1          .15           .2        .25                                                                                            0          .05          .1          .15            .2   .25
                                                                                                                      Subjective Uncertainty t                                                                                                                                    Subjective Uncertainty t
                                                                                                Coeff. = -.96, S.E. = .120, R^2 = .033, N = 4698                                                                                                            Coeff. = -.28, S.E. = .072, R^2 = .006, N = 4733

                       Notes: Both bin scatters show 50 quantiles of subjective uncertainty at t for the sales growth rate over the next four quarters. The vertical
                       axis in panel (a) shows the cosine similarity between forecast distribution support points for sales growth rates at t and t+2 (or t+3) for the
                       same firm. The vertical scale in panel (b) shows cosine similarity for forecast distribution probabilities at t and t+2 (or t+3). We report the
                       underlying firm-level regressions with firm-clustered standard errors at the bottom of each figure, using SBU data from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                              Figure 5: Uncertainty and subsequent expectations revisions
                                                                                                                       Figure 5a.                                                                                                                                                     Figure 5b.
                                                                                                                     Raw Panel                                                                                                                                                  Firm and Date FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           .06
Abs. Change in Expectations, t to t+2




                                                                                                                                                                   Abs. Change in Expectations, t to t+2
                                        .12




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .05
                                        .1
                                        .08




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .04
                                        .06




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .03
                                        .04
                                        .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .02




                                              0                                                        .05               .1                .15          .2                                                                              -.05                              0               .05                  .1         .15
                                                                                                               Sales Growth Uncertainty, t                                                                                                                                    Sales Growth Uncertainty, t
                                              Coeff. = .533, S.E. = .053, R^2 = .177, N = 3230                                                                                                                                                        Coeff. = .205, S.E. = .098, Within R^2 = .016, N = 3136
                       Notes: This figure shows two bin-scatter plots. On the horizontal axis, both show 50 quantiles of subjective uncertainty for sales growth over
                       the next four quarters, measured in month t. Both have on the vertical axis the absolute value of the change in sales growth expectations
                       (looking for quarters ahead) that we measure across consecutive surveys, in months t and t+2 (or t+3). On the left, we show the relationship
                       for the raw panel, while on the right we show the relationship controlling for firm and date fixed effects. We report the underlying firm-level
                       regressions with firm-clustered standard errors at the bottom of each figure, using SBU data from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          43
                                                   Figure 6: Subjective uncertainty has a V-shaped relationship
                                                        to past sales growth and recent forecast revisions
                                                                   Figure 6a.                                                                                                                             Figure 6b.




                                                                                                                                                                             .12
                                      .15
  Subjective Uncertainty in Month t




                                                                                                                                         Subjective Uncertainty in Month t
                                                                                                                                                                             .1
                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                                             .08
                                                                                                                                                                             .06
                                      .05




                                                                                                                                                                             .04
                                                                                                                                                                             .02
                                      0




                                             -.6      -.4          -.2          0      .2         .4                                                                                -.2            -.1               0            .1        .2
                                                      Sales Growth, Past 12 Months (Reported)                                                                                             Change in Sales Growth Expectations, t-2 to t

                                      Notes: This figure shows two bin-scatter plots plot with subjective uncertainty over sales growth in the four quarters following month t on
                                      the vertical axis. Figure 6a shows shows 100 quantiles of past sales growth for the 12 months prior to t on the horizontal axis. Figure 6b
                                      instead shows 100 quantiles of the change in sales growth expectations (looking four quarters ahead) between t ­ 2 (or t - 3) and t. Data are
                                      from the SBU and the sample covers all survey waves from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                               Figure 7: Business Expectations and
                                                                 Figure 7a.
                                                                            Uncertainty Indices Figure 7b.
                                                      Business Expectations Indices                                                                                                          Business Uncertainty Indices
                                      .025




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .045
Employment Growth Expectations




                                                                                                                                                                             .06
                                                                                                                                         Employment Growth Uncertainty
                                                                                                       .05
                                                                                                             Sales Growth Expectations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sales Growth Uncertainty
                                                                                                                                                                             .055
                                      .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .04
                                                                                                       .04




                                                                                                                                                                             .05
                                      .015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .035
                                                                                                       .03




                                                                                                                                                                             .045
                                      .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .03
                                                                                                       .02




                                                                                                                                                                             .04
                                      .005




                                                                                                                                                                             .035




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .025
                                                                                                       .01




                                       2015m1        2016m1       2017m1      2018m1   2019m1                                                                                 2015m1      2016m1         2017m1          2018m1    2019m1
                                                                       date                                                                                                                                   date

                                                            Employment Growth Next 12 Months                                                                                                   Employment Growth Next 12 Months
                                                            Sales Growth Next 4 Quarters                                                                                                       Sales Growth Next 4 Quarters


                                Notes: The above figures show our three business expectations (left) and business uncertainty (right) indices for: (1)
                                employment growth in the next 12 months; (2) sales growth in the next 4 quarters. The same figures appear on the official
                                Survey of Business Uncertainty website.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        44
                                                                           Figure 8: External comparisons
                                                                          Figure 8a.                                                                                                                   Figure 8b.




                                                                                                                                         .045




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24
                                                                                                           .08
      .05




                                                                                                           .07




                                                                                                                                         .04
                                                                                                                 Duke CFO Survey




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        22
      .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1-year VIX
                                                                                                           .06
SBU




                                                                                                                                   SBU
                                                                                                                                         .035




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
      .03




                                                                                                           .05




                                                                                                                                         .03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        18
      .02




                                                                                                           .04




                                                                                                                                         .025
      .01




                                                                                                           .03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
       2015m1                                            2016m1       2017m1       2018m1      2019m1                                     2015m1                                          2016m1    2017m1        2018m1       2019m1
                                                                           date                                                                                                                          date

                                                             Sales Growth Expectations Index                                                                                                       Sales Growth Uncertainty Index
                                                             Duke CFO Survey Revenue Growth Expectations                                                                                           1-year VIX (smoothed)
             Correlation: .723                                                                                                                  Correlation: .674
            Notes: The left panel shows our Sales Growth Expectations Index and the revenue-weighted average of expected change in revenue growth
            rates for the next 12 months among firms answering the Duke CFO Survey. Because the Duke Survey goes to field in the third month of each
            quarter, we align its quarterly responses to March, June, September and December. The right panel shows our Sales Growth Uncertainty
            Index and the 1-year VIX on the 15th day of each month (Source: CBOE via Bloomberg). If the 15th is not a trading day we try the 16th,
            14th, 17th, 13th, 18th, or 12th in that order. We smooth the monthly 1-year VIX series using the same procedure as for our Business
            Uncertainty Index.




                                                       Figure 9: Skewness in realized future growth
                                                       rates rises with current subjective skewness
             Realized Skewness (Empl. Growth)




                                                                                                                                                       Realized Skewness (Sales Growth)
                                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                           Notes: We split the distribution
                                                                                                                                                                                           subjective skewness about future
                                                .5




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                           employment growth (looking 12 months
                                                                                                                                                                                           ahead) and sales growth (looking four
                                                                                                                                                                                           quarters ahead) into four quartiles. The
                                                                                                                                                                                           horizontal axis plots the mean
                                                                                                                                                 -.2
                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                           subjective skewness in each quartile.
                                                                                                                                                                                           We then compute the skewness of
                                                                                                                                                                                           realized employment or sales growth
                                                -.5




                                                                                                                                                 -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                           rates over the ensuing 12 months or
                                                      -1.5           -1           -.5            0         .5                               1
                                                                              Subjective Skewness                                                                                          four quarters for each quartile and plot
                                                                                                                                                                                           that on the vertical axis. N(Employment)
                                                                     Employment Growth, Next 12 Months                                                                                     = 3,692. N(Sales) = 3,037.
                                                                     Sales Growth, Next 4 Quarters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        45
                                                       Figure 10: Previous Survey Completions and
                                                                       Subjective UncertaintyFigure 10b
                                                              Figure 10a
                                                           Dep Variable: log(Sales Growth Uncertainty)                                                                                                                                                                 Dep Variable: log(Sales Growth Uncertainty)
                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                Coefficient
                           Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                         -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.2
                                         -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.4
                                               1       3       5       7        9        11        13        15        17        19        21        23        25        27        29                                                                     1        3       5       7        9        11        13        15        17        19        21        23        25        27        29
                                                   2       4       6       8        10        12        14        16        18        20        22        24        26        28        30+                                                                   2        4       6       8        10        12        14        16        18        20        22        24        26        28        30+
                                                             Number of Previous Responses                                                                                                                                                                              Number of Previous Responses
                                               Mean (SD) of Dep. Var: -3.54 (.880)                                                                                                                                                                       Mean (SD) of Dep. Var: -3.71 (.806). Employment-weighted
                                     Notes: This figure shows estimated coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from regressions of the natural log of sales growth
                                     uncertainty (looking ahead over the next 4 quarters) on a set of indicators for the firm's number of previous SBU responses on the right-
                                     hand-side as well as firm and date fixed effects (not shown). Figure 4a (left) shows unweighted estimates, while figure 4b (right) weights
                                     observations by employment (winsorized at 500 employees). We top-code the number of responses at 30. Data are from the SBU and
                                     cover all survey waves between 10/2014 and 10/2019. We construct the 95 percent confidence intervals based on firm-clustered robust
                                     standard errors.




                                                                       Figure 11: Reinterpreting SBU responses as
                                                                       approximations to continuous distributions
                                                                                              Figure 11a                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 11b
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                              log(Subjective Uncertainty) (Continuous)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
Expected Sales Growth (Continuous)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -3
                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -4
                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -5
                                     -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -6




                                           -.35            -.25                -.15                -.05                 .05                     .15                 .25                   .35                                                                 -6                       -5                            -4                            -3                            -2                       -1
                              Expected Sales Growth (Discrete)                                                 log(Subjective Uncertainty) (Discrete)
            Coeff. = 1.00, S.E. = .001, R^2 = .996, N = 7159                                     Coeff. = 1.01, S.E. = .006, R^2 = .978, N = 7155
      Notes: The above figures show binscatter plots that compare out measures of subjective mean expectations and uncertainty interpreting SBU responses as
      discrete or subjective distributions. Our baseline measures interpret SBU responses as discrete, 5-point probability distributions. Alternatively, we can interpret
      the responses as a continuous distribution consisting of 5 bins, with a uniform distribution within each bin. Figure 12a plots 100 percentiles of our discrete
      measure of expected sales growth (looking four quarters ahead) on the horizontal axis against the continuous measure of expectations on the vertical axis. Figure
      12b repeats the exercise for the natural logarithm of subjective uncertainty. Statistics below the figure correspond to the OLS regression in the underlying
      microdata, reporting firm-clustered standard errors. Data are from all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          46
                                        Figure 12: Sales growth expectations and uncertainty indices
                                                      controlling for panel composition




                                                                                                                      .045
                            .05
Sales Growth Expectations




                                                                                           Sales Growth Uncertainty
                                                                                                                      .04
                            .04




                                                                                                                      .035
                            .03




                                                                                                                      .03
                            .02




                                                                                                                      .025
                            .01




                             2015m1         2016m1     2017m1       2018m1     2019m1                                  2015m1          2016m1      2017m1       2018m1     2019m1
                                                             date                                                                                        date

                                        Sales Growth Expectations Index                                                             Sales Growth Uncertainty Index
                                        Sales Growth Expectations Index, Respondent FEs                                             Sales Growth Uncertainty Index, Respondent FEs
                                  Correlation .985                                                                           Correlation .946
                             Notes: The above figures plot our baseline sales growth expectations (left) and uncertainty (right) indices alongside an
                             alternative index that accounts for changing panel composition across months. Our baseline index computes an activity-
                             weighted mean for expectations or uncertainty in each month. By contrast, the alternative index computes the same
                             activity weighted mean after controlling for respondent fixed effects. We smooth both indices using the same procedure.
                             Data are from the SBU and cover all months between 1/2015 and 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                     47
Surveying Business Uncertainty
     Online Appendices,
 Not Intended for Publication
David Altig, Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Brent
                     Meyer, and Nicholas Parker
                             January 2020




                                                                          48
A. Additional Information about
            the SBU




                                  49
 Figure A.1: Capital Expenditures
Questionnaire, May 2019 - present




                                    50
Figure A.2: Capital Expenditures
Questionnaire, Prior to May 2019




                                   51
Figure A.3: Sales Question (in levels) During SBU
   1st Generation (August 2014 - August 2016)




                                                    52
       A.1 Obtaining subjective moments (expectations
      and uncertainty) about future own-firm outcomes
                  from the raw survey data
· The next few slides slides explain how we use the survey responses to
  compute moments of subjective probability distributions over own­firm
  future outcomes.
· We calculate first and second moments of the subjective growth rate
  distributions of employment, sales and unit costs over the next 12 months
  or four quarters, as appropriate.
· Following standard practice in the literature on business­level dynamics,
  we calculate the growth rate of x from t­1 to t as " = 2(" - "() )/
   " + "() . *
· For capital investment, we calculate first and second moments of the
  subjective distribution for future investment rate (I/K).
*
 This definition of the growth rate of sales is convenient for its symmetry around zero and because its support lies on the
closed interval [­2, 2], with the endpoints of the interval corresponding to entry and exit. See "Gross Job Creation, Gross
Job Destruction, and Employment Reallocation" by Steven J. Davis and John Haltiwanger in the 1992 Quarterly Journal of
Economics for a more extensive discussion.




                                            A.1.1 Employment
    Respondent Data
     = firm's current employment level, as reported by the respondent
    2 = employment 12 months hence,  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
    2 = theassociated probabilities,  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5


    Scenario-Specific Growth Rates
    2 = 2(2 -)/(2 +),  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5


    First and Second Moments of the Subjective Growth Rate Distribution
    Mean()         = H
                     2G) 2 2

    Var() = H
            2G) 2 2 - Mean()
                                                        I

    SD() = Var()




                                                                                                                              53
          A.1.2 Sales Revenue (Current SE Questionnaire)
Respondent Data
 = firm's sales revenue in the current quarter, as reported by the respondent
2 = respondent's scenario­specific sales growth rate from now to four quarters hence,  =
1, 2, 3, 4, 5
2 = theassociated probabilities,  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

Implied Future Sales Level
               PQRSTUVW
2 = 1 +                 ,  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
                  )XX


Scenario­Specific Growth Rates (re­expressing respondent growth rates to our growth rate measure)
2 = 2(2 -)/(2 +) = 22 /(2 + 2),  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

First and Second Moments of the Subjective Growth Rate Distribution
Mean() = H          2G) 2 2

Var() = H
        2G) 2 2 - Mean()2
                                                     I


SD() =             Var()




             A.1.3 Sales Revenue (Old SE Questionnaire)
Respondent Data
 = firm's sales revenue in the current quarter, as reported by the respondent
2 = sales revenue four quarters hence,  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
2 = the associated probabilities,  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5


Scenario­Specific Growth Rates
2 = 2(2 -)/(2 +),  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5


First and Second Moments of the Subjective Growth Rate Distribution
Mean()            = H
                    2G) 2 2

Var() = H
        2G) 2 2 - Mean()
                                                     I

SD() = Var()




                                                                                                    54
                          A.1.4 Capital Investment Rates
Respondent Data
 = firm's capital investment expenditures in the current quarter, as reported by the respondent
2 = capital investment expenditures 4 quarters hence,  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
2 = the associated probabilities,  = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
 = our measure of the firm's capital stock


Current Investment Rate
 = / , which we winsorize at the 1st and 99th percentiles


First and Second Moments of the Subjective Distribution for Future Capex:
Mean()          = H
                  2G) 2 2

Var() = H
        2G) 2 2 - Mean()
                                                 I

SD() =           Var()




                        Capital Investment Rates (cont.)
 First and Second Moments of the Distribution of Future Investment Rates:
 Mean()=Mean()/
 SD()=SD()/
 We also winsorize these first and second moments at the 1st and 99th percentiles




                                                                                                  55
                 A.2 Measuring Capital Stocks
· In September and October 2017 as well as February and March 2019 we included
  the following special question with the CC (Capex/Unit Costs) questionnaire:




· We thus have data on our respondents' capital stock (PPENT) during at most two
  survey waves.
                                                                        `
· Our goal is to approximate firm's actual investment rates       in quarter t, as well
                                                              a "
  as their expectations and uncertainty for future investment from the standpoint
                    `             `
  of quarter t: Ec a      , SDc a        in all survey waves.
                         "de              "de




· We impute the firm's capital stock based on the responses to the special
  questions from September/October 2017 and February/March 2019 as follows:
   · Case 1. We observe a firm's reported capital stock once:
     In this case we impute the capital stock " = K ,the reported capital stock for all survey
     waves t the firm participates in.
   · Case 2. We observe a firm's reported capital stock twice, once in 2017 and once in 2019:
     - In months prior to the first observation, we impute " = ) , the first reported capital stock.
     - In months between the two observations, we impute " = "  ) + 1 - "  I where
     " = (I -)/(I - ) ), 2 ,  = 1,2 is an integer representing the month in which we
     observe a reported capital stock, and ) <  < I .
   · Case 3. We do not observe the firm's reported capital stock in any survey wave:
     - We impute " based on a regression log m" = o + " + log m" + m" where  indexes
     firms,  indexes sectors, and  indexes dates and  = employment. Our estimate for         s=
     1.009 0.013 and the R-squared of the regression is 0.432.
· After these imputations we have a (rough) measure of K for most survey
  responses.
· We winsorize our measure of K at the 1st and 99th percentile before starting the
  imputation procedure, and again before running the procedure in case 3.
· Since May 2019, the core SBU questionnaire asks for the current value of the
  capital stock directly (See Figure A.1), so we no longer need to impute the value
  based on employment or special questions.




                                                                                                       56
 A.3 Obtaining Realizations and Forecast Errors
· Consider a firm's subjective mean employment growth in month t,
  looking 12 months ahead (Mean()).
· We measure the firm's realized employment growth Realized() as
  follows:
   · We record its realized employment level in month t+12, "d)I.
   · We record Realized()= 2  ("d)I­ " )/("d)I+ " ).
   · If "d)I is missing, we use "d)) and define Realized()= 2 
     ("d))­ " )/("d))+ " )*12/11.
   · If "d)) is also missing, we use "d)v and record Realized()=
     2  ("d))­ " )/("d))+ " )*12/13.
   · If "d)v is also missing, we use the same formula with "d)X, or
     with "d)e as a last resort.
· We record the firm's forecast error for employment growth looking 12
  months ahead = Mean() ­ Realized().




· Consider a firm's subjective mean sales growth in month t of quarter q,
  looking 4 quarters ahead (Mean()).
· We measure the firm's realized sales growth, Realized(Sale), as follows:
   · We record its current quarterly sales level reported in month t+12, "d)I .
   · We record Realized(Sale)= 2  ("d)I ­ " )/("d)I - " ).
   · If "d)I is missing, we proceed differently depending on whether t is the first,
     second, or third month of the quarter.
       · If t is the first month of the quarter, we then try "d)v and "d)e in that order.
       · If t is the second month of the quarter, we then try "d)) and "d)v in that order.
       · If t is the third month of the quarter, we then try "d)) and "d)X in that order.
   · This procedure ensures that we use the level of quarterly sales reported in quarter
     q+4, though not necessarily in month t+12.

· We record the firm's forecast error for sales growth looking four quarters
  ahead = Mean() ­ Realized()




                                                                                             57
· Consider a firm's subjective mean investment rate looking four quarters
  ahead, as recorded in month t of quarter q (Mean()).
· We measure the firm's realized investment rate in quarter q+4
  Realized() as follows:
   · We record their current quarterly capital expenditures level reported in month t+12,
     "d)I .
   · We record Realized()= "d)I /" . Here we use " rather than "d)I to
     focus on changes in investment rather than changes in (potentially mis-measured)
     capital stocks. This is symmetrical with how we construct expectations of future
     investment Mean() in Appendix A.
   · If "d)I is missing, we proceed differently depending on whether t is the first,
     second, and third month of the quarter.
       · If t is the first month of the quarter, we then try "d)v and "d)e in that order.
       · If t is the second month of the quarter, we then try "d)) and "d)v in that order.
       · If t is the third month of the quarter, we then try "d)) and "d)X in that order.
   · This procedure ensures that we use the level of quarterly capital expenditures
     reported in quarter q+4, though possibly not in month t+12.

· We record the firm's forecast error for its investment rate looking four
  quarters ahead = Mean() ­ Realized().




                                                                                             58
         A.2 More Information about the SBU Recruitment Process and Panel

       The SBU's panel of respondents consists of firms from throughout the United States

economy. With the exception of agriculture and government, our panel includes firms from every

sector and a broad range of sizes (in terms of number of employees), from owner-operated firms

to large publicly-traded companies.

Panel Recruitment Process

       A team of research assistants at the Atlanta Fed identifies and recruits new panel members

using lists of eligible firms purchased from an affiliate of Dunn & Bradstreet, a supplier of business

information and research. We requested that the lists include a proportion of firms in each (broad,

one-digit) sector according to sectoral contribution to US Gross Domestic Product. We expect that

the sampling universe in Dunn & Bradstreet differs from the US Census' since small and young

firms less likely to appear in the former data, whereas the Census observes the universe of

establishments and firms with employment. The recruiting team deduplicates lists of contacts that

we subsequently purchase, preventing us from re-recruiting previously listed firms.

       The team of research assistants at the Atlanta Fed randomly selects potential recruits from

a contact list, focusing on contacts in senior finance or executive roles. Since our goal is to use the

survey to create indices that aggregate business expectations and uncertainty, the team

oversamples firms with more than 100 and 500 employees. Figure A.5 uses a bin-scatter plot to

show that the probability of being contacted increases with firm size. Our recruiters contact

potential respondents via telephone, explaining the nature of the survey, its purpose, and informs

them that individual survey responses are confidential. If the contact agrees to join the survey, the

recruiter records his or her email address, where we deliver the personalized link to the survey




                                                                                                     59
instrument each month. We verify that the email address is valid by sending a confirmation that

they have joined the SBU panel.

       During the period covering June 2014 to June 2018, approximately 42 percent of potential

contacts reached via telephone agreed to join the panel. Among those who joined, 62 percent

responded at least once. In any given month about 43 percent of all continuing panel members

responded to the survey.1 We believe these are fairly high and adequate response rates for a

voluntary and complex survey.

       To maintain the survey's sample size over time, we constantly recruit new firms to join the

panel and replace those who stop responding. Our aim is to maintain a sample size of about 300

or more responses per month.

       Figure A.6 shows how the equally-weighted and employment-weighted firm distribution

in the Census Bureau's 2015 Statistics on US Businesses compares with: (1) our sampling frame;

(2) the sample of firms we contact; and (3) those who ultimately respond. We report the

comparison separately in terms of firms size, industry sector, and region. Focusing on firm size in

Figure A.6a, the sampling frame indeed under-samples small firms (with less than 20 employees),

and over-samples medium to large firms (with more than 20 and less than 500 employees). As we

saw in Figure A.5, our recruiters contact larger firms with a higher probability, in particular those

with more than 100 employees. Finally, looking at the employment-weighted distribution of SBU

responses, we see that it is skewed towards larger firms. This finding is a robust fact of voluntary

firm level surveys. For example, the Decision Maker Panel survey fielded by the University of

Nottingham in collaboration with the Bank of England, which uses the SBU's methodology to




1
 These response rates refer to the period between September 2016 (when we made the most recent major
change to the survey) and October 2018.



                                                                                                   60
elicit five-point subjective probability distributions, has a similar skew towards larger firms (see

Bloom et al., 2018).

       Figure A.7 repeats the comparison between the unweighted and employment-weighted

composition of our survey panel against the rest of the US economy in terms of firm size, sector,

age, region. Figure A.7e also shows the share of firms and share of employment in our sample

belonging to publicly traded firms, as self-reported answers to special questions fielded in

February and March 2019. Figures A.6 and A.7 also appear in the Online Appendix of Barrero

(2019), which also uses SBU data. Figure A.8 shows the distribution of respondents (one per firm)

according to their job titles. CFOs and other financial managers account for about 60 percent of

respondents, with other C-level managers accounting for about 20 percent, and owners for about

10 percent. Thus, our respondents are primarily business executives who should actively

participate in budgeting, forecasting, and decision making.

       Table A.1 asks whether we can predict continued participation in the survey based on

observable firm characteristics. As we already knew from Figure A.6a, larger firms are more likely

to responding to a subsequent survey. We find that the magnitude of expectations and uncertainty

do not correlate strongly with subsequent participation, which eases worries that our sample of

loyal respondents may differentially select firms that are relatively optimistic or pessimistic, or

more or less uncertain. While fixed effects for time, sector, region, or firm increase the R-squared

of these predictive regressions, the within R-squared is small and the same order of magnitude as

the R-squared from regressions that do not include fixed effects.

Data Collection, Preparation, and Cleaning

       In a typical month, we email our respondents an individual link to the survey instrument

on the Monday of the second full week of the month. We collect responses during the next two




                                                                                                  61
workweeks, so data collection ends on the Friday of the third full week of the month. The Monday

following the end of the survey collection, we download and store all responses in a folder that

contains all prior monthly data files. Then we run programs to combine all monthly files into an

aggregate file and perform a series of automated cleaning procedures on the raw survey data. This

cleaning program includes the following processes:

   1. Rescaling of subjective probabilities: On occasion, respondents provide subjective

       probabilities that do not add up to 100 percent. We rescale probability vectors that add to

       between 95 and 105 percent to make them add up to 100 percent. We disregard responses

       whose probability vectors add up to a number outside the 95-105 percent range. Typically,

       this filter eliminates very few of the responses in a given month.

   2. Adjustment of estimates and probabilities given in reverse order: In rare instances, some

       respondents provide their range of estimates in reverse order, starting with their "highest

       case" value in the "lowest case" scenario. We reverse these estimates and their associated

       probabilities to conform to the typical response pattern of lowest to highest.

Once the automated cleaning processes are completed, we perform a manual review of all large

firms (firms with 1000 employees or more). We check a large firm's current month responses for

consistency with its historical responses. If responses are found to be inconsistent, we conduct a

review of publicly available information, including news reports, public filings, etc. If a review of

publicly available information is inconclusive, we consider contacting the respondent for

clarification. We focus on larger firms for the manual audit because of their greater weight on the

aggregate indices produced from the SBU survey.

       We also conduct a manual review of forecast errors once a month, as we describe in the

main text. After computing realized growth rates (for employment in the 12 months after a survey,




                                                                                                   62
for sales in the four quarters following a survey), we compute the forecast error for a firm

responding in month  as the difference between the ex-ante subjective mean and the realized

growth rate we record in the data. We manually review the responses of firms whose forecast

errors for employment and sales growth exceed one in absolute value. We use the firm's history

of responses about current sales and employment to correct obvious mistakes. Common mistakes

include missing or added zeros and reporting an annual rather than a quarterly sales figure. If we

cannot find an obvious mistake, we flag these observations as potential errors, typically excluding

them from analyses of forecast error behavior.




                                                                                                 63
                                                              Figure A.4: Time Series of the Number of SBU
                                                                      Figure A.4a
                                                                                  Responses    Figure A.4b




                                                                                                                                      200
                      200




                                                                                                                   No. of Responses
                                                                                                                                      150
                      150
 No. of Responses




                                                                                                                                      100
                      100




                                                                                                                                      50
                      50




                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                       2014m7    2015m7    2016m7      2017m7   2018m7   2019m7
                                                                                                                                                                    date
                      0




                                2014m7                            2015m7   2016m7      2017m7    2018m7   2019m7                                            Sales Questionnaire
                                                                                    date
                                                                                                                                                            Employment Questionnaire
                                                                               Sales Questionnaire                                                          Investment Questionnaire

Notes: The figure on the left shows the number of responses to the SBU's sales questionnaire for which we can compute an expectation for
sales growth over the next four quarters. The figure on the right shows the number of responses to the sales, employment, and investment
questionnaires for which we can compute, respectively, expected sales growth for the next four quarters, employment growth for the next
twelve months, and the expected investment rate four quarters ahead. Data are from the SBU and include all survey months between
10/2014 and 10/2019.




                                                              Figure A.5: Probability of being contacted by
                                                              our research team as a function of firm size
                                                        .04
                    Probability of Successful Contact




                                                                                                                                                Notes: This figure shows the probability with
                                                                                                                                                which the team of SBU recruiters successfully
                                                        .03




                                                                                                                                                contacts a firm in the SBU's sampling frame,
                                                                                                                                                for each percentile of the firm size
                                                                                                                                                distribution in the sampling frame (on the
                                                        .02




                                                                                                                                                horizontal axis). We say that a firm is
                                                                                                                                                successfully contacted if our recruiting team
                                                                                                                                                speaks to a person at the firm in question.
                                                                                                                                                Data are from the SBU's sampling frame
                                                        .01




                                                                                                                                                combined with the recruiting team's call log
                                                                                                                                                data as of October 2018.
                                                        0




                                                              0                1                     2                                      3
                                                                                    10^X Employees




                                                                                                                                                                                                  64
            Figure A.6: The SBU sampling frame and sample
                             A.6a. Firm Size
                                        Figure A.6a.i                                                                  Figure A.6b.ii


          1 to 19 Empl.                                                                1 to 19 Empl.



         20 to 99 Empl.                                                               20 to 99 Empl.



       100 to 499 Empl.                                                             100 to 499 Empl.



            500+ Empl.                                                                   500+ Empl.



                          0       .2         .4        .6           .8         1                       0          .2            .4                .6              .8
                                           Unweighted Share                                                        Employment-weighted Share
                                  US Economy                     Sampling Frame                                 US Economy                       Sampling Frame
                                  Firms Contacted                SBU Responses                                  Firms Contacted                  SBU Responses

Notes: The above figures show the unweighted (left) and employment-weighted (right) shares of (1) firms in the US economy, (2) the SBU's Dunn & Bradstreet
sampling frame, (3) firm that SBU recruiters contact successfully, and (4) SBU responses across each of the five employment categories shown on the vertical
axis. The SBU data covers all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019. Data for the US Economy come from the US Census Bureau's 2015 Statistics on US
Businesses. An observation in the SBU is a response for which we can construct a subjective probability distribution for one of employment, sales, investment,
or unit cost growth looking one year ahead. Data for the sampling frame include all purchased lists and call logs up to October 2018. We say that SBU
recruiters contact a firm successfully if they manage to speak to an individual at the firm.




                                                             A.6b. Industry
                                        Figure A.6b.i                                                                  Figure A.6b.ii

                            Construction (23)                                                                 Construction (23)
              Durables Manufacturing (31-32)                                                    Durables Manufacturing (31-32)
                    Educational Services (61)                                                         Educational Services (61)
                  Finance and Insurance (52)                                                        Finance and Insurance (52)
      Health Care and Social Assistance (62)                                            Health Care and Social Assistance (62)
                             Information (51)                                                                  Information (51)
               Leisure and Hospitality (71-72)                                                   Leisure and Hospitality (71-72)
                   Mining and Utilities (21-22)                                                      Mining and Utilities (21-22)
         Nondurables Manufacturing (31-32)                                                 Nondurables Manufacturing (31-32)
                Other Services Exc. Govt (81)                                                     Other Services Exc. Govt (81)
   Professional and Busines Services (54-56)                                         Professional and Busines Services (54-56)
                             Real Estate (53)                                                                  Real Estate (53)
      Retail and Wholesale Trade (41, 44-45)                                            Retail and Wholesale Trade (41, 44-45)
     Transportation and Warehousing (48-49)                                            Transportation and Warehousing (48-49)

                                                  0         .1            .2                                                        0      .05         .1   .15        .2
                                                      Unweighted Share                                                                  Employment-weighted Share
                      US Economy                      Sampling Frame                                       US Economy                       Sampling Frame
                      Firms Contacted                 SBU Responses                                        Firms Contacted                  SBU Responses
Notes: The above figures show the unweighted (left) and employment-weighted (right) shares of (1) firms in the US economy, (2) the SBU's Dunn & Bradstreet
sampling frame, (3) firm that SBU recruiters contact successfully, and (4) SBU responses across each of the industry sectors shown on the vertical axis. The SBU
data covers all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019. Data for the US Economy come from the US Census Bureau's 2015 Statistics on US Businesses. An
observation in the SBU is a response for which we can construct a subjective probability distribution for one of employment, sales, investment, or unit cost
growth looking one year ahead. Data for the sampling frame include all purchased lists and call logs up to October 2018. We say that SBU recruiters contact a
firm successfully if they manage to speak to an individual at the firm.




                                                                                                                                                                            65
                                          Figure A.6c.i
                                                               A.6c. Region                                              Figure A.6c.ii

      New England (1)                                                                    New England (1)
        Mid Atlantic (2)                                                                   Mid Atlantic (2)
 East North Central (3)                                                             East North Central (3)
West North Central (4)                                                              West North Central (4)

     South Atlantic (5)                                                                  South Atlantic (5)

East South Central (6)                                                              East South Central (6)

West South Central (7)                                                             West South Central (7)

          Mountain (8)                                                                       Mountain (8)

             Pacific (9)                                                                        Pacific (9)


                           0                    .1               .2                                           0          .05        .1      .15        .2        .25
                                           Unweighted Share                                                               Employment-weighted Share
                       US Economy                    Sampling Frame                                        US Economy                     Sampling Frame
                       Firms Contacted               SBU Responses                                         Firms Contacted                SBU Responses


Notes: The above figures show the unweighted (left) and employment-weighted (right) shares of (1) firms in the US economy, (2) the SBU's Dunn & Bradstreet
sampling frame, (3) firm that SBU recruiters contact successfully, and (4) SBU responses across each of the regions (Census Divisions) shown on the vertical
axis. The SBU data covers all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019. Data for the US Economy come from the US Census Bureau's 2015 Statistics on US
Businesses. An observation in the SBU is a response for which we can construct a subjective probability distribution for one of employment, sales, investment,
or unit cost growth looking one year ahead. Data for the sampling frame include all purchased lists and call logs up to October 2018. We say that SBU
recruiters contact a firm successfully if they manage to speak to an individual at the firm.




          Figure A.7: SBU Panel Distributions vs US Economy
                            A.7a. Firm Size
                                         Figure A.7a.i                                                                         Figure A.7a.ii

         1 to 19                                                                       1 to 19 Empl.



        20 to 99                                                                      20 to 99 Empl.



      100 to 499                                                                    100 to 499 Empl.



           500+                                                                          500+ Empl.



                   0           .2          .4          .6        .8        1                           0            .2              .4            .6        .8
                                          Unweighted Share                                                          Employment-weighted Share
                                    SBU Responses             US Economy                                          SBU Responses                   US Economy

    Notes: The above figures show the unweighted (left) and employment-weighted (right) shares of (1) SBU responses and (2) the US
    Economy accounted for by firms each of the five employment categories shown on the vertical axis. The SBU data covers all waves of
    the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019. Data for the US Economy come from the US Census Bureau's 2015 Statistics on US Businesses. An
    observation in the SBU is a response for which we can construct a subjective probability distribution for one of employment, sales,
    investment, or unit cost growth looking one year ahead.




                                                                                                                                                                       66
                                                               A.7b. Industry
                                                        Figure A.7b.i                                                                              Figure A.7b.ii

                         Construction (23)                                                                    Construction (23)
           Durables Manufacturing (31-32)                                                       Durables Manufacturing (31-32)
                 Educational Services (61)                                                            Educational Services (61)
               Finance and Insurance (52)                                                           Finance and Insurance (52)
   Health Care and Social Assistance (62)                                               Health Care and Social Assistance (62)
                          Information (51)                                                                     Information (51)
            Leisure and Hospitality (71-72)                                                      Leisure and Hospitality (71-72)
                Mining and Utilities (21-22)                                                         Mining and Utilities (21-22)
      Nondurables Manufacturing (31-32)                                                    Nondurables Manufacturing (31-32)
             Other Services Exc. Govt (81)                                                        Other Services Exc. Govt (81)
Professional and Busines Services (54-56)                                            Professional and Busines Services (54-56)
                          Real Estate (53)                                                                     Real Estate (53)
   Retail and Wholesale Trade (41, 44-45)                                               Retail and Wholesale Trade (41, 44-45)
  Transportation and Warehousing (48-49)                                               Transportation and Warehousing (48-49)

                                               0       .05     .1         .15   .2                                                  0        .05    .1   .15        .2   .25
                                                        Unweighted Share                                                                Employment-weighted Share
                                                             SBU Responses                                                                           SBU Responses
                                                             US Economy                                                                              US Economy


Notes: The above figures show the unweighted (left) and employment-weighted (right) shares of (1) SBU responses and (2) the US Economy
accounted for by firms each of the sectors shown on the vertical axis. The SBU data covers all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019.
Data for the US Economy come from the US Census Bureau's 2015 Statistics on US Businesses. An observation in the SBU is a response for
which we can construct a subjective probability distribution for one of employment, sales, investment, or unit cost growth looking one year
ahead.




                                                             A.7c. Geography
                                                   Figure A.7c.i                                                               Figure A.7c.ii

     New England (1)                                                                       New England (1)
       Mid Atlantic (2)                                                                     Mid Atlantic (2)
East North Central (3)                                                               East North Central (3)
West North Central (4)                                                               West North Central (4)
     South Atlantic (5)                                                                   South Atlantic (5)
East South Central (6)                                                               East South Central (6)
West South Central (7)                                                               West South Central (7)
         Mountain (8)                                                                          Mountain (8)
            Pacific (9)                                                                           Pacific (9)

                          0         .05                .1           .15         .2                              0      .05              .1         .15         .2        .25
                                          Unweighted Share                                                               Employment-weighted Share
                                                     SBU Responses                                                                           SBU Responses
                                                     US Economy                                                                              US Economy
Notes: The above figures show the unweighted (left) and employment-weighted (right) shares of (1) SBU responses and (2) the US Economy
accounted for by firms in each Census Division as shown on the vertical axis. The SBU data covers all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to
10/2019. Data for the US Economy come from the US Census Bureau's 2015 Statistics on US Businesses. An observation in the SBU is a
response for which we can construct a subjective probability distribution for one of employment, sales, investment, or unit cost growth
looking one year ahead.




                                                                                                                                                                          67
                                                   A.7d. Firm Age
                                Figure A.7d.i                                                              Figure A.7d.ii

1989 & earlier                                                           1989 & earlier


   1990-1994                                                                1990-1994


   1995-1999                                                                1995-1999


   2000-2004                                                                2000-2004


   2005-2009                                                                2005-2009


        2010-                                                                    2010-


                 0      .2           .4           .6            .8                        0       .2         .4       .6           .8       1
                               Unweighted Share                                                        Employment-weighted Share
                       SBU Responses                   US Economy                                  SBU Responses             US Economy

  Notes: The above figures show the unweighted (left) and employment-weighted (right) shares of (1) SBU responses and (2) the US Economy
  accounted for by firms who hired their first paid employee during the years listed on the vertical axis. The SBU data covers all waves of the
  SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019. Data for the US Economy come from the US Census Bureau's 2015 Business Dynamics Statistics. An
  observation in the SBU is a response for which we can construct a subjective probability distribution for one of employment, sales,
  investment, or unit cost growth looking one year ahead. We obtained information on when SBU respondents hired their first paid employee
  based on a special question that accompanied the core SBU survey in January 2017.




                     A.7e. Publicly-traded vs. Privately-held

                                                                                               Notes: This figure shows the
                                                                                               share of unique firms in the
                                                                                               SBU and the share of
                                                                                               employment among all SBU
                                                                                               responses accounted for firms
                                                                                               whose shares traded in a
                                                                                               stock exchange or over-the-
                                                                                               counter markets.*
                                                                                                *We determine whether a firm is publicly-
   0                          .1                           .2                             .3
                                                                                               traded based on a special survey question
                                          Fraction
                                                                                               from February and March 2019
                         Publicly-traded Firms Share
                         Employment Share Publicly-traded Firms




                                                                                                                                                68
              Figure A.8: Job Titles of SBU Respondents




  Notes: This figure shows the percentage of SBU panel members whose job title corresponds to the categories on the vertical axis. The
  sample includes all firms that have been part of the SBU panel at any point between October 2014 and January 2020. The unit of
  observation is a firm.




           Table A.1: What variables predict continued
                   participation in the survey?
                                                       (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)               (7)           (8)
Dependent Variable                                                                 1(Firm Responds to a Subsequent Survey)
Estimator                                             OLS           OLS           OLS         OLS          OLS         OLS               OLS           Probit

log(Employment)                                    0.017***                                                 0.008*         0.000         0.005        0.031*
                                                    (0.005)                                                 (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.021)       (0.016)
Expected Sales Growth, Next 4 Quarters                             -0.012                      -0.008        -0.008        0.001         0.021        -0.036
                                                                  (0.077)                     (0.077)       (0.077)       (0.078)       (0.071)       (0.283)
log(Sales Growth Uncertainty), Next 4 Quarters                                   -0.009        -0.009        0.010         0.002       -0.018**        0.035
                                                                                (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.026)

Industry FE                                                                                                                  Y
Region FE                                                                                                                    Y
Date FE                                                                                                                      Y             Y
Firm FE                                                                                                                                    Y

Mean of Dep. Variable                                0.768         0.791         0.791         0.791         0.807          0.82         0.824         0.807

Observations                                           17,388         7,159        7,156         7,153        6,873         6,275         6,612         6,873
(Pseudo) R-squared                                     0.004          0.000        0.000         0.000        0.001         0.163         0.517         0.001
Within R-squared                                                                                                          2.23e-05       0.00102
Notes: This table attempts to predict whether a given firm responding to the SBU on date t responds to any subsequent SBU survey at a date t+j, j>0. We use the
current log(Employment), current sales growth expectations and uncertainty (looking four quarters ahead) as well as industry, region, time, and firm FEs as
potential predictors. Firm-clustered robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                69
           B. Additional Information about Survey Development and Testing

       We document the process through which we came up with the methodology to elicit five-

point discrete subjective probability distributions from business executives. Table B.1 summarizes

a series of question designs that we fielded and evaluated, initially as part of the BIE's special

question series and later in a new panel of firms for the Survey of Business Uncertainty.

October 2013: Initial question formulations

       We began fielding trial questions in October 2013, comparing two designs for eliciting

information about the firm's subjective distribution over its future sales growth rate. Figure B.1

displays screen shots. We randomly assigned each question design to half the participants.

   ·   The first design asked respondents to select the best, middle and worst-case percentage

       changes in the firm's sales over the next twelve months. A drop-down menu for each case

       let respondents choose among values ranging from -10 to +25 in one-point increments.

       Pop-up boxes instructed respondents to select a "best case" corresponding to the top ten

       percent of possible outcomes, a "worst case" corresponding to the bottom ten percent, and

       a "middle case" corresponding to a value the firm would use for planning purposes.

   ·   The second design asked respondents to assign probabilities to five pre-set interval bins for

       the possible percentage change in sales over the next year. The bins ranged from "less than

       -1 percent" at the bottom end to "more than 5 percent" at the top end.

       The first design resembles that of the Duke CFO Survey question about future stock market

returns, and the second is closer to that of the Bank of Italy's Survey on Investment in

Manufacturing. These two long-running surveys of business mangers offered a natural starting

point for thinking about SBU question design. We were particularly interested in two issues: First,




                                                                                                  70
whether the two designs yield similar inferences about mean expectations and uncertainty, and

second, the adequacy of the intervals in the five-bin design.

        Using the October 2013 responses, we constructed subjective distributions and compared

four moment statistics.2 The first design yielded a higher mean expectation than the second design

(4.2 and 1.9 percent, respectively, for the expected sales growth rate), greater dispersion in

expected sales growth rates (standard deviations of 5.9 and 1.7 percent), higher subjective

uncertainty (average standard deviation values of 3.6 and 1.4 percent), and more dispersion in

subjective uncertainty (standard deviations of 2.1 and 0.8 percent). For each moment, we reject

the null hypothesis of equality across the two question designs at a p-value under 0.001. Clearly,

the two question designs yield quite different inferences about firm-level forecast distributions.

        Each question design also has potentially serious weaknesses for our purposes. The first

design allows for only three support points, which affords a rather coarse characterization of the

subjective probability distribution. Moreover, the pre-set outcome range in the drop-down menu

may inject anchoring effects that distort the responses. Regarding the second design, a large body

of literature shows that (a) businesses differ greatly in their realized growth rates and (b) much of

the mass in the realized growth rate distribution lies outside the lowest and highest values (-1

percent and 5 percent) specified in the question. See, for example, the literature review in Davis

and Haltiwanger (1999). Taken together, (a) and (b) imply that it is infeasible to pre-specify a

modest number of support points or bins that allow all firms to characterize their subjective

forecast distributions in a reasonably granular manner. This observation argues strongly in favor

of letting respondents select the support points. Our survey responses to the second question design



2
 The first design yields a three-point discrete distribution with probability 0.1 for the "worst" case, 0.8
for the "middle" case and 0.1 for the "best." For the second design, we applied the user-selected
probability to the interval midpoint. We used 6% and -2% for the top and bottom intervals, respectively.



                                                                                                              71
suggest another reason as well. In particular, the typical respondent assigned a probability of about

30 or 40 percent to the middle bin (1.1 to 3 percent sales growth) and 10 to 20 percent to the outer

bins. This pattern is worrisome in light of empirical regularities (a) and (b). It suggests that the

question design leads respondents to put too much mass in our pre-set middle bin. This response

pattern fits the "middle means typical" heuristic, a well-known source of response distortion in the

survey design literature (e.g., Tourangeau, Couper, and Conrad, 2004).

November 2013: Alternative interval bins

       We retained the first question design in November 2013 but made it clearer that the worst,

middle and best cases correspond to support points with pre-set probabilities of 0.1, 0.8 and 0.1.

We tried a variant of the second design with much wider interval bins. Figure B.2 shows both of

the questions we tried in November. The wider bins more closely align with the range of outcomes

elicited by the first question design in October 2013 and better reflect the heterogeneity in observed

firm-level growth rates.

       The November 2013 results showed that the spread of the bin intervals in the second design

matter greatly. In particular, the moment statistics generated by the second question design in

November 2013 are much closer to the ones generated by the first design in either month. For

example, the second design yielded an average expected growth rate of 5.1 percent and average

uncertainty statistic of 5.8 percent in the November survey. Moreover, the same firms responded

quite differently to the October and November variants of the second question design. Among

firms that received and answered the second question in both months, the average expected growth

rate jumped from 1.7 to 5.1 percent, and the average subjective standard deviation jumped from

1.1 to 4.5 percent. In sharp contrast, among the firms that received and answered the first question

in both months, the average expected growth rate was nearly identical (3.3 and 3.2 percent), and




                                                                                                    72
the average subjective standard deviation was similar at 3.4 percent in October and 3.0 percent in

November. Finally, among firms that got the second design in October and the first design in

November, the moment statistics differ between months very similarly to how they differ across

the two designs in October.

       The foregoing discussion underscores two advantages of letting respondents select the

location of support points. First, it allows for a parsimonious question format (as in the first design)

while still accommodating enormous cross-firm heterogeneity in the central tendency and

dispersion of growth rates. Second, it avoids anchoring and types of response distortions that might

be introduced by pre-specifying support points or interval bins.

December 2013: Testing three-point versus five-bin designs on unit cost questions

       In December 2013, we modified the questions to refer to unit cost growth over the next 12

months. Figure B.3 shows screen shots. Again, the two question designs yielded systematic

differences in the moment statistics. Although the between-design discrepancies in December

2013 for unit cost growth were smaller than the ones for sales growth in October 2013, the results

reinforced our concerns about the pitfalls in pre-specifying the support points or bins.

January 2014: Freeing up the probabilities

       In January 2014, we began testing designs that let respondents freely select probabilities

and support points. We used a three-point distribution and returned to sales growth. We modified

the questionnaire to refer to scenarios for "low", "medium", and "high" growth, instead of the

"worst," "most likely," and "best" scenarios. Figure B.4 shows screenshots.

       With this design, respondents reported statistically significantly higher subjective

uncertainty and--particularly--greater heterogeneity in both forecasts and subjective uncertainty

concerning sales growth over the next 12 months. Letting respondents provide their own




                                                                                                      73
probabilities typically yielded more weight on the "high" and "low" scenarios ­ closer to 20 or 25

percent than the 10 percent specified in the October and November variants of this question.

Respondents also assigned a broad range of probabilities to "high" and "low" scenarios, typically

from 5 to 30 percent but in extreme cases as low as zero or as high as 80 or 85 percent. By contrast,

the three support point values they selected were similar to the ones they gave in October and

November. We did not remind respondents that probabilities should add up to 100 percent. Indeed,

20 percent submitted probability vectors that did not add up to 100.

       The January 2014 experiment led us to conclude that letting respondents select support

points and probabilities is feasible and allows them to express idiosyncratic features of their

subjective probability distributions. From a research standpoint, this question design means our

survey questions can capture heterogeneity in expectations and uncertainty in the cross-section of

firms as well as within firms over time.

February 2014: Testing a question about employment

       In February 2014 we essentially replicated the experiment from January, but now asked

BIE respondents to provide a three-point subjective probability distribution for their firm's

employment 12 months in the future. We first asked them for the firm's current number of

employees (including part-time). Then we asked them to provide three-point outcomes for the level

of employment ("low", "middle", and "high") twelve months into the future, and then assign a

probability to each of those three outcomes. See Figure B.5 for a screenshot.

       The February test showed BIE respondents were willing and able to express a three-point

discrete distribution for future employment levels. Similar to our prior tests of questions about

sales growth and unit cost growth, the employment levels question had a low rate of item

nonresponse, respondents gave monotonic outcomes across the "low", "medium", and "high"




                                                                                                   74
cases, and 98 percent of their probability assignments summed to 100 percent. Thus, we found it

feasible to obtain expectations and uncertainty about employment, which is a key indicator of firm

size and performance in the firm dynamics literature (e.g. see Davis and Haltiwanger, 1999).

March 2014: Repeating the three-point, three-probability sales question from January 2014

       The March 2014 BIE special question included a repeat of the January 2014 question,

namely asking respondents for "low", "middle", and "high" scenarios for sales growth over the

next year and subsequently ask them to assign a probability to each of these scenarios. (See Figure

B.6 for a screenshot.) We confirmed the suitability of the question and found responses to be

broadly consistent with those from January.

April-May 2014: Testing five-point, five-probability versions of the sales and employment

questions

       We decided to test a five-point version of the sales question in April 2014 (again as a

special question in the BIE survey), to see whether and how respondents took up the added

flexibility. We were also interested to see if we could capture more extreme outcomes by asking

for two additional "highest" and a "lowest" scenarios at the tails of the elicited sales growth

distribution. (Figure B.7 shows a screenshot of this version of the question.) We found this test to

be successful, with many respondents assigning more extreme outcomes and lower probabilities--

on the order of 10 percent--to the extreme outcomes.

       In May 2014 we tested a five-point version of the employment question from February

2014. The screenshot for this test, again implemented among BIE respondents, is shown in Figure

B.8. Once more, we found this test to be successful, with respondents assigning low probabilities

to the outermost "highest" and "lowest" scenarios and associating those outcomes with more

extreme outcomes.




                                                                                                  75
June 2014: Testing a three-point version of the sales question, plus asking for extreme scenarios

       In June 2014 we returned to the three-point sales question from January and March and

considered how responses changed if we asked for "best" and "worst" tail scenarios in addition to

the three-point distribution, without asking for associated probabilities for those tail scenarios.

Figure B.9 shows a screenshot of this test.

       Responses to the three-point question in this experiment yielded forecasts and subjective

uncertainty over future sales that had a similar mean and dispersion as those from January and

March. We interpreted this consistency between January, March, and June responses as a sign of

the reliability of our methodology.

       June 2014 was the last time we tested questions as part of the BIE special question series.

July 2014: First tests on the new SBU panel

       From July 2014 on, we conducted survey testing on a new panel of firms recruited

specifically for the Survey of Business Uncertainty (described in more detail in Online Appendix

E below). Following the A/B testing strategy employed previously, we split the sample randomly

and sent three-point or five-point versions of the questions, now covering three topics:

employment, sales growth, and prices. See Figure B.10 for screenshots of these questions.

       In the inaugural SBU survey, we found that respondents were willing and able to provide

monotonic scenarios (i.e. the "lowest" support point is less than the "low" support point, etc.)

across the five support points for the outcomes, that probability vectors nearly always summed up

to 100 percent, and that the distributions of respondents' implied subjective expectations and

uncertainty resembled those of the three-point questions we tested in previous months.

Additionally, as we first found in the April 2014 test, the five-point questions gave respondents

additional flexibility to express their perception of outcomes farther out on the tails. As a




                                                                                                 76
consequence of these findings we decided to focus on our five-point question design going

forward.

Summer and Early Fall 2014: Cognitive interviews and further development of questions

       During summer 2014, the team conducted cognitive interviews with 7 members of the BIE

panel to assess their understanding of the questions that constituted the new SBU survey. Most

interviewees found the questions to be interesting, worthwhile, and user-friendly. Much of the

feedback they provided was quite industry-specific and thus not particularly actionable since we

wanted our survey to work for firms throughout the private business sector.

       One useful finding from the interviews concerned the way we were asking respondents to

select the five potential support point outcomes ("lowest" to "highest"). Up to that point, we had

been using drop-down boxes with one-unit increments. For example, the bottom box would

correspond to -20 percent (or lower) sales growth over the next year, the next to -19, the following

one -18 percent, and so forth. Many respondents asked the increments to be finer in order to

increase precision.

       Additionally, we found that the drop-down boxes could be problematic. This was

especially true for sales, where we had made the range covered the drop-down box very large

(from less than -24 percent in the lowest case to more than +35 percent in the highest). Some

respondents confused the minus with a dash and thus ended up selecting the wrong outcome.

Others had difficulty working with such a large drop down menu. In light of these comments and

observations, we moved to an open-text question format, allowing respondents to enter the values

each of the support point outcomes freely for all questions. We tested that question design in

August 2014, which was the same as in July except for the replacement of the drop-down boxes

with open text boxes.




                                                                                                  77
        In early fall 2014 we also changed the format of the sales questionnaire to mimic that of

employment, namely asking for the current level of sales in dollars and asking for five potential

sales levels one year ahead, using an open-text format. We had been using this open-text, free

selection approach for the questions on employment levels because it was harder for us to preset

the support point outcomes in the presence of vast heterogeneity in the number of employees across

firms. We additionally changed the wording in the sales question to refer to quarterly values, given

that sales are a flow rather than a stock variable and are often tracked quarterly. See Figure A.2,

for a look at the revised sales question.

        During the August test we also tested questions on unit costs (which we had previously

tested in December 2013), capital investment (following the new sales question, see Figure A.1)

and new questions about profit margins (see Figure B.11). In September we conducted tests that

were very similar to those of August, also trying out questions on average prices.3

October 2014: Initial version of the SBU operates regularly

        In October 2014 we settled on the first stable version of the SBU questionnaire (at the time

known as the "Decision Maker Survey"). Since then, the survey has been administered monthly

out of the Atlanta Fed with monthly response rates averaging roughly 40 percent, resulting in about

300 responses per month. Up until October 2015 we divided the panel into three subgroups, each

answering questions about two topics in a given month, with topics including employment, sales,

capex, unit costs, average prices, and profit margins. From November 2015 to August 2016 we

used six sub-groups, each answering questions about two of the six topics.

September 2016 to April 2019




3
 See Figure B.11 for the wording of the prices and profit margins questions. In subsequent rounds of the
survey we eliminated the questions on these two topics and they are not part of our main analyses.



                                                                                                       78
       We made a major change to the SBU in September 2016, at which time we eliminated the

questions on average prices and profit margins. Based on feedback from our respondents these

were the questions that created the most confusion. Eliminating these two topics also allowed us

to split the sample into just two groups, greatly increasing the number of responses per topic per

month. Starting in September 2016, the monthly SBU form thus contained two of the four topics

in the following combinations: Average Unit Cost/Capital Expenditures (CC), and Sales

Revenue/Number of Employees (SE). We sorted our panel respondents randomly into two

subgroups. In a given month group A received the Sales Revenue/Number of Employees (SE)

questionnaire and vice versa for group B.

       In September 2016 we also changed the sales question back to asking about sales growth

rates looking ahead over the next four quarters, rather than sales levels four quarters ahead. Figure

A.2 reflects this change, in contrast with Figure 1b in the main text. Our rationale for the change

was that many respondents made mistakes in entering the dollar value of sales four quarters into

the future. Some common mistakes included giving an annual rather than quarterly value for the

firm's current or future sales level or failing to keep units consistent. In some cases, respondents

reported current sales in units of dollars and future values in thousands or millions of dollars, at

other times using different units across months. By asking for sales growth rates we created fewer

opportunities for respondents to make such mistakes.

May 2019 onwards

       In May 2019 we implemented a new round of changes to the SBU questionnaire. We

eliminated the unit cost growth questions given our limited ability to track actual changes in unit

costs and due to feedback from our respondents concerning that question. Several respondents

have cited difficulty answering questions about unit costs. Service firms, in particular, cited




                                                                                                   79
confusion about this question, often saying that unit costs are more relevant for manufacturing.

We therefore decided to concentrate on subjective probability distributions for future employment,

sales, and capital expenditures, asking about only one of these topics in a given month. These

changes expanded the number of respondents receiving questions about a given topic in a given

month. Having a rotating panel of three questions rotated monthly also means that a given firm

answers questions about a given topic once per quarter.

       Starting in May 2019, we also include a question about the level of the stock of capital (i.e.,

property, plant and equipment) as part of the investment questionnaire. Responses to this question

let us construct measures of current and future investment rates (I/K).




                                                                                                    80
 Figure B.1: October 2013 Trial Questions

                              Notes: This figure shows
                              screenshots from our first
                              trial at eliciting subjective
                              probabilities for future sales
                              growth in October 2013.
                              We performed an A/B test,
                              giving half of the Atlanta
                              Fed's BIE panel the three-
                              point question above and
                              the other half the bottom
                              question.




Figure B.2: November 2013 Trial Questions

                               Notes: This figure shows
                               screenshots     from     our
                               November 2013 test, again
                               attempting      to     elicit
                               subjective probabilities for
                               future sales growth. We
                               again performed an A/B
                               test, giving half of the
                               Atlanta Fed's BIE panel the
                               three-point question above
                               and the other half the
                               bottom question.




                                                               81
Figure B.3: December 2013 Trial Questions

                              Notes: This figure shows
                              screenshots      from      our
                              December 2013 test, now
                              attempting to elicit subjective
                              probabilities for future unit
                              cost growth. We again
                              performed an A/B test, giving
                              half of the Atlanta Fed's BIE
                              panel the five-bin question
                              above and the other half the
                              bottom question with three
                              support points.




 Figure B.4: January 2014 Trial Question
                             Notes: This figure shows
                             screenshots from our January
                             2014 test question, again
                             eliciting            subjective
                             probabilities for future sales
                             growth. We sent the same
                             question to all of the Atlanta
                             Fed's     BIE      panel     of
                             respondents.       This   new
                             question has two parts: the
                             top asks firms to provide
                             numerical outcomes for their
                             "low", "medium", and "high"
                             outcomes and the bottom
                             asks for probabilities.




                                                           82
Figure B.5: February 2014 Trial Question
                          Notes:      This      figure    shows
                          screenshots from our February
                          2014 test question, now eliciting
                          subjective probability distributions
                          for future employment. We sent
                          the same question to all of the
                          Atlanta Fed's BIE panel of
                          respondents. This new question has
                          three parts: first it asks for current
                          employment levels, then asks for
                          numerical outcomes for the "low",
                          "medium", and "high" outcomes,
                          and finally the bottom asks for
                          probabilities for those outcomes.




 Figure B.6: March 2014 Trial Question


                             Notes: This figure shows
                             screenshots from our March
                             2014 test question, which
                             repeated the January 2014
                             experiment     and      elicited
                             subjective probabilities for
                             future sales growth. We sent
                             the same question to all of the
                             Atlanta Fed's BIE panel of
                             respondents.




                                                             83
Figure B.7: April 2014 Trial Question

                           Notes: This figure shows
                           screenshots from our April 2014
                           test question, which extended
                           our January and March 2014
                           experiments to a five-point
                           format,      again     eliciting
                           subjective probabilities for
                           future sales growth. We sent
                           the same question to all of the
                           Atlanta Fed's BIE panel of
                           respondents.




Figure B.8: May 2014 Trial Question

                         Notes: This figure shows
                         screenshots from our May 2014
                         test question, which extended
                         our February 2014 test for
                         eliciting subjective probabilities
                         for future employment levels,
                         now using a five-point format.
                         We sent the same question to
                         all of the Atlanta Fed's BIE panel
                         of respondents.




                                                              84
            Figure B.9: June 2014 Trial Question

                                                        Notes:     This     figure    shows
                                                        screenshots from our June 2014
                                                        test question, which replicated the
                                                        question from January and March
                                                        2014, using a three-point design to
                                                        elicit subjective probabilities for
                                                        future sales growth levels. Then we
                                                        additionally asked respondents for
                                                        estimates of their "worst" and
                                                        "best" case scenarios. We sent the
                                                        same question to all of the Atlanta
                                                        Fed's BIE panel of respondents.




             Figure B.10: July 2014 Questions
         (Asking for five vs. three support points)

Notes: This figure shows screenshots from our July 2014 test questions, in which we A/B
tested three- and five-support point designs to elicit subjective probability distributions
about employment, prices and sales. July 2014 was the first month in which we tested our
questions on a newly-recruited panel of firms for the SBU specifically. We randomly split
the panel into two sub-groups, with the first group assigned the three-point question and
the second assigned the five-point question.




                                                                                              85
B.10a. Employment Questions




       B.10b. Prices




                              86
             B.10c. Sales Growth




Figure B.11: Additional SBU Questions During 1st
    Generation (August 2014-August 2016)
              B.11a. Profit Margins




                                                   87
B.11b. Prices




                88
89
                                                             Table B.1: Summary of Tests for Developing the
Panel                                               Date
                                                                     Survey of Business Uncertainty
                                                                Variable(s)       Abbreviated description                                                         Description
                                                                                                          Participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups. Group 1 received a question eliciting the "best," "most
                                                                                 A/B test. three­estimate
                                                                                                          likely," and "worst" case change in sales levels over the next 12 months. A drop­down box was provided with
                                                   Oct­13      sales levels      and five-binned range
                                                                                                          estimates ranging from ­15% to 30%. Group 2 received a question asking respondents to assign a likelihood to five
                                                                                 versions.
                                                                                                          potential percentage sales level change ranges (from "less than ­1%" to "more than 5%") over the next 12 months.
                                                                                                          Participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups. Group 1 received a question eliciting the "best," "most
                                                                                                          likely," and "worst" case change in sales levels over the next twelve months. For each estimate a drop­down box was
BIE Survey Panel ­ Special Question Series




                                                                                                          provided with options ranging from ­15% to 30%. A note indicating "best" and "worst" case scenarios should be
                                                   Nov­13      sales levels      A/B test.
                                                                                                          associated with a 10% chance of occurrence was includeC. Group 2 received a question asking respondents to assign
                                                                                                          a likelihood to five potential percentage sales level change ranges (ranging from "less than ­5%" to "more than 25%")
                                                                                                          over the next 12 months.
                                                                                                          Participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups. Group 1 received a question eliciting the "best," "middle,"
                                                                                                          and "worst" case percentage change in unit costs over the next 12 months. Group 2 received a question asking
                                                   Dec­13       unit costs       A/B test
                                                                                                          respondents to assign a likelihood to five potential percentage unit cost change ranges (from "less than ­1%" to "more
                                                                                                          than 5%") over the next 12 months.
                                                                                                          Participants received a two­part question. Part one elicited the expected "low," "middle," and "high" case changes in
                                                   Jan­14      sales levels      three estimates          sales levels over the next twelve months. Part two asked respondents to assign a likelihood of occurrence for each of
                                                                                                          the three scenarios.
                                                                                                          Participants received a two­part question. Part one elicited the expected "low," "middle," and "high" case number of
                                                                number of
                                                   Feb­14                        three estimates          employees twelve months ahead. Part two asked respondents to assign a likelihood of occurrence for each of the
                                                                employees
                                                                                                          three scenarios.
                                                   Mar­14      sales levels      three estimates          Repeat of the January 2014 question.

                                                                                                            The same question as in January and March 2014 with the addition of a "worst case" and "best case" scenario for a
                                                   Apr­14      sales levels      five estimates
                                                                                                            total of five response categories.

                                                                number of                                   The same question as in February 2014 with the addition of a "worst case" and "best case" scenario for a total of five
                                                   May­14                        five estimates
                                                                employees                                   response categories.
                                                                                 three estimates with a
                                                                                                            Repeat of the January 2014 question with a follow­up question asking for the "best case" and "worst case" scenarios
                                                   Jun­14      sales levels      best case/worst case
                                                                                                            without a likelihood assignment.
                                                                                 follow­up




 Panel                                              Date     No. of Groups              Variable(s)                            Notes                                                Description
                                                                                                                                            Participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups. In each group,
                                                                                                          A/B Test ­ 5 estimate and 3       respondents received a two­part question for each variable. Grop 1: Part one
                                                                             number of employees, average estimate versions with drop down elicited the "high," "medium," and "low" case change in each variable over
                                                   Jul­14         2
                                                                                 price, sales revenue     boxes for estimates and open text the next 12 months. Part two asked respondents to assign a likelihood to
                                                                                                          boxes for likelihoods             each of these scenarios. Group 2: Same format as Group 1 with two
                                                                                                                                            additional scenarios eliciting the "lowest case" and "highest case."
                                                                              sales revenue, average price,                                      Participants received a two­part question for each variable. Part one elicited
                                                                                                               five estimates with drop down box
                                                                               number of employees, unit                                         the "highest," "high," "medium," "low," and "lowest" case change in each
                                                   Aug­14         2                                            for estimates and open text box
                                                                              cost, capital investment, profit                                   variable over the next 12 months. Part two asked respondents to assign a
                                                                                                               for likelihoods
                                                                                                                                                 likelihood to each of these scenarios.
            Survey of Business Uncertainty Panel




                                                                                          margin
                                                                                                                                                  Participants received a two­part question for each variable. Part one elicited
                                                                                                             five estimates with open text
                                                                              sales revenue, average prices,                                      the "highest," "high," "medium," "low," and "lowest" case change in each
                                                   Sep­14         2                                          boxes for estimates and
                                                                               unit cost, capital investment                                      variable over the next 12 months. Part two asked respondents to assign a
                                                                                                             likelihoods
                                                                                                                                                  likelihood to each of these scenarios.
                                                                              sales revenue, average price,                                       Participants received a two­part question for each variable. Part one elicited
                                                   Oct­14                                                        five estimates with open text
                                                                               number of employees, unit                                          the "highest," "high," "medium," "low," and "lowest" case change in each
                                                     to           3                                              boxes for estimates and
                                                                              cost, capital investment, profit                                    variable over the next 12 months. Part two asked respondents to assign a
                                                   Jan­15                                                        likelihoods
                                                                                          margin                                                  likelihood to each of these scenarios.
                                                                              sales revenue, average price,                                       Participants received a two­part question for each variable. Part one elicited
                                                   Feb­15                                                        five estimates with open text
                                                                               number of employees, unit                                          the "highest," "high," "medium," "low," and "lowest" case change in each
                                                     to           3                                              boxes for estimates and
                                                                              cost, capital investment, profit                                    variable over the next 12 months. Part two asked respondents to assign a
                                                   Oct­15                                                        likelihoods
                                                                                          margin                                                  likelihood to each of these scenarios.
                                                                              sales revenue, average price,                                       Participants received a two­part question for each variable. Part one elicited
                                                   Nov­15                                                        five estimates with open text
                                                                               number of employees, unit                                          the "highest," "high," "middle," "low," and "lowest" case change in each
                                                   to Jan­        6                                              boxes for estimates and
                                                                              cost, capital investment, profit                                    variable over the next 12 months. Part two asked respondents to assign a
                                                      16                                                         likelihoods
                                                                                          margin                                                  likelihood to each of these scenarios.
                                                                              sales revenue, average price,                                       Participants received a two­part question for each variable. Part one elicited
                                                   Feb­16                                                        five estimates with open text
                                                                               number of employees, unit                                          the "highest," "high," "middle," "low," and "lowest" value for each variable
                                                   to Aug­        6                                              boxes for estimates and
                                                                              cost, capital investment, profit                                    over the next 12 months. Part two asked respondents to assign a likelihood
                                                      16                                                         likelihoods
                                                                                          margin                                                  to each of these scenarios.
                                                                                                                                                  Participants received a two­part question for each variable. Part one elicited
                                                   Sep­16                      sales revenue, average unit five estimates with open text
                                                                                                                                                  the "highest," "high," "middle," "low," and "lowest" value for each variable
                                                      to          2             cost, capital expenditures, boxes for estimates and
                                                                                                                                                  over the next 12 months. Part two asked respondents to assign a likelihood
                                                   Present                        number of employees       likelihoods
                                                                                                                                                  to each of these scenarios.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   90
   C. Additional Empirical Results




   C.1 Core results focusing on employment
   growth expectations and uncertainty

· The next few slides replicate some of the core results about the SBU
  microdata focusing on employment growth rather than sales growth
  expectations and uncertainty.
· Broadly speaking the results are the same whether we focus on sales
  or employment. In several cases they are sharper for employment,
  which we believe owes to less measurement error in employment
  expectations and realizations.




                                                                         91
                                           Figure C.1: Subjective Expectations Predict
                                                           Realizations
                                                               Figure C.1a                                                                                                       Figure C.1b

                                                              Raw Panel                                                                                                      Time Fixed Effects
                             .3




                                                                                                                                                 .3
Realized Employment Growth




                                                                                                       Realized Employment Growth
                             .2




                                                                                                                                                 .2
                             .1




                                                                                                                                                 .1
                             0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                             -.1




                                                                                                                                                 -.1
                             -.2




                                                                                                                                                 -.2
                                   -.4            -.2                0             .2             .4                                                   -.4            -.2             0              .2           .4
                                                    Expected Employment Growth                                                                                          Expected Employment Growth
                                   Coeff. = .732, S.E. = .082, R^2 = .110, N = 3692                                                                    Coeff. = .726, S.E. = .083, Within R^2 = .122, N = 3692




                                                            Figure C.1c                                                                                                         Figure C.1d
                                                                                                       Mean by Firm Realized Employment Growth




                                                       Firm & Time Fixed Effects                                                                                              Cross Section
                             .3




                                                                                                                                                 .3
Realized Employment Growth
                             .2




                                                                                                                                                 .2
                             .1




                                                                                                                                                 .1
                             0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                             -.1




                                                                                                                                                 -.1
                             -.2




                                                                                                                                                 -.2




                                   -.2           -.1             0            .1             .2                                                              -.2       -.1             0             .1          .2
                                                    Expected Employment Growth                                                                                   Mean by Firm Expected Employment Growth
                                   Coeff. = .691, S.E. = .117, Within R^2 = .345, N = 3570                                                             Coeff. = .876, S.E. = .153, R^2 = .136, N = 589

                              Notes: This figure shows bin-scatter plots of employment growth expectations for the next 12 months on the horizontal axis against
                              measured employment growth over the ensuing 12 months on the vertical axis. Figure B.1a shows the relationship in the raw panel data.
                              Figure B.1b controls for time fixed effects. Figure B.1c adds firm fixed effects on top o the time effects. Figure B.1d shows the
                              relationship in the cross section, plotting the mean-by-firm expected employment growth on the horizontal axis against the mean-by-
                              firm realized employment growth on the vertical axis. Statistics below the figure correspond to the population OLS regression. Data are
                              from all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 92
                                        Figure C.2: Subjective Uncertainty Predicts
                                                 Absolute Forecast Errors
                                                          Figure C.2a                                                                                                       Figure C.2b

                                                         Raw Panel                                                                                                        Time Effects
                          .4




                                                                                                                                           .4
Absolute Forecast Error




                                                                                                    Absolute Forecast Error
                          .3




                                                                                                                                           .3
                          .2




                                                                                                                                           .2
                          .1




                                                                                                                                           .1
                          0




                                                                                                                                           0
                                0              .1              .2                .3            .4                                               0              .1              .2              .3               .4
                                                      Subjective Uncertainty                                                                                          Subjective Uncertainty
                                Coeff. = .812, S.E. = .067, R^2 = .138, N = 3692                                                                Coeff. = .808, S.E. = .067, Within R^2 = .138, N = 3692.




                                                        Figure C.2c                                                                                                       Figure C.2d
                                                    Time and Firm Effects                                                                                                Cross Section
                          .4




                                                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                       Mean by Firm Absolute Fcast Error
Absolute Forecast Error
                          .3




                                                                                                                                           .3
                          .2




                                                                                                                                           .2
                          .1




                                                                                                                                           .1
                          0




                                                                                                                                           0




                               -.05            0             .05            .1           .15                                                    0                   .1                  .2                 .3
                                                     Subjective Uncertainty                                                                                  Mean by Firm of Subjective Uncertainty
                               Coeff. = .386, S.E. = .097, W/in R^2 = .011, N = 3570.                                                           Coeff. = 1.02, S.E. = .096, R^2 = .285, N = 576


                          Notes: This figure shows bin-scatter plots of subjective uncertainty (i.e. the SD of respondents' subjective probability distribution) over
                          employment for the next 12 months on the horizontal axis against the respondent's absolute forecast error for employment growth
                          over the ensuing 12 months on the vertical axis. Figure B.2a shows the relationship in the raw panel data. Figure B.2b controls for time
                          fixed effects. Figure B.2c includes firm fixed effects as well as time effects. Figure B2.d shows the relationship in the cross section,
                          plotting mean-by-firm subjective uncertainty on the horizontal axis against mean-by-firm absolute forecast errors on the vertical axis.
                          The statistics below each figure correspond to the population OLS regression. Data are from all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to
                          10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                93
                                                                                            Figure C.3: Uncertainty in month t and belief revisions
                                                                                                         in the next same-topic survey
                                                                                                Figure C.3a. Revising the Vector of Support Points                                                                                                      Figure C.3b. Revising the Vector of Probabilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .95
                                                                                      .9
                                              Cos(Supp. Points t+2, Supp. Points t)




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cos(Probabilities t+2, Probabilities t)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .9
                                                                                      .85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .85
                                                                                      .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                                                      .75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .75
                                                                                            0               .1               .2               .3     .4                                                                                             0               .1                .2             .3         .4
                                                                                                                  Subjective Uncertainty t                                                                                                                                Subjective Uncertainty t
                                                                                            Coeff. = -.10, S.E. = .075, R^2 = .000, N = 4487                                                                                                        Coeff. = -.18, S.E. = .058, R^2 = .005, N = 4563

                       Notes: This figure shows two bin-scatter plots. On the horizontal axis, both show 50 quantiles of subjective uncertainty for employment
                       growth over the next 12 months, measured in month t. In figure 5a (left) the vertical axis shows the cosine similarity of the vector of support
                       points respondents provide across consecutive surveys, in months t and t+2 (or t+3). In figure 5b (right) we instead show the cosine similarity
                       across vectors of probabilities from nearest same-topic surveys. The regression results reported below each figure correspond to the
                       underlying microdata regression, reporting firm-clustered standard errors. Data are from the SBU and the sample covers all survey waves
                       from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                         Figure C.4: Uncertainty and subsequent expectations revisions
                                                                                                                   Figure C.4a                                                                                                                                            Figure C.4b
                                                                                                                  Raw Panel                                                                                                                                      Firm and Time Fixed Effects
                                                                                                                                                                                                  .06
                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                          Abs. Change in Expectations, t to t+2
Abs. Change in Expectations, t to t+2
                                        .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .05
                                        .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .04
                                        .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .03
                                        0




                                              0                                                        .1               .2               .3        .4                                                                         -.05                              0               .05             .1        .15
                                                                                                        Employment Growth Uncertainty, t                                                                                                                      Employment Growth Uncertainty,t
                                              Coeff. = .403, S.E. = .038, R^2 = .196, N = 2969                                                                                                                                                Coeff. = .039, S.E. = .080, Within R^2 = .000, N = 2881

                       Notes: This figure shows two bin-scatter plots. On the horizontal axis, both show 50 quantiles of subjective uncertainty for employment
                       growth over the next 12 months, measured in month t. Both have on the vertical axis the absolute value of the change in employment
                       growth expectations (looking for 12 months ahead) that we measure across consecutive surveys, in months t and t+2 (or t+3). On the left,
                       we show the relationship for the raw panel, while on the right we show the relationship controlling for firm and date fixed effects. The
                       regression results reported below each figure correspond to the underlying microdata regression, reporting firm-clustered standard errors.
                       Data are from the SBU and the sample covers all survey waves from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 94
                                                               Figure C.5: Past sales growth and recent forecast revisions
                                                                          predict higher subjective uncertainty
                                                                                        Figure C.5a                                                                                                    Figure C.5b
                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                                          Subjective Uncertainty in Month t
               Subjective Uncertainty in Month t
                                                   .15




                                                                                                                                                                     .15
                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                     .1
                                                                                                                                                                     .05
                                                   .05




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                           -.3             -.2         -.1           0      .1             .2
                                                               -.4               -.2              0    .2           .4                                                                Change in Employment Growth Expectations, t-2 to t
                                                                     Employment Growth, Past 12 Months (Reported)
                                          Notes: This figure shows two bin-scatter plots with subjective uncertainty over employment growth in the 12 months following month t on
                                          the vertical axis. Figure 6a shows shows 100 quantiles of past employment growth for the 12 months prior to t on the horizontal axis. Figure
                                          6b instead shows 100 quantiles of the change in employment growth expectations (looking 12 months ahead) between t ­ 2 (or t - 3) and t.
                                          Data are from the SBU and the sample covers all survey waves from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                               Figure C.6: Reinterpreting responses as continuous
                                                                    distributions consisting of 5 uniform bins
                                                                                       Figure C.6a                                                                                                      Figure C.6b
Expected Employment Growth (Continuous)
                                          .4




                                                                                                                          log(Subjective Uncertainty) (Continuous)
                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                                     -3
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                     -4
                                          -.2




                                                                                                                                                                     -5
                                          -.4




                                                                                                                                                                     -6




                                                         -.4               -.2                0        .2            .4                                                          -5               -4            -3               -2             -1
                           Expected Employment Growth (Discrete)                                                   log(Subjective Uncertainty) (Discrete)
             Coeff. = 1.04, S.E. = .005, R^2 = .985, N = 7064                                      Coeff. = 1.00, S.E. = .004, R^2 = .985, N = 7070
       Notes: The above figures show binscatter plots that compare out measures of subjective mean expectations and uncertainty interpreting SBU responses as
       discrete or subjective distributions. Our baseline measures interpret SBU responses as discrete, 5-point probability distributions. Alternatively, we can interpret
       the responses as a continuous distribution consisting of 5 bins, with a uniform distribution within each bin. Figure 12a plots 100 percentiles of our discrete
       measure of expected employment growth (looking 12 months ahead) on the horizontal axis against the continuous measure of expectations on the vertical axis.
       Figure 12b repeats the exercise for the natural logarithm of subjective uncertainty. Statistics below the figure correspond to the OLS regression in the underlying
       microdata, reporting firm-clustered standard errors. Data are from all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                95
                                                                  Figure C.7: Subjective Uncertainty and
                                                                        Previous Survey Completions
                                                                      Figure C.7a               Figure C.7b
                                                      Dep Variable: log(Empl. Growth Uncertainty)                                                                                                                                                Dep Variable: log(Empl. Growth Uncertainty)
                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                             .1
Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                        Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                             0
                             -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.2
                             -.2
                             -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.4
                                          1       3       5       7       9        11        13        15        17        19        21        23        25        27        29                                                      1       3       5       7       9        11        13        15        17        19        21        23        25        27        29
                                              2       4       6       8       10        12        14        16        18        20        22        24        26        28        30+                                                    2       4       6       8       10        12        14        16        18        20        22        24        26        28        30+
                                                        Number of Previous Responses                                                                                                                                                               Number of Previous Responses
                                          Mean (SD) of Dep. Var: -3.24 (.833)                                                                                                                                                        Mean (SD) of Dep. Var: -3.24 (.830). Employment-weighted
Notes: This figure shows estimated coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from regressions of the natural log of employment growth
uncertainty (looking ahead over the next 4 quarters) on a set of indicators for the firm's number of previous SBU responses on the right-hand-
side as well as firm and date fixed effects (not shown). Figure B.3a (left) shows unweighted estimates, while figure B.3b (right) weights
observations by employment (winsorized at 500 employees). We top-code the number of responses at 30. Data are from the SBU and cover all
survey waves between 10/2014 and 10/2019. We construct the 95 percent confidence intervals based on firm-clustered robust standard errors.




                                                       Figure C.8: Employment growth expectations and
                                                      uncertainty Indices controlling for panel composition
                                                                                        Figure C.8a                                                                                                                                                                           Figure C.8b
                                   .025




                                                                                                                                                                                        Employment Growth Uncertainty Index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .06
  Employment Growth Expectations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .055
                                   .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .05
                                   .015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .045
                                   .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .04
                                   .005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .035




                                    2015m1                    2016m1                    2017m1                        2018m1                        2019m1                                                                     2015m1                    2016m1                    2017m1                        2018m1                        2019m1
                                                                                              date                                                                                                                                                                                       date

                                                              Employment Growth Expectations Index                                                                                                                                                       Employment Growth Uncertainty Index
                                                              Employment Growth Expectations Index, Respondent FEs                                                                                                                                       Employment Growth Uncertainty Index, Respondent FEs
                                          Correlation .806                                                                                                                                                                           Correlation .947
         Notes: The above figures plot our baseline employment growth expectations (left) and uncertainty (right) indices
         alongside an alternative index that accounts for changing panel composition across months. Our baseline index computes
         an activity-weighted mean for expectations or uncertainty in each month. By contrast, the alternative index computes the
         same activity weighted mean after controlling for respondent fixed effects. We smooth both indices using the same
         procedure. Data are from the SBU and cover all months between 1/2015 and 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              96
                    C.3 Additional descriptive results about the
                                  SBU microdata

              · Below we report some additional results pertaining to our
                expectations and uncertainty indices based on the SBU data.




                              Figure C.9: Marginal Distributions
                             C.9a. Reported Sales Growth Rates,
                                       Past 12 MonthsNotes: The histogram shows the empirical distribution
                                                                    of reported sales growth rates for the past 12 months
          8




                                                                    in the Survey of Business Uncertainty. The sample
                                                                    includes all SBU responses between 10/2014 to
                                                                    10/2019. For survey months prior to 9/2016, we
          6




                                                                    compute the firm's employment growth rate in the 12
                                                                    months to t using the firm's sales in the current
Density




                                                                    quarter (measured in month t) and its answer to the
                                                                    question, "Looking back, four quarters ago, what was
          4




                                                                    the approximate dollar value of your SALES
                                                                    REVENUE?". For survey months since 9/2016, we use
                                                                    responses to the question, "Looking back, over the last
                                                                    12 months, what was your approximate percentage
          2




                                                                    SALES REVENUE GROWTH rate?" In both cases we
                                                                    report growth rates measured as the change divided
                                                                    by the average between the start and end. For
                                                                    responses since 9/2016 we assume the raw data
          0




              -.6      -.4       -.2      0        .2      .4       report conventional growth rates (change divided by
                         Reported Sales Growth Rates                initial period) and we transform them to obtain our
              N = 7383. Mean = .036. SD = .146                      preferred growth rate measured. Before plotting, we
                                                                    winsorize the distribution at the 1st and 99th
                                                                    percentiles.




                                                                                                                         97
                            C.9b. Sales Growth Expectations,
                                     Next 4 Quarters
                                                                           Notes: The histogram shows the
           10




                                                                           empirical distribution of expected
                                                                           sales growth rates, looking ahead
                                                                           to the next four quarters. The
 Density




                                                                           sample includes all SBU responses
                                                                           between 10/2014 to 10/2019 for
           5




                                                                           which we have a five-point
                                                                           subjective distribution over future
                                                                           employment growth rates. We
                                                                           compute these subjective mean
           0




                -.4         -.2         0
                              Expected Sales Growth
                                                      .2         .4
                                                                           growth rates as described in
                N = 7159. Mean = .041. SD = .078                           Section 2 of the main text.




                              C.9c. Sales Growth Uncertainty,
                                      Next 4 Quarters
          25




                                                                           Notes: The histogram shows the
                                                                           empirical distribution of subjective
                                                                           uncertainty about sales growth,
          20




                                                                           looking ahead to the next four
                                                                           quarters. The sample includes all SBU
Density
          15




                                                                           responses between 10/2014 to
                                                                           10/2019 for which we have a five-
          10




                                                                           point subjective distribution over
                                                                           future sales growth rates. We
          5




                                                                           compute subjective uncertainty about
                                                                           sales growth as the standard
          0




                0                 .1             .2                   .3   deviation of the five-point subjective
                      Subjective Uncertainty over Sales Growth             distribution. See Section 2 of the
                N = 7160. Mean = .044. SD = .047                           main text for details.




                                                                                                                    98
                                        Figure C.10: Predictive power of discrete vs.
                                              continuous subjective moments
                                     C.10a. Sales Growth Expectations and Uncertainty
                                                                  Figure C.8a                                                                                         Figure C.8b




                                                                                                                                      .35
                                     .2
        Realized Sales Growth




                                                                                                                                      .3
                                                                                                                Abs. Forecast Error
                                     .1




                                                                                                                                      .25
                                                                                                                                      .2
                                     0




                                                                                                                                      .15
                                                                                                                                      .1
                                     -.1




                                           -.2         -.1           0            .1          .2           .3                               0          .05           .1           .15             .2         .25
                                                                Expected Sales Growth                                                                             Subjective Uncertainty

                                                 Discrete Interpretation     Continuous Interpretation                                           Discrete Interpretation         Continuous Interpretation
                                           Discrete: .585 (.084). Continuous: .584 (.084). N = 6074                                         Discrete: .931 (.100). Continuous: .788 (.090). N = 6074
Notes: Each of the above figures figure superimposes two bin-scatter plots. On the left we show forecast employment growth over the next twelve months on the horizontal
axis against actual employment growth. On the right we have subjective uncertainty over employment growth for the next twelve months on the horizontal axis against the
respondent's absolute forecast error for employment growth over the ensuing twelve months on the vertical axis. The blue dots show each relationship under our baseline
interpretation that SBU responses are discrete, 5-point probability distributions. The red triangles show the relationship if we interpret the responses as a continuous
distribution consisting of 5 bins, with a uniform distribution within each bin. Statistics below the figure correspond to the population OLS regression, reporting firm-clustered
standard errors. Data are from all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                     C.10b. Employment Growth Expectations and
                                            Figure C.10a
                                                         Uncertainty Figure C.10b
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                      .3
        Realized Employment Growth




                                                                                                                Abs. Forecast Error
                                                                                                                                      .25
                                     .1




                                                                                                                                      .2
                                     0




                                                                                                                                      .15
                                     -.1




                                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                                                                                      .05
                                     -.2




                                           -.3        -.2         -.1         0          .1           .2                                    0                .1             .2               .3                .4
                                                             Expected Employment Growth                                                                           Subjective Uncertainty
                                                 Discrete Interpretation     Continuous Interpretation                                           Discrete Interpretation         Continuous Interpretation
                                           Discrete: .732 (.082). Continuous: .658 (.079). N = 7400                                         Discrete: .812 (.067). Continuous: .679 (.069). N = 7384

Notes: Each of the above figures figure superimposes two bin-scatter plots. On the left we show forecast employment growth over the next twelve months on the
horizontal axis against actual employment growth. On the right we have subjective uncertainty over employment growth for the next twelve months on the
horizontal axis against the respondent's absolute forecast error for employment growth over the ensuing twelve months on the vertical axis. The blue dots show
each relationship under our baseline interpretation that SBU responses are discrete, 5-point probability distributions. The red triangles show the relationship if we
interpret the responses as a continuous distribution consisting of 5 bins, with a uniform distribution within each bin. Statistics below the figure correspond to the
population OLS regression, reporting firm-clustered standard errors. Data are from all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    99
                                                                         Figure C.11: Uncertainty vs. Firm Size
                                                                               Figure C.11a                                                                                                      Figure C.11b
                                                                      Sales Growth Uncertainty vs. Size                                                                          Employment Growth Uncertainty vs. Size
                         -3




                                                                                                                                                                 -2
                                                                                                                                        Subjective Uncertainty
Subjective Uncertainty
                         -3.2




                                                                                                                                                                 -2.5
                         -3.4




                                                                                                                                                                 -3
                         -3.6




                                                                                                                                                                 -3.5
                         -3.8




                                                                                                                                                                 -4
                         -4




                                                                                                                                                                           2                    4                  6                  8
                                                2                               4                       6               8                                                                        log(Employment)
                                                                               log(Employment)
                                                                                                                                                                               Discrete Interpretation    Continuous Interpretation
                                                Discrete Interpretation                    Continuous Interpretation
                                                                                                                                                                        Discrete: -.26 (.019). Continuous: -.27 (.020). N = 7073
                                   Discrete: -.12 (.020). Continuous: -.12 (.021). N = 6882

                    Notes: Each of the above figures shows a bin-scatter plot of the natural logarithm of subjective uncertainty on the vertical axis against 20 quantiles of the
                    natural log of current firm-level employment. Figure B.11a focuses on sales growth uncertainty for the next four quarters on the vertical axis, while Figure
                    B.11b focuses on employment growth uncertainty looking ahead over the next twelve months. Subjective uncertainty is the standard deviation of each
                    respondents' five-point subjective distribution over future sales or employment growth. See Section 2 and Appendix A for more details on how we measure
                    subjective uncertainty. The statistics below each figure report the slope coefficient and firm-clustered standard error in the underlying microdata regression.
                    Data are from all waves of the SBU from 10/2014 to 10/2019.




                                                                             Figure C.12: Uncertainty vs. Age
                                                                            C.12a. Without controlling for size
                                          .08




                                                                                                                                                                                Notes: This figure shows within group
                                          .06




                                                                                                                                                                                means and 95 percent confidence intervals
                            Uncertainty




                                                                                                                                                                                of sales growth uncertainty looking ahead
                                          .04




                                                                                                                                                                                over the next four quarters, grouping firms
                                                                                                                                                                                by the decade in which they hired their
                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                                                first paid employee. Data are from the SBU
                                                                                                                                                                                and cover all survey waves between
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                10/2014 and 10/2019. The vertical lines
                                                    1960s & earlier




                                                                               1970-79




                                                                                              1980-89




                                                                                                            1990-1999




                                                                                                                            2000-2009




                                                                                                                                                                                are 95 percent confidence intervals based
                                                                                                                                                                                on firm clustered robust standard errors.

                                                                                   Year Hired 1st Employee




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                         C.12b. Controlling for Size
                  .2




                                                                                                                              Notes: This figure shows within group
                                                                                                                              means and 95 percent confidence intervals
                  .15




                                                                                                                              of sales growth uncertainty over the next
    Uncertainty




                                                                                                                              four quarters, grouping firms by the
                  .1




                                                                                                                              decade in which they hired their first paid
                                                                                                                              employee after controlling for the
                  .05




                                                                                                                              relationship between uncertainty and firm
                                                                                                                              size (measured as log(current sales)). Data
                                                                                                                              are from the SBU and cover all survey
                  0



                        1960s & earlier




                                               1970-79




                                                             1980-89




                                                                                  1990-1999




                                                                                                         2000-2009
                                                                                                                              waves between 10/2014 and 10/2019. The
                                                                                                                              vertical lines are 95 percent confidence
                                                                                                                              intervals based on firm clustered robust
                                                                                                                              standard errors.
                                                   Year Hired 1st Employee




                                          Table C.1: How do higher-order subjective moments predict
                                                         outcomes and forecast errors?
                                                      C.1a. Sales Growth, Next 4 Quarters
                                                                         (1)                    (2)                  (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)
                                                                                                                                           Abs(Forecast - Realized Sales Growth),
                                                                          Realized Sales Growth, Next 4 Quarters
Dependent Variable                                                                                                                                   Next 4 Quarters

Expected Sales Growth, Next 4 Quarters                                 0.589***               0.569***           0.569***   0.451***     0.032      0.006        0.006        -0.025
                                                                        (0.084)                (0.081)            (0.081)    (0.110)    (0.060)    (0.061)      (0.061)      (0.059)
Sales Growth Uncertainty, Next 4 Quarters                                0.058                  0.087              0.095      0.065    0.936***   0.974***     0.948***     0.400***
                                                                        (0.163)                (0.159)            (0.155)    (0.229)    (0.100)    (0.098)      (0.096)      (0.150)
Sales Growth Skewness, Next 4 Quarters                                                        0.019**            0.020**    0.026***              0.025***     0.024***      0.008*
                                                                                               (0.008)            (0.008)    (0.008)               (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.004)
Sales Growth Kurtosis, Next 4 Quarters                                                                            -0.001     -0.002                              0.002        0.000
                                                                                                                  (0.002)    (0.002)                            (0.001)      (0.001)

Date FE                                                                                                                        Y                                               Y
Firm FE                                                                                                                        Y                                               Y

Observations                                             3,037          3,037        3,037         2,913         3,037          3,037         3,037         2,913
R-squared                                                0.026          0.030        0.030         0.287         0.049          0.062         0.062         0.397
Adjusted R-squared                                      0.0258         0.0293       0.0291         0.161        0.0480         0.0606        0.0612         0.290
Firms                                                     511            511          511           387           511            511           511           387
Notes: This table regresses realized sales growth in the 4 quarters following a survey and the associated absolute forecast error on the mean, standard deviation (i.e.
uncertainty), skewness, and kurtosis of the subjective distribution provided by a respondent with regards to sales growth in quarters q to q+4. We drop singleton
observations in columns 4 and 8 when we include firm and date fixed effects in the regression. Data are from the SBU, including all survey waves between 10/2014
and 10/2019. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                     101
                                       C.1b. Employment, Next 12 Months
                                                            (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)       (7)        (8)
                                                                                                            Abs(Forecast - Realized Employment Growth),
                                                        Realized Employment Growth, Next 12 Months
Dependent Variable                                                                                                         Next 12 Months

Expected Employment Growth, Next 12 Months               0.751***      0.732***     0.734***    0.671***       0.002        -0.006       -0.001     -0.142**
                                                          (0.083)       (0.080)      (0.079)     (0.109)      (0.062)      (0.059)      (0.059)      (0.059)
Employment Growth Uncertainty, Next 12 Months              0.114         0.126        0.118       0.143      0.813***     0.818***     0.795***     0.361***
                                                          (0.082)       (0.082)      (0.083)     (0.134)      (0.070)      (0.071)      (0.069)      (0.097)
Employment Growth Skewness, Next 12 Months                             0.010**       0.011**    0.015***                     0.004      0.006*        0.000
                                                                        (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.005)                   (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.003)
Employment Growth Kurtosis, Next 12 Months                                            0.001       0.001                                0.003***       0.001
                                                                                     (0.001)     (0.002)                                (0.001)      (0.001)

Date FE                                                                                             Y                                                  Y
Firm FE                                                                                             Y                                                  Y

Observations                                                3,692         3,692          3,692       3,570        3,692        3,692       3,692      3,570
R-squared                                                   0.112         0.115          0.115       0.349        0.139        0.139       0.145      0.477
Adjusted R-squared                                          0.112         0.114          0.114       0.242        0.138        0.139       0.144      0.391
Firms                                                        576           576            576         454          576          576         576        454
Notes: This table regresses realized employment growth in the 12 months following a survey, the associated absolute forecast error, and the raw forecast error
on the mean, standard deviation (i.e. uncertainty), and skewness of the subjective distribution provided by a respondent with regards to Employment Growth in
the 12 months following the survey. We drop singleton observations in columns 4 and 8 when we include firm and date fixed effects in the regression. Data are
from the SBU, including all survey waves between 10/2014 and 10/2019. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




          C.3 Additional results about our expectations
                     and uncertainty indices

       · Below we report some additional results pertaining to our
         expectations and uncertainty indices based on the SBU data.




                                                                                                                                                               102
                      Figure C.13: Investment Rate Indices


                                                                .14




                                                                                                                                         .04
                                 Investment Rate Expectations




                                                                                                                                                Investment Rate Uncertainty
                                                                .12




                                                                                                                                         .035
                                                                                                                                         .03
                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                         .025
                                                                .08
                                                                .06




                                                                                                                                         .02
                                                                 2015m1        2016m1        2017m1      2018m1          2019m1
                                                                                                  date

                                                                               Investment Rate Expectations, 4 Quarters Ahead
                                                                               Investment Rate Uncertainty, 4 Quarters Ahead

Notes: This figure shows our investment rate expectations (left axis) and uncertainty (right axis) indices, looking four
quarters ahead. We smooth both indices using the same procedure as for the sales growth and employment growth indices,
which we describe in the main text. Both indices appear on the official Survey of Business Uncertainty website as of
February 2020.




             Figure C.14: Our sales growth expectations and uncertainty
               indices and 95 percent confidence bands with/without
                          controlling for panel composition
                             Figure C.14a                                                                                           Figure C.14b
                                                                                                         .06
 .08




                                                                                                         .05
 .06




                                                                                                         .04
 .04




                                                                                                         .03
 .02




                                                                                                         .02
 0




  2015m1          2016m1      2017m1                                      2018m1        2019m1            2015m1          2016m1     2017m1                                   2018m1   2019m1
                                    date                                                                                                   date

                           Baseline Sales Expectations Index                                                                       Baseline Sales Uncertainty Index
                           Sales Expectations Index - Firm FEs                                                                     Sales Uncertainty Index - Firm FEs
                           95% Conf. Bands Baseline                                                                                95% Conf. Bands Baseline
                           95% Conf. Bands Firm FEs                                                                                95% Conf. Bands Firm FEs

       Correlation .942                                                                                        Correlation .854
Notes: The above figures plot our baseline sales growth expectations (left) and uncertainty (right) indices alongside alternative indices that
account for changing panel composition across months and also display 95 percent confidence bands for each index based on two-way firm
and date clustered robust standard errors. Our baseline index computes an activity-weighted mean for expectations or uncertainty in each
month. By contrast, the alternative index computes the same activity weighted mean controlling for respondent fixed effects. This figure does
not smooth the indices time series. Data are from the SBU and cover all months between 1/2015 and 10/2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                                103
