                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PRICE ISN'T EVERYTHING:
             BEHAVIORAL RESPONSE AROUND CHANGES IN SIN TAXES

                                       Alex Rees-Jones
                                       Kyle T. Rozema

                                     Working Paper 25958
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25958


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          June 2019, Revised February 2020




We thank Douglas Baird, Adam Chilton, Erin Delaney, Gerrit De Geest, Dhammika Dharmapala,
Michael Frakes, Ezra Friedman, Daniel Hemel, Jim Hines, William Hubbard, Don Kenkel,
Genevieve Lakier, Sarah Lawsky, Ben Lockwood, Anup Malani, Jonathan Masur, Richard
McAdams, Adam Rosenzweig, Sarath Sanga, Max Schanzenbach, Joel Slemrod, Kate Smith,
Dmitry Taubinsky, and seminar audiences at the American Economic Association Annual
Meeting, the American Law and Economics Association Annual Meeting, the Conference on
Empirical Legal Studies, the Junior Tax Scholars Workshop, George Mason University Antonin
Scalia Law School, University of California Berkeley Haas School of Business, University of
California Berkeley School of Law, University of California Hastings College of Law, University
of Chicago Law School, Washington University School of Law, and Wharton for helpful
comments. We thank Andrew Joung for excellent research assistance and the Wharton Dean's
Research Fund for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alex Rees-Jones and Kyle T. Rozema. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Isn't Everything: Behavioral Response around Changes in Sin Taxes
Alex Rees-Jones and Kyle T. Rozema
NBER Working Paper No. 25958
June 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. D9,H2

                                          ABSTRACT

Taxes change behavior. But how does this change arise? In traditional economic models, change
is achieved through the price channel: assuming all else is held constant, taxes increase prices and
thus decrease demand. However, the assumption that all else is held constant may be violated in
the course of a legal change, in part because the process by which laws are changed often
involves the provision of information, attempts at persuasion, and the deployment of alternative
dissuasive tools. We examine violations of this assumption in a particular policy domain:
discouraging smoking with cigarette taxes. We document a marked increase in related media
coverage, lobbying efforts, place-based smoking restrictions, and anti-smoking appropriations in
the time period surrounding a tax law change. The intensity of these factors is directly associated
with decreases in cigarette consumption in a manner that could be confused with price effects.
Our results suggest that price effects may have a surprisingly small role in the behavioral
response that occurs around tax law changes.


Alex Rees-Jones
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
alre@wharton.upenn.edu

Kyle T. Rozema
University of Chicago
5505 S Everett Ave
Unit 3W
Chicago, IL 60637
kylerozema@gmail.com
I. INTRODUCTION

         Taxes are often deployed to shape the behavior of individuals and

institutions. But how does this behavioral change arise? Nearly universally in

economic models, taxes' influence on behavior is attributed to their impact on

prices. Concretely, a tax on a commodity raises its price, and the law of demand

then implies that the quantity demanded should decrease.

         In the course of changing a tax law, however, more than just prices may

change. Changing the law typically requires making the case that the law should

change, and interested parties attempt to influence the process with the provision

of information, persuasive appeals, and alternative non-price interventions.

Furthermore, the act of changing the law may itself have an expressive effect,

whereby it directly influences beliefs, emotions, or behavior purely by condoning

or condemning an activity (McAdams, 2015). 1 Although an important role for such

expressive powers is prominent in the legal literature, 2 this concept is rarely


1
  Different legal theories exist to explain how the expressive function of law operates. For example,
an attitudinal theory of expressive law posits that laws signal the underlying social attitudes towards
a behavior, and citizens who are motivated to avoid societal disapproval change behavior in response
to laws updating their beliefs (McAdams, 2000a); an informative theory of expressive law posits
that the lawmaking process aggregates information on the costs and benefits of a behavior, and
citizens change behavior in response to laws updating their beliefs (Dharmapala and McAdams,
2003); and a focal point theory of expressive law posits that laws influence expectations about how
citizens will behave and thus guide the behavior of citizens with a common interest in coordinating
(Posner, 1996; Strauss, 1996; McAdams, 2000b). A large literature in law analyzes how laws can
and should change behavior through social norms (McAdams, 1997; Cooter, 1998; Posner and
Rasmusen, 1999; Posner, 2000; McAdams and Rasmusen, 2007). Social norms could change
behavior either by informing citizens of others' behavior in a morally neutral way (Picker, 1997;
Posner, 2000; Mahoney and Sanchirico, 2001) or by representing unwritten rules of behavior and
thus signaling moral disapproval (Ellickson, 1991; Cooter, 1996; Kahan, 1996, 1998; McAdams,
1997; Kaplow and Shavell, 2002).
2
  See, e.g., Pildes and Niemi, 1993; Sunstein, 1994; Lessig, 1995; Sunstein, 1996; Robinson and
Darley, 1997; Cooter, 1998; Pildes, 1998; Mazzone, 1999; Posner, 2000; Alder, 2000; Nadler, 2005;
Dana, 2007; McAdams, 2015; Schauer, 2015; Linos and Twist, 2016; Nadler, 2017; Richards, 2017.
Following a line of work on expressive law (e.g., Kornhauser, 1998; Adler, 2000; McAdams, 2000a,
2000b; Dharmapala and McAdams, 2003), we distinguish the expressive effect of law as defined



                                                  2
considered in economic applications. 3 Relatively little empirical work measures the

importance of a tax's expressive effect as compared to its price effect. 4

         In this article, we assess the relative importance of a tax's price effect as

compared to a set of non-price factors. Our set of non-price factors consists of

potentially important dimensions of expressive effects, broadly defined to include

effects generated throughout the lawmaking process. 5 Our measures approximate

the information provision in the social debate taking place through media outlets,

persuasive activities undertaken in the political process including campaign

contributions and targeted appropriations, and attempts to dissuade the targeted

behavior through alternative laws or policies. We acknowledge that the precise

measurement of expressive effects is extremely challenging, and that the list of

proxies we consider is incomplete. However, even with imperfectly measured

proxies for the activities pursued in the process of legal change, we find substantial

evidence that non-price factors relating to expressive effects can be just as powerful

in changing behavior as the tax itself.




above from a related concept of expressive law dealing with how law can have moral value
independent of whether it changes behavior because of what it expresses (e.g., Adler 2000a, 2000b;
Anderson and Pildes, 2000). In particular, we are interested in what McAdams (2015, pgs. 13-17)
refers to as an expressive theory of law's effects, which McAdams distinguishes from other
categories of expressive claims made in the legal literature.
3
  This is true not only in classical economic models with rational agents (e.g., Pigou, 1920; Ramsey,
1927; Harberger, 1964), but also in economic models of sin taxation in behavioral public finance
(e.g., O'Donoghue and Rabin, 2003, 2005, 2006; Farhi and Gabaix, 2017; Allcott, Lockwood, and
Taubinsky, 2019). Although these behavioral-economic models involve agents with some degree of
"irrationality," they continue to model taxes as affecting quantity demanded through prices and not
through changing demand itself.
4
  For some measurement of expressive effects, see, e.g., McAdams and Nadler, 2005; Funk, 2007;
Wittlin, 2011; Dwenger et al., 2016; Fabbri and Hoeppner, 2018.
5
  As discussed in Section 2, these factors are related to the idea of anti-smoking sentiment, the
importance of which has been documented (e.g., DeCiccia et al., 2008).



                                                 3
        In our empirical analysis, we examine how the consumption of cigarettes

by pregnant women evolves throughout the process of state-level cigarette tax law

changes. Dissuading smoking by pregnant women is of particular interest because

of its dramatic consequences for infant health (Evans, Ringel, and Stech 1999).

Furthermore, in prominent papers on the response to sin taxation, this behavior has

been used as a proxy for smoking more broadly (e.g., Gruber and Köszegi 2001),

in part because of the unusual availability of high-frequency measurements of

smoking that are comparable across states and over time. We use the smoking

information that is reported on the U.S. Standard Certificate of Live Birth, 6 a

permanent legal record required for all live births. 7 Using these data, we examine

how cigarette consumption evolves in the time period surrounding 150 state-level

tax law changes occurring between 1989 and 2009.

        Our empirical analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we examine the time-

path of four non-price factors during the lawmaking process: place-based legal

restrictions on cigarette smoking (such as bans on smoking in restaurants or

workplaces), news headlines related to cigarettes, anti-smoking appropriations

(used to fund anti-smoking advertising, among other things), and tobacco industry

spending on political donations to state politicians. We document substantial

changes in these factors during the lawmaking process. Compared to states not


6
 See Figure A1 for an example.
7
 The manner in which these data are collected help alleviate concerns of survey response bias: the
procedure for collecting smoking information starts with using medical records, physician reports,
or observed behaviors; if these sources are unavailable, smoking information is recorded by the
mother's report (National Center for Health Statistics, 1987). Smulian et al. (2001) find that 86
percent of hospital staff in New Jersey maternity facilities used either prenatal care records or
maternal hospital medical records as the source of the smoking information. They also found that
only 6 percent of hospital staff in New Jersey used the mother's report.



                                                4
facing tax law changes, the period before a tax law change is marked by a sizable

increase in newspaper coverage and political donations. This illustrates that tax

changes occur during time periods of substantial information provision and

attempts at persuasion. The period before and after a tax law change is also marked

by an increase in both place-based legal restrictions and anti-smoking

appropriations, illustrating the simultaneous use of other dissuasive policies. These

findings establish that potentially important non-price factors are not held constant

in the lawmaking process.

       Second, we examine the relative importance of price and non-price factors

on the decrease in cigarette consumption that occurs around changes in tax law. We

demonstrate that this decrease in consumption is partly explained by the adoption

of place-based legal restrictions, increases in newspaper coverage, and increases in

anti-smoking appropriations, even after accounting for the changes in cigarette

taxes. Controlling for even our partial list of non-price factors dramatically

influences the estimated importance of price effects: the inclusion of these controls

reduces the estimated responsivity to the tax by roughly half.

       Taken together, these results suggest that a meaningful degree of the

decrease in demand occurring during a sin tax change arises from non-price factors.

In our third set of analyses, we investigate additional predictions that arise if non-

price factors are at work. Because the increase in non-price factors often occurs

well in advance of the tax change, decrease in demand due to these factors should

occur well before taxes become relevant for prices. Directly comparing the time-

path of demand in states facing a tax change to that in states facing no tax change,




                                          5
we find that demand diverges well in advance of the tax change. 8 Furthermore, the

degree of this anticipatory decrease in demand is uncorrelated with the size of the

tax change that is ultimately enacted, suggesting that the responses are not well

explained by expectations of future price increases.

         In sum, our results support the view that the process of changing tax laws

changes more than just prices. While this process does unambiguously shape

financial incentives, its impact on informational, psychological, and sociological

factors influencing demand may be of at least comparable quantitative importance.

Furthermore, changes in sin taxes are often only one prong of a multi-pronged

attempt to dissuade the target behavior. A complete economic theory of sin taxation

must accommodate these factors. A complete legal theory of expressive effects

must better account for those that occur as a result of the ideas communicated by

all the activities and debate that surround and accompany the process of legal

change.

         The paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides a conceptual framework

for understanding the role of non-price factors. Section III describes the




8
  For passed tax laws, these findings bear some resemblance to existing empirical tests of "rational
addiction" (Becker and Murphy, 1988). Gruber and Koszegi (2001) test the hypothesis that demand
will decline after a tax change is passed, but before it is effective, resulting from rationally addicted
smokers reducing their degree of addiction in anticipation of a known future increase in price (see
also Taylor et al. (2018) for comparable findings regarding the implementation of the Berkeley soda
tax). While such forces may be active, models of rational addiction require significant modification
to explain our finding that much of the suppression in demand occurs not only before the date of
proposed tax changes, but also well before the moment of voting to enact the change. Furthermore,
the finding that this anticipatory decline is uncorrelated with the tax change that will ultimately be
enacted suggests that it may not be rationalized by rational expectations of future price changes.




                                                   6
construction of our dataset. Section IV presents empirical analysis. Section V

concludes.




II. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

       Our empirical analyses evaluate the extent to which changes in cigarette

consumption around tax changes are attributed to changes in prices. We formalize

the potential theoretical role of non-price factors in the model of Reif (2018), which

combines and generalizes the forward-looking features of the rational addiction

model of Becker and Murphy (1988) and social interaction features in the spirit of

Brock and Durlauf (2001).

       Consider an individual facing the following utility maximization problem:
                        

                  max   -1 (( ,  ,  ,  ) +  ( ,  [ ]))
                   ,
                       =1

                                  

                      s. t. 0 = (1 + )-(-1) ( +   )
                                  =1


                             +1 = (1 -  )( +  )



Utility in period t is governed by the individual's discount rate ( < 1), private

utility (), and social utility ( ).     Utility is maximized subject to a budget

constraint requiring that lifetime discounted expenditures (at an interest rate )

equals lifetime discounted wealth (0 ).

       This model has four basic features. First, the individual chooses between

smoking  at price  and other consumption  (with price normalized to 1),




                                          7
resulting in substitution between these goods governed by their relative prices.

Standard sensitivity to contemporaneous prices arises. Second, the individual is

influenced by addiction to nicotine (achieved by smoking). Addiction is modeled

with a "stock" of addictive capital  that decays each period by the rate of

depreciation   (0,1). The larger the addictive stock, the higher the marginal

utility of smoking. Through this channel, the amount of nicotine consumption today

will influence how much an individual wants to smoke in the future; therefore,

prices that will be faced in the future become relevant to consumption decisions

today. Third, the utility of smoking is influenced by the behavior of other

individuals through social utility ( ), such as where conformity to group smoking

norms is valued or where smoking generates spillovers. 9 Social utility is governed

by the relationship of the individual's smoking ( ) and the individual's expectation

of the average smoking of others ( [ ]).10 Fourth, utility is influenced by a catch-

all component for "non-price factors"  which accounts for the level of education,

advertising, and other factors that influence both utility directly and utility achieved

from smoking. 11

         In theoretical or empirical approaches using models of this variety, the term

 is normally viewed as a confounding factor. For convenience, it is typically

assumed to be held constant in the course of a tax change. We argue that a variety



9
  As noted by Reif, social utility of these types have been employed in significant prior work (Binder
and Pesaran, 2001; Blanchflower et al., 2009; Brock and Durlauf, 2001; Glaeser and Scheinkman,
2002).
10
   Reif considers several ways of specifying this function, and assumes that the group is sufficiently
large that the individual's contribution to the mean is negligible.
11
   For ease of exposition, we adopt Reif's treatment of  as a scalar, but note that its replacement
with a vector generates no problems with the analysis that follows.



                                                  8
of factors that evolve in the course of a tax change are naturally accommodated by

this term. We follow Reif (2018) and represent individual utility (after substituting

optimal  into the equation) as:

                                  2   2 1  2
         ( ,  ,  ,  [ ])) = - 2 (   +   +    ) +   

        +    +    +   +   +   +  +  ( ,  [ ])

This representation allows utility to depend on both linear and quadratic terms for

smoking ( ), addictive stock ( ), and other factors ( ). Utility also depends on

interactions between all three, and a more general functional form of social utility

( ( ,  [ ])). For further details and restrictions on these terms, see Reif (2018).

        This representation highlights the manner in which non-price factors may

become relevant. In the context of this model, such persuasive effects may operate

through several channels. First, through the terms  and  ,  directly affects

utility. This could capture phenomena such as a direct aversion to graphic warning

labels, 12 and it could capture direct aversion to anti-smoking sentiment (as in, e.g.,

DeCiccia et al., 2008). Second, through the term  ,  influences the marginal

utility generated by additional smoking. This could capture news coverage

influencing beliefs about the marginal health consequences of smoking or direct

increases in the marginal costs of smoking from non-tax dissuasive policies such as

place-based restrictions. Third, through the term  ,  influences the marginal

utility of smoking generated by addictive stock. This could capture advertisements




12
   For recent empirical evidence on the effects of graphic warning labels on consumption, see
Beleche et al. (2018). Graphic warning labels are used in other settings as well, and recent field-
tests provide empirical evidence that graphic warning labels on sugary drinks can meaningfully
decrease consumption (e.g., Roberto et al. 2016).



                                                9
that remind the individual of smoking more often, policies that restrict exposure to

smoking in public areas, or increased information about or accessibility of smoking

cessation aids. 13

         The degree to which smokers actively choose to manage their addiction in

a forward-looking manner remains a topic of debate. However, as documented in

Reif (2018), convenient cigarette demand equations result from this framework

regardless of whether consumers are myopic or forward-looking. The smoking

demand equation for a myopic individual is:

                           =  1  +  2  +  3  +  4  + 

The smoking demand equation for a forward-looking individual is:

        = 1  +  2 +1 +  3  +  4  +  5 +1 +  6  +  7 +1 + 

In both cases, demand is linear in the parameters of interest, with the coefficients

(,  ) and the constants ( , ) depending on the specifics of the social interaction

model.

         These demand equations nest both the common considerations of a tax

change present in the literature and the alternative non-price factors that we set out

to study. First, both demand equations contain a standard, contemporaneous price

effect (represented by the term 1 or 1 ). In traditional models of sin taxation that

are meant to approximate (addiction-free) rational agents, this is the sole channel

through which a tax change influences behavior. Next, the demand equations


13
   It is worth noting that Reif's model does not permit these other factors to influence social utility.
However, in principle, the importance of these factors could arise through this channel as well. Anti-
smoking campaigns have arguably increased the social stigma surrounding smoking, which itself
can decrease demand (Stuber et al. 2009; Riley et al. 2017). Furthermore, place-based smoking
restrictions can displace smoking to more public locations, so these restrictions could shape
perceptions of smoking prevalence (Hamilton et al. 2008).



                                                  10
contain intertemporal dependency on past and future prices. Past and future prices

become indirectly relevant through the addictive component, captured by term  2

in the myopic model or the term  3 in the forward-looking model, and become

directly relevant for the forward-looking consumer through the term  2 . These

terms capture the forces of anticipatory price responses (Becker and Murphy, 1988;

Köszegi and Gruber, 2001). 14

        We contend that typical discussion or analysis of tax changes imagines taxes

operating through only contemporaneous and non-contemporaneous prices. Indeed,

most discussion and analysis of tax changes typically focuses entirely on

contemporaneous prices. However, we draw attention to the remaining components

of the demand equations, which are governed directly by issues such as

expectations of social behavior, information, and material changes to the costs or

benefits of smoking itself. A tax change is almost always viewed purely as a price

change, but we will present evidence suggesting that both the social expectations

and information components captured in the remaining terms of the equation are

directly affected. In contrast to the typical treatment of variation in the non-price

factors as a small confound that must be approximately controlled for, we examine

whether these factors could potentially be a primary channel through which

behavioral change operates in the course of a tax change.




III. DATA SOURCES AND SAMPLE DEFINITION


14
  The model assumes that future prices are known. In practice, future prices are uncertain and
unavailable, and some of the non-price factors we examine may additionally influence future price
expectations.



                                               11
         Our data analysis relies on the cigarette consumption of pregnant mothers,

the timing of state-level proposed tax law changes, and potential measures of non-

price factors of demand suppression. We detail our construction of these data

below.

A. Cigarette Demand: Natality Files

         To conduct our analyses, we require a measure of cigarette consumption

that is both high-frequency and comparable across states and over time. Research

on cigarette demand typically uses one of two data sources: direct measurement of

cigarette sales or survey measures of consumption. The advantage of using cigarette

sales data is their clear reflection of actual purchasing behavior, often providing

high-frequency measures at the state, local, retailer, household, or individual level.

For many research questions, including ours, the main drawback of sales data is its

limited availability for longer time series, and the concern that cigarette purchasing

and consumption might diverge surrounding tax changes. As an example of the

latter concern, stockpiling of cigarettes around cigarette tax changes has been well

documented (Chiou and Muehlegger, 2014). Additionally, tax changes may induce

smokers to travel to other tax territories for purchases (e.g., DeCicca et al., 2013a,

DeCicca et al., 2013b, Lovenheim 2008, Chiou and Muehlegger 2008).

         Although consumption data overcomes issues of stockpiling and travel for

purchase, it comes with multiple drawbacks. First, most consumption datasets are

based on surveys, and how people respond to surveys could be influenced by the

policy intervention being studied. Second, very few datasets have enough coverage

to establish credible measures of cigarette consumption at a granular time level.



                                         12
Gruber and Köszegi (2001) discuss this issue at length. Their solution, which we

adopt, is to use cigarette consumption of mothers who gave birth as measured in

the Vital Statistics Detailed Natality Data Files. For the main analysis, we follow

their approach to construct a measure of cigarette consumption at the state-year-

month level. Like Gruber and Köszegi (2001), we note that although pregnant

women are not a representative population, they are an important group to study

because of the dramatic consequences of maternal smoking on infant health.

Indeed, the impact of maternal smoking on infant health is thought to be the leading

externality associated with smoking (Evans, Ringel, and Stech 1999).

       For most states and in most years, the Natality files have recorded every

birth since 1989. We follow the treatment of the smoking variable in Gruber and

Köszegi (2001) and assume that it represents the average rate of consumption in the

month before delivery. Unfortunately for our purposes, the details of the measure

of cigarette consumption changed in the mid-2000s, and states transitioned to using

this new measure in a staggered manner between 2003 and 2009. Because the new

measures are not directly comparable to the old measures, we drop the state from

our dataset once the older measure is no longer available.

       The measures of interest are either unavailable or unreliable in California,

Indiana, South Dakota, and New York, so we follow Gruber and Köszegi (2001)

and drop these states. For the remaining states, we construct the state-year-month

average cigarette consumption beginning in 1989 and ending at the point where the

survey elicitation was changed. Figure 1 reports the window of available data for

each included state, as well as the timing of tax law change events discussed below.




                                        13
B. Timing of Tax Laws

        We augment our data on monthly state-specific cigarette consumption with

data on the state cigarette taxes in place, as well as the exact timing of all changes

in state tax law. We use two datasets to identify the timing of each tax law change,

including year-month of the enactment and the year-month that the tax law change

becomes effective: the Centers for Disease Control's State Tobacco Activities

Tracking and Evaluation System and the National Conference of State Legislature's

Ballot Measures Database. 15




C. Intensity of Political Activities and Social Debate

        We form three different measures of political and social debate to serve as

non-price factors. We view these as measures of activities intended to inform or

influence the behaviors of either voters or lawmakers.

        First, we establish a proxy relevant to the intensity of political debate around

cigarettes using tobacco industry spending on political donations to state

politicians. To do so, we use a component of the Database on Ideology, Money in

Politics, and Elections (DIME) (Bonica 2013). DIME contains information on

approximately 100 million donations made by individuals, political action

committees, and corporations to candidates in local, state, and federal elections


15
   We additionally validate the effective dates by comparing them to those reported in the Tax
Burden on Tobacco dataset released by the Federation of Tax Administrators. We checked the
reliability of the database on tax changes via referendum against cigarette referendums in
Ballotpedia, an online encyclopedia of U.S. elections that also provides information on state
referendums. In the small number of cases with discrepancies, we went to primary sources to verify
the dates to use.



                                               14
from 1979 to 2014. 16 Our measure draws from the "contributions database" within

DIME, and focuses specifically on donations to state-level candidates. DIME

includes the date on which the donation was made and the state of the candidate or

committee that the donation was made to, which we use to build a panel of state-

year-month donations made from the tobacco-related entities.

         Second, to construct a measure of persuasive activity by anti-tobacco

interests, we use state-level anti-smoking appropriations from the 2015 Health

Communication Interventions, Best Practices Program Components from the

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 17 The appropriations data capture

funding from four major funding sources: federal funding, state funding, the Robert

Wood Johnson Foundation, and the American Legacy Foundation. Note that the

appropriations measure only imperfectly reflects expenditures in a given time

period because the appropriations are not necessarily expended. We assume that

they are expended in a uniform manner throughout the funding period.

         Third, we establish a proxy for the intensity of public debate around

cigarettes by using headline appearances of smoking-related words in newspapers.

This approach derives a measure of public debate by assuming that newspapers

either respond to public demand for issues or promote debate about an issue by

writing about it. 18 To construct the dataset, we scraped headlines from


16
    Within this database, contribution records, candidate and committee filings, and election
outcomes for state elections are provided by the National Institute on Money in State Politics and
the Sunlight Foundation. More information can be found at http://data.stanford.edu/dime.
17
   Because the appropriations data are available only since 1991, we code appropriations in 1989
and 1990 as those in 1991.
18
   In showing that changes in physician behavior before tort reforms lead to a two-fold increase on
estimated effects of the law on physician behavior, Malani and Reif (2015) document an increase in
newspapers discussing medical malpractice reforms before it was adopted.



                                               15
newslibrary.com from 1990 to 2015. According to newslibrary.com, it is "[t]he

most complete archive available for [6504 newspapers and other news sources]".

The website is searchable by state and search results contain the date of the news

article. Our main measure is the number of monthly headlines including "cigarette."

Newspapers enter and exit this dataset over time, with substantially more

newspapers in the dataset in recent years, so we measure the intensity of debate

using the number of cigarette-related headlines per state or local journal rather than

the raw count of articles appearing.

D. Place-Based Legal Restrictions

        We construct an index of the strength of a state's place-based restrictions

on smoking activity using the State Tobacco Activities Tracking and Evaluation

System from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018. 19 This data

contains historical information on all state-level legislation, including the

enactment date and effective date of laws related to smoking in bars, day care

centers, housing, public transportation, restaurants, workplaces, and other areas. 20

Our place-based legal restriction index is the average number of legal changes in

each of the available domains described above.


19
   The data are available at https://chronicdata.cdc.gov/Legislation/CDC-STATE-System-Tobacco-
Legislation-Smokefree-Ind/32fd-hyzc.
20
   The database contains laws related to "Bars, Commercial Day Care Centers, Government Multi-
Unit Housing, Government Worksites, Home-Based Day Care Centers, Hotels and Motels, Personal
Vehicles, Private Multi-Unit Housing, Private Worksites, Restaurants, Bingo Halls, Casinos,
Enclosed Arenas, Grocery Stores, Hospitals, Hospital Campuses, Malls, Mental Health Outpatient
and Residential Facilities, Prisons, Public Transportation, Racetrack Casinos, Substance Abuse
Outpatient and Residential Facilities." We group several of the separate classifications. Day care
centers includes commercial and home-based. Casinos includes casinos, bingo halls, and racetracks.
Hospitals includes hospitals and hospital campuses. Mental health facilities includes mental health
outpatient and residential facilities. Substance use facilities includes outpatient and residential
facilities.



                                               16
E. Summary of Dataset

        The final sample consists of 10,022 state-year-month cells and spans 150

tax changes occurring in 43 of the 46 states in the sample.

IV. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

        In this section, we present analysis that tests for the importance of non-price

factors in explaining the decrease in cigarette consumption around tax law changes.

We proceed in two steps. First, we examine the time-path of the candidate non-

price factors around tax law changes. Second, we examine the relative importance

of price and non-price factors in the decrease in consumption that occurs.

        In these analyses, we will often employ a "stacked event study" approach.

When employing this approach, we will define some window of time around a tax-

change event. Considering a single event in isolation, we then proceed by

examining a variable of interest across that window, comparing the "treated" state

with a tax change to "control" states experiencing no tax change in that window.

We define event time as the month relative to the month a tax change became

effective. We create a stacked dataset containing each such event. Table 1 reports

descriptive statistics of the original panel data and the stacked-event-study dataset.

        The data structure in the stacked event study approach allows us to test for

the significance of changes in an outcome in the treated state relative to the control

states in a difference-in-differences approach. 21 We regress an outcome on event


21
   A difference-in-differences approach only produces unbiased estimates if the change in law is
exogenous. Dating back to at least Besley and Case (2000), the possibility of endogenous policies
leading to biased estimates has been acknowledged. Malani and Reif (2015) build on this literature



                                               17
time indicator variables and examine the interaction between these indicators and

the state with a cigarette tax change. We do not include event-time indicators for

the period 2 to 3 years prior to the tax change, using the mean difference across

states at this time as the pre-period in the difference-in-difference design. All

analyses include state-event fixed effects to draw on within-state-event variation.

The coefficients of interest are on the interaction terms between time and treatment

status.

          Statistical inference in this framework requires accounting for several

dimensions of correlation in the error terms. First, because of the manner in which

events are stacked, a given state-year-month can be present multiple times in our

data. For example, Alabama in January of 2000 serves as a control observation for

both Louisiana's July 2000 tax change and Arkansas's July 2001 tax change (as

well as other tax changes). 22 This introduces correlation between the error terms

for these two control observations in the data. This is accommodated by clustering

standard errors by state, 23 which additionally accounts for residual within-state

variation occurring across events and across time. Second, there can be common

shocks experienced by all states at given moments in time, such as due to an

increase in the federal cigarette tax or the death of the Marlboro man, motivating

us to additionally cluster standard errors by year-month. Finally, one might be



by distinguishing endogenous policies from anticipation matters and show how such distinction can
matter in estimating treatment effects.
22
   Note that the event time in which a given state-year-month will be a control observation differs
across events. For example, Alabama in January of 2000 serves as a control observation in event
time -6 for Louisiana's July 2000 tax change and event time -18 for Arizona's July 2001 tax change.
23
   Note that to deal with the issue of repeated cases of the same observation, it would be sufficient
to cluster at the state-year-month level. However, this level of clustering is nested within the state
level, and clustering at this coarser level is standard practice in this literature.



                                                 18
concerned about correlation occurring across all observations within a given event,

as can arise due to our selection of control states at the event level. We perform

multi-way clustering using the approach of Correia (2016).

         This approach to clustering is conservative and significantly reduces

statistical power. Although clustering along fewer dimensions would substantially

increases statistical power, we feel our approach best reflects the statistical

uncertainty that exists. In essence, although sample sizes for our regressions appear

large, our conceptual sample size is no larger than the 150 events which we observe.

The manner in which we cluster reflects this attitude towards inference in our

sample.

A. Examining the Time-Paths of Non-Price Factors

         We begin by examining the time-path of the factors around tax law changes:

place-based      legal     restrictions,    cigarette     news      headlines,     anti-smoking

appropriations, and political donations made by associates of the tobacco industry.

As described above, we examine a stacked event study. Within each event, we

compare the evolution of each measure in the state facing a tax law change--the

"treated" state--with states facing no tax law change within that window--the

"control" states. 24




24
   As we will see, the process of changing the tax law decreases cigarette consumption even before
the law is changed, which could contaminate the trend in any control state if that state changed tax
law outside of the event window. We therefore take a conservative approach and exclude from the
control states any state that witnessed a tax law change six months prior to the event window and
six months subsequent to the event window. Similar results arise if we do not make this exclusion.



                                                19
       Figure 2 documents a stark escalation of these four non-price factors in the

time surrounding a tax law change. Each panel reports the evolution of a six-month

moving average. Panel A reports the place-based legal restrictions index, Panel B

reports the news headlines per journal, Panel C reports the anti-smoking

appropriations, and Panel D reports the tobacco industry political donations. For a

particularly clear example of the nature of social and political discourse in the

course of a tax law change, consider the time path for tobacco industry political

donations. While the baseline level of donations is quite low, a marked spike in

donation activity is seen in a narrow window leading up to the tax law change.

Figure 3 plots the difference between the treated and control states, normalized by

the standard deviation of this variable in control states for this window. Due to the

large response in political donations, we report it separately on the right y-axis (of

a larger scale than the left, which applies to all other factors). It shows that the

increase in donation activity is large in magnitude compared to fluctuations in

donation activity that occur in control states--it constitutes an increase by more

than 10 standard deviations in the window immediately prior to a tax change.

       The other measures exhibit conceptually similar differences between treated

and control states, but the changes are less dramatic and less localized. In the time

period leading up to the tax law change, there is a marked increase in newspaper

headlines concerning cigarettes and in anti-smoking appropriations. In the two

years leading up to a tax law change, there is a steady divergence between the

treated and control states in the place-based legal restrictions index.




                                         20
       Moving beyond visual assessment to statistical analysis, we directly test for

the significance of these patterns in the difference-in-differences approach

described above. We use our stacked-event-study data and construct 6-month bins

in the three years before and one year after the tax law change. We regress each of

the non-price factors on the bins and the interaction between the bins and the state

with a cigarette tax change (the treated state). The coefficients of interest are on the

interaction terms between treated states and 6-month bins, which estimate the

differential change occurring in treated states over different six-month windows.

Figure 4 plots the estimated coefficients with 90 percent confidence intervals, and

shows that the patterns described above are generally statistically significant.

Compared to control states, states facing a tax law change witness an increase in

newspaper headlines in the lead up to the date of the tax law change, an increase in

place-based legal restrictions in the years following the tax law change, and a

(statistically insignificant) increase in anti-smoking appropriations throughout. The

increase in tobacco industry political donations in the immediate lead up to the tax

law change remains apparent, but the estimate does not reach statistical significance

at conventional levels.

B. Testing for Impact of Non-Price Factors

       Having established that non-price factors are not constant around tax law

changes and documented that the process of changing cigarette taxes explains some

of the variation in the size of the debate around changes in taxes, we now assess

how changes in these factors may confound inference about price effects. We focus

the analysis on understanding the contribution of within-treated-state variation in




                                          21
non-price factors for predicting within-treated state variation in cigarette

consumption. We estimate the following regression with the stacked-event-study

data:

           ln(cigarettes),, =  +  statetax, +  , +  , + ,, .


Subscripts denote event e in state s and year-month t. Because we are concerned

only with the contribution of the non-price factors in explaining within-treated-state

variation, the primary regression only includes data from the state facing a tax law

change in each stacked event. We relaxed this restriction and found qualitatively

similar results, illustrating that the influence of these variables is not unique to

treated states. 25 We regress the natural log of cigarette consumption on the current

state tax, non-price factors , , and state-event fixed effects (, ). We define news

headlines, anti-smoking advertising, and political donations as the cumulative

amount leading up to the current month, thus assuming persistent effects of the non-

price factors. 26 As before, we conduct multi-dimensional clustering of standard

errors, allowing for correlation within event, within state, and within year-month.

Because we are interested in the association of these factors with the high-

frequency variation in demand occurring near a tax law change, we estimate this

regression from data on the three years before and after the event. The results are

reported in Table 2.




25
  See Table A1.
26
  Table A2 reports the results for the current month non-price factors. We similarly find evidence
that non-price factors predict consumption, although the quantitative reduction of estimated price
effects is less when ignoring cumulative effects.



                                               22
         The first column of Table 2 illustrates an unsurprising finding: consistent

with the existence of price-responsivity, smoking demand is negatively associated

with the state tax within the state facing a tax law change. Interpreting the

magnitude of coefficients, a one dollar increase in the state tax is associated with a

26 percent decrease in cigarette consumption. In Columns 2 to 5, we separately add

as controls the non-price factors that we have already seen are not constant around

the tax law change. We find that the variation in place-based legal restrictions

index, newspaper discussion of cigarettes, 27 and anti-smoking appropriations all

have strongly statistically significant associations with a decrease in cigarette

consumption. Qualitatively similar--but not statistically significant--results are

found for tobacco industry political donations. Column 6 controls for all the non-

price factors. We again find strongly significant associations with all non-price

factors except tobacco industry political donations.

         Contrasting the estimated coefficient on the state tax across columns

illustrates a striking consequence of these findings. Across columns 2-5, we find

that the inclusion of individual controls consistently reduces the estimated

coefficient on State Tax (although in columns 2 and 5 the 95% confidence intervals




27
  Cigarette headlines can operate in two main ways. First, the headline could contain information
about non-price factors, including the health consequences of smoking and social norms. Second,
the headline could contain information about the expected or actual future increase in the price of
cigarettes. If headlines provide information about expected future prices, the headlines could be
changing behavior by increasing the salience of the future prices. We distinguish these two channels
by separating the cigarette headlines into those that contain the word tax and those that do not
contain the word tax. Table A3 shows that the estimated effect in Table 3 is driven exclusively by
cigarette headlines that do not contain the word tax, providing no evidence that the headlines are
changing behavior by providing information more relevant to taxes than to smoking itself.



                                                23
still include the column 1 estimate). As seen in column 6, including all of these

controls reduces the estimated responsivity to the tax by roughly half. 28

B.1 Robustness Considerations

Role of the use of a 3-year time window: The regressions in Table 2 are estimated

from the examination of a 3-year window around tax-change events. We find that

the estimated responsivity to the tax is substantially diminished when non-price

controls are included. This finding is robust to the use of different time windows

around the event. Figure 5 reports the coefficients on state tax estimated with (as in

column 6 of Table 2) and without (as in column 1 of Table 2) non-price controls,

using time windows ranging from one to five years. Although estimated price

effects are systematically larger for larger time windows, the inclusion of non-price

controls substantial reduces the estimated effect in all time windows considered.

Role of functional form assumptions: The analyses in Table 2 assume a log-linear

relationship between state taxes and cigarette consumption. Although this

functional form assumption is common, it is possible that the estimates are driven

by specification error. To investigate the sensitivity of the estimates to functional

form assumptions, we modify the regression framework to allow for a

nonparametric relationship between taxes and cigarette consumption. In particular,

we estimate the regressions in Columns 1 and 6 of Table 2 but replace the linear


28
  This interpretation requires the assumption that the increase in cigarette prices from the increase
in taxes takes effect in the month the tax increase becomes effective, which is supported by strong
evidence that cigarette prices are stable until the month of the tax change (Rozema 2018) and even
until the week of the tax change (Harding et al. 2012). This assumption does require the absence of
anticipatory price effects. As discussed below, we accounted for anticipatory response to known
future tax increases in alternative specifications by controlling for the enacted tax (e.g., Gruber and
Koszegi, 2001; Taylor et al., 2018).



                                                 24
state tax variable with a cubic spline. 29 Figure 6 plots the estimated splines, which

may be interpreted as estimated demand curves identified from within-event

variation in taxes. The figure provides strong evidence that the curve estimated in

the absence of controls is substantially steeper and spans a broader range of

consumption levels than the curve with the controls. Overall, the figure indicates

that controls for non-price factors substantially reduce estimated price responsivity

in a manner that does not rely on the log-linear specification of our primary

regressions.

Unique responsivity of pregnant smokers: The analyses thus far have considered

the smoking behavior of pregnant women. We study this group because of intrinsic

interest in this "sin" behavior and because there are desirable data properties

described in Section III. One concern that arises from this choice is that pregnant

women might be especially responsive to non-price factors, rendering the results

inapplicable to the broader population of smokers. A second concern is that the

non-price factors could influence survey response bias, and pregnant women might

be the group that responds the most to non-price factors by misreporting. To assess

these concerns, we repeat the analyses in Table 2 using survey measurements of

cigarette consumption available in the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System

(BRFSS). The BRFSS is a cross-sectional telephone survey overseen by the United

States' Center for Disease Control, aimed to measure the health behaviors of the




29
   Because this spline can approximate a broad range of nonlinear relationships between taxes and
consumption, we use the raw levels of cigarette consumption as our dependent variable (instead of
its logarithmic transform).



                                               25
general populace of the U.S. 30 Because the BRFSS discontinued its question on the

number of cigarettes consumed in 2000, use of this dataset results in a substantially

reduced number of usable tax-change events. Appendix Table A4 reports the

results, which are broadly consistent with those reported above. In the log-linear

regression with no non-price controls, the coefficient on State Tax is -0.381

(s.e.=0.070). With the inclusion of all non-price controls, this estimate is reduced

to -0.136 (s.e.=0.055). As in Table 2, we find that the inclusion of non-price

controls accounts for over half of the originally estimated price responsivity.

Role of place-based legal restrictions: It is worth emphasizing that some research

has estimated price responses after controlling for place-based legal restrictions in

some way (e.g., Yurekli and Zhang 2000, Callison and Kaestner 2013, MacLean,

Kessler, and Kenkel 2016, Nesson 2017). 31 If the large reduction in the price effect

witnessed from controlling for all the non-price factors is mainly driven by the

place-based legal restrictions, prior estimates of the price effect would be close to

the true price effect. Column 2 of Table 2 suggests that only part of the reduction

in price effect is explained by place-based legal restrictions. We further assess the

comparative importance of place-based legal restrictions by re-running these

regressions with different permutations of controls. Figure A2 reports the

coefficients on cigarette taxes estimated from regressions with controls indicated

on the x-axis. Controlling for the three other non-price factors reduce the price


30
   We match our stacked-event study dataset to the BRFSS dataset constructed by Goldin and
Homonoff (2013), who study the relationship between cigarette tax salience and regressivity. See
their paper for a complete description of the dataset.
31
   Gruber and Koszegi (2001) do not control for place-based legal restrictions in the main analysis,
but note that "controlling for the presence of various categories of clean air laws (using data
described in Gruber [2000]) makes little difference to our results" (pg. 1274).



                                                26
effect by nearly 50 percent relative to the baseline with only place-based legal

restrictions controlled. Consistent with Table 2, the results of these analyses

demonstrate that controls for news headlines and anti-smoking appropriations are

responsible for the largest reductions in estimated price effects.

C. Testing Additional Predictions of the Influence of Non-Price Factors

       The results above suggest that much of the evolution in cigarette

consumption that occurs around a cigarette tax change might be explained by the

coevolution of non-price factors. This finding has strong implications for the

predicted timing of the decrease in consumption. Because the evolution of non-

price factors begins well before the tax is enacted, the decrease in consumption that

occurs around a tax change would be expected to begin well in advance of when a

tax change becomes relevant for prices.

       To test the prediction, Figure 7 plots the evolution of the time-path of

cigarette consumption in treated states compared to control states. The figure is a

version of the stacked-event study regression design described above. We regress

the natural log of cigarette consumption on event time indicators from 2 years

before the tax change to 1 year after, allowing the period of time 3 years before the

tax change to 2 years before the tax change to serve as the pre-period. The figure

reports coefficients on the interactions between the event time indicators and the

state with a cigarette tax change, which estimate the differential change occurring

in treated states in the event time. Although the 90 percent confidence intervals are

generally large given the conservative approach to clustering standard errors, the




                                          27
divergence in demand between treatment and control states appears to be a gradual

process beginning over a year in advance of the tax change.

       Models of rational addiction predict some degree of anticipatory decrease

in demand arising from a known future increase in prices. Prior work documents

decreases in demand occurring before the tax is enacted but after a vote has

occurred (e.g., Gruber and Köszegi 2001). Note that the anticipatory effect we

document here is occurring substantially earlier: the shaded region of Figure 7

illustrates the interquartile range of when votes on tax changes occurred in our data.

Of course, a smoker who is aware of upcoming votes might hold a rational

expectation of some future price increase even before the vote occurs.

       Building on this observation, we investigate how accommodating the

regression framework of Gruber and Köszegi (2001) affects our results. The key

element of their approach is regressing cigarette consumption not only on the tax

rate that is in effect, but also on the tax rate that has been enacted but is not yet

effective. The coefficient on this latter term is interpreted as capturing anticipatory

response to the future tax increase that has already been enacted.

       Table 3 presents results for regressions like those in Table 2 including a

single additional variable. In the period between when a tax change is enacted and

when it becomes effective, this variable takes the value of the size of the tax change

(measured in dollars). At all other times, this variable takes the value of zero.

Column 1 reproduces the qualitative result of Gruber and Köszegi (2001), showing

that 30 percent of the ultimate decrease in consumption that is attributed to the tax

occurs in the window after the tax is enacted but before the tax goes into effect.



                                          28
Examining columns 2-5, however, we see that even with the inclusion of this

variable, the relevance of the non-price factors that we have emphasized persists.

In column 6, which reproduces our main specification with all non-price controls

included, we continue to find that the estimate on tax is reduced by over half relative

to the baseline specification in column 1. Furthermore, the coefficient on the Gruber

and Köszegi measure of anticipation of the price change becomes smaller and is

not statistically significant at conventional levels. This suggests that the strength of

the statistical evidence in support of Gruber and Köszegi's account is meaningfully

weakened when non-price factors are accommodated. However, it is important to

note that the coefficient is imprecisely estimated, and the results do not reject

meaningful anticipatory effects.

       In short, the nature of the anticipatory consumption response to tax changes

is consistent with non-price factors having a direct influence on demand.

Furthermore, the nature of this response is difficult to rationalize through existing

accounts of rationally-addicted anticipation of price effects.

V. DISCUSSION

       In the standard economic framework, sin taxes dissuade behavior through

price effects. All else equal, a raise in taxes raises market prices, which in turn

reduces demand. While this logic is correct and compelling, in this article we have

documented that all else is not held equal in the course of a tax law change, and that

behavioral response may also be attributed to non-price factors.




                                          29
       The results align with recent findings in several disparate domains, each

demonstrating that more than financial incentives change in the course of a policy

change. In a particularly clear example, Abouk and Adams (2013) find that the

decline of accidents after texting bans is better explained by the bans'

announcements than the bans themselves. Relatedly, Richwine et al., (2019) present

evidence that showing that vaccinations drastically increased in the lead up to a law

that removed all nonmedical exemptions for school-mandated vaccinations--a

window of time in which there was much public discourse about the benefits of

vaccinations. Finally, Malani and Reif (2014) find that Physicians labor supply

reacts in anticipation of tort reform, and show that accounting for their evolving

expectations significantly affects the estimated impact of the policy. Our findings

show that conceptually similar concerns exist in the domain of sin taxation and, in

this context, are quite severe. We highlight the importance of these features in four

ongoing academic debates.

       First, the results inform the ongoing policy discussion about the expected

effects of sin taxes. While taxes on items like cigarettes and alcohol have long been

employed, the recent surge of interest in taxing soda and sugary beverages has

resulted in renewed interest, both conceptual and practical. As we proceed with a

wave of attempts to impose new such taxes, understanding the key determinants of

successful reduction in consumption is needed. Our results help inform the key

channels through which these legal changes can achieve their goal and illustrate the

potential for non-price channels to achieve similar effects.




                                         30
       Second, the results are relevant to the literature aimed at assessing the

evidence of "rational addiction" in the spirit of Becker and Murphey (1988). Classic

tests of this theory, such as Gruber and Köszegi (2001), present evidence that

cigarette consumption decreases in advance of the tax change. This is interpreted

as evidence that forward-looking smokers reduce their degree of addiction in

anticipation of cigarettes becoming more expensive. Our results suggest that a

variety of other factors can be expected to cause declines in consumption preceding

the tax change. Our conceptual framework does not rely on the absence of any

rational addiction motives--indeed, the provision of information that we document

could interact with these motives in a manner that helps reduce demand. However,

our results suggest that interpreting anticipatory decline in consumption as clear

evidence of rational addiction could only be done under the extremely stringent

scenario in which all non-price factors are fully controlled for in empirical analysis.

       Third, the results are relevant to the estimation and interpretation of sin tax

elasticities. We have documented that the inclusion of our candidate non-price

factors as controls reduces the estimated degree of price sensitivity by roughly half.

Furthermore, we emphasize that we have only a partial list of non-price factors, and

our available measures are imperfect proxies for the underlying constructs of

interest. As a result, the reduction in the estimated degree of price sensitivity is

likely an underestimate. Prior research has demonstrated that controls for non-price

elements such as anti-smoking sentiments can mitigate estimated elasticities (e.g.,

DeCicca et al., 2008). We contribute to this debate by organizing the variety of

components into a single conceptual framework and documenting that this




                                          31
framework results in meaningfully different quantitative estimates of price

responsivity.

       Finally, the results contribute to an active debate in the legal literature about

how laws work and why they are enacted. Legal scholars have long appreciated that

laws do more than change financial incentives. We show the value of an expanded

definition of expressive effects that incorporates responses to the ideas

communicated by all the activities and debate that surround and accompany the

process of legal change. Despite the prevalence of the view that law can work by

expressing value, we are aware of only a handful of papers that directly estimate

the magnitude of any expressive effects. This article presents some of the first

empirical evidence that begins to separate price effects from expressive effects and

suggests that, at least with cigarette taxes, the view of how the law can work through

non-price channels should play a bigger role in lawmaking.




                                          32
REFERENCES

Abouk, R., and Adams, S. (2013). Texting Bans and Fatal Accidents on Roadways:
      Do They Work? Or Do Drivers Just React to Announcements of
      Bans? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(2), 179-199.
Alder, Matthew D. (2000a). "Expressive Theories of Law: A Skeptical Overview."
       University of Pennsylvania Law Review 148(5): 1363­1500.
Alder, Matthew D. (2000b). "Linguistic Meaning, Nonlinguistic `Expression' and
       the Multiple Variants of Expressivism: A Reply to Professors Anderson and
       Pildes." Expressive Theories of Law: A Skeptical Overview." University of
       Pennsylvania Law Review 148(5): 1577-1594.
Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky (2019). "Regressive
        Sin Taxes, with an Application to the Optimal Soda Tax." Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 134(3): 1557­1626.
Anderson, Elizabeth S. and Richard H. Pildes (2000). "Expressive Theories of Law:
      A General Restatement." University of Pennsylvania Law Review 148:
      1503-1575.
Becker, Gary and Kevin Murphy (1988). "A Theory of Rational Addiction."
       Journal of Political Economy 96(4): 675­700.
Besley, Timothy and Anne Case (2000). "Unnatural Experiments." The Economic
       Journal 110(467): 672­694.
Beleche, Trinidad, Nellie Lew, Rosemarie L. Summers, and J. Laron Kirby (2018).
       "Are Graphic Warning Labels Stopping Millions of Smokers? A Comment
       on Huang, Chaloupka, and Fong." Econ Journal Watch 15(2): 129­157.
Binder, M. and M. H. Pesaran (2001). "Life-cycle consumption under social
       interactions." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 25 (1-2): 35­83.
Blanchflower, D. G., B. Van Landeghem, and A. J. Oswald (2009). "Imitative
       obesity and relative utility." Journal of the European Economic Association
       7 (2-3): 528­538.
Brock, William A. and Steven N. Durlauf (2001). "Discrete choice with social
       interactions." Review of Economic Studies 68(2): 235­260.
Callison, Kevin and Robert Kaestner (2013). "Do Higher Tobacco Taxes Reduce
       Adult Smoking? New Evidence of the Effect of Recent Cigarette Tax
       Increases on Adult Smoking." Economic Inquiry 52(1): 155­172.
Chiou, Lesley and Erich Muehlegger (2008). "Crossing the Line: Direct Estimation
       of Cross­Border Cigarette Sales and the Effect on Tax Revenue." B.E.
       Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 8(1): 1­41.




                                       33
Chiou, Lesley and Erich Muehlegger (2014). "Consumer Response to Cigarette
       Excise Tax Changes." National Tax Journal 67(3): 621­650.
Cooter, Robert D. (1996). "Decentralized Law for a Complex Economy: The
       Structural Approach to Adjudicating the New Law Merchant." University
       of Pennsylvania Law Review 144(5): 1643­1696.
Cooter, Robert D (1998). "Expressive Law and Economics." Journal of Legal
       Studies 27(2): 585­607.
Correia, Sergio (2016). "A Feasible Estimator for Linear Models with Multi-Way
       Fixed Effects." Working paper.
Dana, David (2007). "The Law and Expressive Meaning of Condemning the Poor
       after Kelo." Northwestern University Law Review 101(1): 365­382.
DeCicca, Philip, Donald S. Kenkel, Alan D. Mathios, and Justine Shin (2008)
      "Youth Smoking, Cigarette Prices and Anti­Smoking Sentiment." Health
      Economics 17(6): 733­749.
DeCicca, Philip, Donald Kenkel, and Feng Liu (2013). "Excise Tax Avoidance:
      The Case of State Cigarette Taxes." Journal of Health Economics 32(6):
      1130­1141.
DeCicca, Philip, Donald Kenkel, and Feng Liu (2013). "Who Pays Cigarette Taxes?
      The Impact of Consumer Price Search." Review of Economics and
      Statistics 95(2): 516­529.
Dharmapala, Dhammika and Richard H. McAdams (2003). "The Condorcet Jury
      Theorem and the Expressive Function of Law: A Theory of Informative
      Law." American Law and Economics Review 5(1): 1­31.
Dwenger, Nadja, Henrik Kleven, Imran Rasul, and Johannes Rincke (2016).
     "Extrinsic and Intrinsic Motivations for Tax Compliance: Evidence from a
     Field Experiment in Germany." American Economic Journal: Economic
     Policy 8 (3): 203­232.
Ellickson, Robert C. (1991). "Order without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes."
       Harvard University Press.
Evans, William N., Jeanne S. Ringel, and Diana Stech (1999). "Tobacco Taxes and
       Public Policy to Discourage Smoking." Tax Policy and the Economy 13: 1­
       56.
Fabbri, Marco and Sven Hoeppner (2018). "Compliance Externalities and the
       Role­Model Effect on Law Abidance: Field and Survey Experimental
       Evidence." Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 15(3): 539­562.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix (2017). "Optimal Taxation with Behavioral
        Agents." NBER Working Paper No. 21524.




                                      34
Funk, Patricia (2007). "Is There An Expressive Function of Law? An Empirical
       Analysis of Voting Laws with Symbolic Fines." American Law and
       Economics Review 9(1): 135­159.
Furth­Matzkin, Meirav and Cass R. Sunstein (2018). "Social Influences on Policy
      Preferences: Conformity and Reactance." Minnesota Law Review 102:
      1339­1379.
Glaeser, E. L., B. Sacerdote, and J. A. Scheinkman (1996). "Crime and Social
       Interactions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2):507­548.
Goldin, Jacob and Tatiana Homonoff (2013). "Smoke Gets in your Eyes: Cigarette
       Tax Salience and Regressivity." American Economic Journal: Economic
       Policy 5(1): 302-36.
Gneezy, Uri and Aldo Rustichini (2000). "A Fine Is a Price." Journal of Legal
      Studies 29(1): 1­17.
Gruber, Jon and Botond Köszegi (2001). "Is Addiction `Rational'? Theory and
       Evidence." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 1261­1303.
Hamilton, William L., Lois Biener, and Robert T. Brennan (2008). "Do Local
      Tobacco Regulations Influence Perceived Smoking Norms? Evidence from
      Adult and Youth Surveys in Massachusetts." Health Education Research
      23(4): 709­722.
Harberger, Arnold (1964). "The Measurement of Waste." American Economic
      Review 54(3): 58­76.
Harding, Matthew, Ephraim Leibtag, and Michael Lovenheim (2012). "The
      Heterogeneous Geographic and Socioeconomic Incidence of Cigarette
      Taxes: Evidence from Nielsen Homescan Data." American Economic
      Journal: Economic Policy 4(4): 169­198.
Kahan, Dan M. (1996). "What Do Alternative Sanctions Mean?" University of
      Chicago Law Review 63(2): 591­653.
Kahan, Dan M. (1998). "Social Meaning and the Economic Analysis of Crime."
      Journal of Legal Studies 27(2): 609­622.
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell (2002). "Fairness versus Welfare." Harvard
      University Press.
Kornhauser, Lewis A. (1998). "No Best Answer?" University of Pennsylavania
      Law Review 146: 1599­1637.
Lessig, Lawrence (1995). "The Regulation of Social Meaning." University of
       Chicago Law Review 62: 943­1047.
Linos, Katerina and Kimberly Twist (2016). "The Supreme Court, the Media, and
       Public Opinion: Comparing Experimental and Observational Methods."
       Journal of Legal Studies 45(2): 223­254.




                                      35
Lovenheim, Michael (2008). "How Far to the Border?: The Extent and Impact of
      Cross­Border Casual Cigarette Smuggling." National Tax Journal 61(1): 7­
      33.
MacLean, Johanna, Asia Kessler, and Don Kenkel (2016). "Cigarette Taxes and
     Older Adult Smoking: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study."
     Health Economics 25(4): 424­438.
Mahoney, Paul G. and Chris William Sanchirico (2001). "Competing Norms and
     Social Evolution: Is the Fittest Norm Efficient?" University of Pennsylvania
     Law Review 149(6): 2027­2062.
Malani, Anup and Julian Reif (2015). "Interpreting Pre­Trends as Anticipation:
       Impact on Estimated Treatment Effects from Tort Reform." Journal of
       Public Economics 124: 1­17.
Matsusaka, John G. (2005). "Direct Democracy Works." Journal of Economic
      Perspectives 19(2): 185­206.
Mazzone, Jason (1999). "When Courts Speak: Social Capital and Law's Expressive
      Function." Syracuse Law Review 49(3): 1039­1066.
McAdams, Richard H. (1997). "The Origin, Development, and Regulation of
     Norms." Michigan Law Review 96(2): 338­433.
McAdams, Richard H. (2000a). "An Attitudinal Theory of Expressive Law."
     Oregon Law Review 79: 339­390.
McAdams, Richard H. (2000b). "A Focal Point Theory of Expressive Law."
     Virginia Law Review 86: 1649­1729.
McAdams, Richard H. and Janice Nadler (2005). "Testing the Focal Point Theory
     of Legal Compliance: The Effect of Third­Party Expression in an
     Experimental Hawk/Dove Game." Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 2(1):
     87­123.
McAdams, Richard H. and Eric B. Rasmusen (2007). "Norms and the Law." In
     Handbook of Law and Economics: Volume 2, edited by A. Mitchell
     Polinsky and Steven Shavell, 1573­1618. Elsevier, North­Holland.
McAdams, Richard H. (2015). "The Expressive Powers of Law: Theories and
     Limits." Harvard University Press.
Janice Nadler (2005). "Flouting the Law." Texas Law Review 83: 1399-1441.
Nadler, Janice (2017). "Expressive Law, Social Norms, and Social Groups." Law
       and Social Inquiry 42(1): 60­75.
National Center for Health Statistics, US Department of Health and Human
       Services. [Accessed February 2014] Hospitals' and physicians' handbook
       on      birth    registration    and      fetal     death     reporting.
       http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/misc/hb_birth.pdf. Published October 1987




                                       36
Nesson, Erik (2017). "Heterogeneity in Smokers' Responses to Tobacco Control
      Policies." Health Economics 26(2): 206­225.
O'Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (2003). "Studying Optimal Paternalism,
     Illustrated by a Model of Sin Taxes." American Economic Review Papers
     and Proceedings 93(2): 186­191.
O'Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (2005). "Optimal Taxes for Sin
     Goods." Swedish Economic Policy Review 12(2): 7­39.
O'Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (2006). "Optimal Sin Taxes." Journal of
     Public Economics 90(10): 1825­1849.
Picker, Randal C. (1997). "Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative
       Approach to the Adoption of Norms." University of Chicago Law Review
       64: 1225­88.
Pigou, Arthur (1920). "The Economics of Welfare." Macmillan and Company.
Pildes, Richard H. and Richard G. Niemi (1993). "Expressive Harms, `Bizarre
        Districts,' and Voting Rights: Evaluating Election­District Appearances
        After Shaw v. Reno." Michigan Law Review 92(3): 483­587.
Pildes, Richard H. (1998). "Why Rights are Not Trumps: Social Meanings,
        Expressive Harms, and Constitutionalism." Journal of Legal Studies 27(2):
        725­763.
Posner, Eric A. (1996). "Law, Economics, and Inefficient Norms." University of
       Pennsylvania Law Review 144: 1697­1744.
Posner, Richard, and Eric. B. Rasmusen (1999). "Creating and Enforcing Norms,
       with Special Reference to Sanctions." International Review of Law and
       Economics 19(3): 369­82.
Posner, Eric A. (2000). "Law and Social Norms." Harvard University Press.
Ramsey, F. P. (1927). "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation." Economic
      Journal 37(145): 47­61.
Reif, Julian (2018). "A Model of Addiction and Social Interactions." Economic
        Inquiry (forthcoming).
Richards, Kitty (2017). "An Expressive Theory of Tax." Cornell Journal of Law
       and Public Policy 27: 301­355.
Richwine, Chelsea J and Dor, Avi and Moghtaderi, Ali (2019). "Do Stricter
      Immunization Laws Improve Coverage? Evidence from the Repeal of Non-
      medical Exemptions for School Mandated Vaccines." National Bureau of
      Economic Research Working Paper Number 25847.
Riley Kristen E., Michael R. Ulrich, Heidi A. Hamann, and Jamie S. Ostroff (2017).
       "Decreasing Smoking but Increasing Stigma? Anti­tobacco Campaigns,
       Public Health, and Cancer Care." AMA Journal of Ethics 19(5): 475­485.



                                       37
Roberto, Christina, Diandra Wong, Aviva Musicus, and David Hammond (2016).
       "The Influence of Sugar­Sweetened Beverage Health Warning Labels on
       Parents' Choices." Pediatrics 137(2): 1­10.
Robinson, Paul H. and John M. Darley (1997). "The Utility of Desert."
      Northwestern University Law Review 91: 453­499.
Rozema, Kyle (2018). "Tax Incidence in a Vertical Supply Chain: Evidence from
     Cigarette Wholesale Prices." National Tax Journal 71(3): 427­450.
Schauer, Frederick (2015). "The Force of Law." Harvard University Press.
Smulian, John C. Cande V. Ananth, Maryellen L. Hanley, Robert A. Knuppel, Judy
      Donlen, and Lakota Kruse (2001). "New Jersey's Electronic Birth
      Certificate Program: Variations in Data Sources." American Journal of
      Public Health 91(5): 814­816.
Strauss, David A. (1996). "Common Law Constitutional Interpretation." University
       of Chicago Law Review 63(3): 877­935.
Stuber, Jennifer, Sandro Galea, and Bruce G. Link (2009). "Stigma and Smoking:
        The Consequences of Our Good Intentions." Social Service Review 83(4):
        585­609.
Sunstein, Cass R. (1994). "Incommensurability and Valuation in Law." Michigan
       Law Review 92: 779­861.
Sunstein, Cass R. (1996). "On the Expressive Function of Law." University of
       Pennsylvania Law Review 144: 2021­2053.
Taylor, Rebecca, Scott Kaplan, Sofia Villas­Boas, and Kevin Jung (2018). "Soda
       Wars: The Effect of A Soda Tax Election on University Beverage Sales."
       Working paper.
Wittlin, Maggie (2011). "Buckling Under Pressure: An Empirical Test of the
        Expressive Effects of Law." Yale Journal on Regulation 28(2): 419­469.
Yurekli, Ayda and Ping Zhang (2000). "The Impact of Clean Indoor­Air Laws and
       Cigarette Smuggling on Demand for Cigarettes: An Empirical Model."
       Health Economics 9(2): 159­170.




                                      38
Figure 1: Summary of State's Data Availability and Tax Law Changes


    AK
    AL
    AR
    AZ
    CO
    CT
    DE
     FL
    GA
     HI
     IA
     ID
     IL
    KS
    KY
    LA
    MA
    MD
    ME
     MI
    MN
    MO
    MS
    MT
    NC
    ND
    NE
    NH
     NJ
    NM
    NV
    OH
    OK
    OR
    PA
     RI
     SC
    TN
    TX
    UT
    VA
    VT
    WA
    WI
    WV
    WY
           1989
           1990
           1991
           1992
           1993
           1994
           1995
           1996
           1997
           1998
           1999
           2000
           2001
           2002
           2003
           2004
           2005
           2006
           2007
           2008
           2009




Notes : Each line indicates the years that the state is in the sample. The circle markers
indicate the timing of cigarette tax changes.




                                           39
                                                                      Figure 2: Time-Paths of Non-Price Factors

                                         A. Place-Based Legal Restrictions                             B. News Headlines
                                   .15




                                                                                                                                       .15
                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                               Headlines Per Journal
Place-Based Legal
Restrictions Index
                                   .1




                                                                                                  Monthly News
                                                                                                                                       .05
                                   .05




                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                       -.05
                                   0




                                         -3         -2           -1           0           1                                                   -3          -2         -1           0      1
                                                  Years Relative to Tax Law Change                                                                    Years Relative to Tax Law Change

                                         C. Anti-Smoking Appropriations                                D. Tobacco Industry Political Donations
                                   80




                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                               Political Donations Per 1000 Citizens
Appropriations Per 1000 Citizens




                                                                                                     Monthly Tobacco Industry
                                   60
    Monthly Anti-Smoking




                                                                                                                                       2
                                   40




                                                                                                                                       1
                                   20
                                   0




                                                                                                                                       0
                                   -20




                                         -3         -2           -1           0           1                                                   -3          -2         -1           0      1
                                                  Years Relative to Tax Law Change                                                                    Years Relative to Tax Law Change


                                                                                     Control                                                  Treatment

                                         Notes : Each panel reports the evolution of a non-price factor, comparing "treatment" states with a tax
                                         change to "control" states with no tax change in the window of consideration. We plot a six-month moving
                                         average, shifted such that the average of the non-price factor in the shaded window two-to-three years before
                                         the tax change is zero. The sample for this figure is restricted to the 112 tax changes for which a balanced
                                         panel is available over this window of consideration.




                                                                                               40
                            Figure 3: Time-Paths of Non-Price Factors: Difference from Control States




                                                                                                                           Treated and Control States (Standard Deviations)
                       5




                                                                                                                              Difference in Political Donations Between
                                                                                                                                                                    15
  Control States (Standard Deviations)
                                    4
    Difference Between Treated and
                             3




                                                                                                                                                           10
                       2




                                                                                                                                                   5
         0       1




                                                                                                                                        0
  -1




                                                                                                                              -5
                       -2




                                         -3                -2                    -1              0                   1
                                                                Years Relative to Tax Law Change

                                              Place-Based Legal Restrictions        News Headlines
                                              Anti-Smoking Appropriations           Tobacco Industry Political Donations


Notes : This figure reports the evolution of the non-price factors plotted in Figure 2, taking the difference
between "treatment" states with a tax change to "control" states with no tax change in the window
of consideration. We plot a six-month moving average of the difference, normalized by the standard
deviation of this variable in control states and shifted such that the average of the non-price factor in the
shaded window two-to-three years before the tax change is zero. The sample for this figure is restricted
to the 112 tax changes for which a balanced panel is available over this window of consideration.
Tobacco industry political donations are reported on the right y-axis.




                                                                               41
                                              Figure 4: Time-Paths of Non-Price Factors: Difference-in-Difference Estimates

                                         A. Place-Based Legal Restrictions                            B. News Headlines




                                                                                                                                      .3
                                   .1
                                   .08




                                                                                              Headlines Per Journal
                                                                                                                                      .2
Place-Based Legal
Restrictions Index




                                                                                                 Monthly News
                                   .06




                                                                                                                                      .1
                                   .04
                                   .02




                                                                                                                                      0
                                   0




                                                                                                                                      -.1
                                         -3          -2          -1           0          1                                                  -3     -2           -1           0      1
                                                  Years Relative to Tax Law Change                                                               Years Relative to Tax Law Change

                                         C. Anti-Smoking Appropriations                               D. Tobacco Industry Political Donations
                                   80




                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                              Political Donations Per 1000 Citizens
Appropriations Per 1000 Citizens




                                                                                                    Monthly Tobacco Industry
                                   60




                                                                                                                                      6
    Monthly Anti-Smoking
                                   40




                                                                                                                                      4
                                   20




                                                                                                                                      2
                                   0




                                                                                                                                      0
                                   -20




                                                                                                                                      -2




                                         -3          -2          -1           0          1                                                  -3     -2           -1           0      1
                                                  Years Relative to Tax Law Change                                                               Years Relative to Tax Law Change

                                         Notes : This figure reports the estimated coefficients from difference-in-difference regressions. The estimated
                                         coefficients come from the stacked-event-study data where we construct 6-month bins in the three years
                                         before and one year after the tax law change. We then regress each of the non-price factors on the bins
                                         and the interaction between the bins and the state with a cigarette tax change (the treated state). The
                                         reported coefficients are on the interaction terms between treated states and 6-month bins, which estimate
                                         the differential change occurring in treated states over different six-month windows. Capped lines indicate
                                         90 percent confidence intervals.




                                                                                             42
      Figure 5: Estimated Price Responsivity with and without Non-Price Controls




Notes : This figure reports the estimated responsivity of demand to the state tax level derived from the
analysis in Section IV.B. Across columns, we vary the width of the time interval examined, ranging from a
narrow window examining one year pre- and post-tax change to a wide window examining five years pre- and
post-tax change. Contrasting the light and dark gray bars illustrates the degree to which price responsivity
declines when the non-price factors are included as control variables.




                                                   43
                                                       Figure 6: Cigarette Demand With and Without Non-Price Controls


                                                                             Estimated Demand Curve (Without Non-Price Controls)
  Cigarette Consumption (Average Cigarettes Per Day)
                                                  2


                                                                             Estimated Demand Curve (With Non-Price Controls)
         1.2      1.4   1   1.6       1.8




                                                       0            .5           1               1.5          2             2.5
                                                                                State Cigarette Tax ($)

Notes : This figure plots semiparametric estimates of the cigarette demand curve with or without non-price
controls. We estimate a cubic spline governing the within-state relationship between cigarette consumption
and state taxes, with data restricted to a 3-year window surrounding a tax change. Estimates "with controls"
linearly control for all non-price terms considered in Table 2. 90 percent confidence intervals are shaded
behind each estimate.




                                                                                     44
             Figure 7: Time Path of Consumption Around Tax Changes




Notes : This figure reports the estimated coefficients from our difference-in-difference regressions
discussed in Section IV.C. Capped lines indicate 90 percent confidence intervals. The shaded
region indicates the 25th to 75th percentile range of dates at which votes on the tax law changes
occurred.




                                                45
                           Table 1: Descriptive Statistics



                                                                 Stacked Events
                                                 Panel    All     Control     Treatment

Average Cigarettes Per Day                       1.63     1.79      1.81          1.55

Place-Based Legal
Restrictions Index                               0.44     0.34      0.33          0.48

Monthly News
Headlines Per Journal                            0.36     0.38      0.38          0.35

Monthly Anti-Smoking
Appropriations Per 1000 Citizens               131.65    92.52     87.50         162.54

Monthly Tobacco Industry
Political Donations Per 1000 Citizens            1.45     0.57      0.50          1.56

Notes : The first column presents averages of our primary variables of interest in our panel
data. Columns 2-4 present averages calculated within our "stacked event study" dataset,
comprised of a three-year window for all available states surrounding each tax change event.




                                            46
         Table 2: Within-Tax-Change-Event Predictors of Cigarette Consumption



                                                                     ln(Cigarettes)
                                                (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

State Tax                                      -0.264 -0.227 -0.203 -0.196 -0.257 -0.127
                                              (0.033) (0.031) (0.026) (0.032) (0.034) (0.023)

Place-Based Legal                                           -0.152                                    -0.087
Restrictions Index                                         (0.031)                                   (0.034)

News Headlines                                                        -0.005                          -0.005
Per Journal (Cumulative)                                             (0.001)                         (0.001)

Anti-Smoking Appropriations                                                     -0.005                -0.004
Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                                 (0.002)               (0.001)

Tobacco Industry Political Donations                                                       -0.070     -0.022
Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                                            (0.089)    (0.054)

N                                              9,642       9,642     9,642      9,642      9,642      9,642

Notes : Standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected using multi-dimensional clustering that allows
for correlation within event, within state, and within year-month.  p<0.1,  p<0.05,  p<0.01.




                                                      47
Table 3: Within-Tax-Change-Event Predictors of Anticipatory Cigarette Consumption Re-
sponse



                                                                      ln(Cigarettes)
                                                 (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

 Effective State Tax                            -0.266 -0.229 -0.205 -0.198 -0.259 -0.128
                                               (0.033) (0.032) (0.026) (0.033) (0.034) (0.023)

 Size of Enacted Tax Change                     -0.081 -0.062 -0.050 -0.069 -0.076 -0.030
 (Prior to Being Effective)                    (0.021) (0.023) (0.020) (0.022) (0.023) (0.021)

 Place-Based                                                 -0.150                                    -0.086
 Legal Restrictions Index                                   (0.031)                                   (0.034)

 News Headlines                                                        -0.005                          -0.005
 Per Journal (Cumulative)                                             (0.001)                         (0.001)

 Anti-Smoking Appropriations                                                     -0.005                -0.004
 Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                                 (0.002)               (0.001)

 Tobacco Industry Political Donations                                                       -0.066     -0.021
 Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                                            (0.089)    (0.054)

 N                                              9,642       9,642     9,642      9,642      9,642      9,642

 Notes : Standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected using multi-dimensional clustering that allows
 for correlation within event, within state, and within year-month.  p<0.1,  p<0.05,  p<0.01.




                                                       48
Appendix
                Figure A1: Example U.S. Standard Certificate of Live Birth




Source : National Center for Health Statistics (1987)




                                                   49
Figure A2: Estimated Price Responsivity with Different Sets of Controls




                                  50
    Table A1: Predictors of Cigarette Consumption in States without Tax Changes

                                                                 ln(Cigarettes)
                                                (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)

Place-Based Legal                              -0.293                                       -0.094
Restrictions Index                            (0.053)                                      (0.038)

News Headlines                                            -0.006                            -0.005
Per Journal (Cumulative)                                 (0.001)                           (0.001)

Anti-Smoking Appropriations                                          -0.010                 -0.006
Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                      (0.002)                (0.002)

Tobacco Industry Political Donations                                            -0.833      -0.256
Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                                 (0.538)     (0.316)

N                                            150,836     150,836    150,836    150,836     150,836

Notes : Standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected using multi-dimensional clustering that
allows for correlation within event, within state, and within year-month.  p<0.1,  p<0.05, 
p<0.01.




                                                 51
                 Table A2: Non-Price Factors Measured Contemporaneously

                                                                      ln(Cigarettes)
                                                (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)

State Tax                                      -0.264 -0.227 -0.259 -0.253 -0.264 -0.217
                                              (0.033) (0.031) (0.032) (0.031) (0.033) (0.029)

Place-Based Legal                                           -0.152                                    -0.132
Restrictions Index                                         (0.031)                                   (0.031)

Monthly News                                                          -0.003                          -0.002
Headlines Per Journal                                                (0.005)                         (0.005)

Monthly Anti-Smoking                                                            -0.147                -0.139
Appropriations Per 1000 Citizens                                               (0.038)               (0.038)

Monthly Tobacco Industry                                                                   -0.138 -0.181
Political Donations Per 1000 Citizens                                                     (0.072) (0.074)

N                                              9,642       9,642     9,642      9,642      9,642      9,642

Notes : Standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected using multi-dimensional clustering that allows
for correlation within event, within state, and within year-month.  p<0.1,  p<0.05,  p<0.01.




                                                      52
Table A3: Within-Tax-Change-Event Predictors of Cigarette Consumption: News Headlines
with and without the Word Tax



                                                                      ln(Cigarettes)
                                                            (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)

     State Tax                                             -0.210 -0.211 -0.208 -0.130
                                                          (0.027) (0.027) (0.026) (0.023)

     News Headlines Per Journal (Cumulative)
         Cigarette with Tax                                -0.012                -0.002     -0.001
                                                          (0.002)               (0.003)    (0.003)

         Cigarette without Tax                                        -0.007 -0.006 -0.007
                                                                     (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)

     Place-Based Legal                                                                      -0.083
     Restrictions Index                                                                    (0.033)

     Anti-Smoking Appropriations                                                            -0.004
     Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                                        (0.001)

     Tobacco Industry Political Donations                                                   -0.027
     Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                                        (0.054)

     N                                                     9,642      9,642      9,642      9,642

     Notes : Standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected using multi-dimensional cluster-
     ing that allows for correlation within event, within state, and within year-month.  p<0.1,
     
        p<0.05,  p<0.01.




                                                   53
Table A4: Within-Tax-Change-Event Predictors of Cigarette Consumption Using BRFSS
Data



                                                                     ln(Cigarettes)
                                                (1)          (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

State Tax                                      -0.381 -0.373 -0.189 -0.360 -0.330 -0.136
                                              (0.070) (0.070) (0.058) (0.070) (0.073) (0.055)

Place-Based Legal                                           -0.039                                    0.054
Restrictions Index                                         (0.059)                                   (0.045)

News Headlines                                                        -0.002                          -0.002
Per Journal (Cumulative)                                             (0.000)                         (0.000)

Anti-Smoking Appropriations                                                     -0.003                -0.002
Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                                 (0.001)               (0.000)

Tobacco Industry Political Donations                                                       -1.407 -1.353
Per 1000 Citizens (Cumulative)                                                            (0.360) (0.360)

N                                              4,980       4,980     4,980      4,980      4,980      4,980

Notes : Standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected using multi-dimensional clustering that allows
for correlation within event, within state, and within year-month.  p<0.1,  p<0.05,  p<0.01.




                                                      54
