                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               MARKUPS AND INEQUALITY

                                         Corina Boar
                                       Virgiliu Midrigan

                                      Working Paper 25952
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25952


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          June 2019, Revised November 2020




We thank Federico Kochen for superb research assistance, our discussants Salome Baslandze,
Paco Buera, Basile Grassi for insightful feedback, as well as Adrien Auclert, Jess Benhabib,
Mariacristina De Nardi, Mark Gertler, Mike Golosov, Oleg Itskhoki, Benjamin Moll, Gianluca
Violante, Ludwig Straub and seminar participants at Barcelona GSE Forum, Boston University,
Cleveland Fed, Copenhagen, Duke, Dutch National Bank Conference on Inequality, ERMAS,
Harvard, Ischia Conference on Frontiers of Macroeconomics, Madrid Conference on Firm
Dynamics and Macroeconomics, Minneapolis Fed, National Bank of Romania, NBER Summer
Institute, NYU, OSU, Penn, Philadelphia Fed, Princeton, Rochester, Rome Conference on
Macroeconomics, Sciences Po, SED, SITE, St Louis Conference on Macroeconomics of
Inequality, Stony Brook and Warwick Conference on Inequality for valuable comments. We
gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation, Grant SES-1948119. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Corina Boar and Virgiliu Midrigan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Markups and Inequality
Corina Boar and Virgiliu Midrigan
NBER Working Paper No. 25952
June 2019, Revised November 2020
JEL No. D4,E2,L1

                                         ABSTRACT

We study optimal product market interventions in an unequal economy in which firm ownership
is concentrated and markups increase with firm market shares. We characterize optimal regulation
in a static Mirrleesian setting in which we impose no constraints on the shape of interventions,
and take into account their general equilibrium and distributional effects. We find that optimal
regulation improves allocative efficiency, thereby increasing product market concentration.
Though it leads to greater inequality, optimal regulation increases the equilibrium wage,
benefiting most households. This result extends to a dynamic setting with capital and wealth
accumulation.


Corina Boar
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
corina.boar@gmail.com

Virgiliu Midrigan
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu
1         Introduction
The United States has experienced a sharp increase in product market concentration, profit
shares and measured markups in recent decades.1 Since firm ownership is highly concentrated,
a growing concern is that markups redistribute income from workers towards firm owners,
thus increasing inequality. This led to numerous calls for rethinking competition policy to
explicitly incorporate distributional concerns, in addition to concerns for economic efficiency.2
        Existing work on markups, such as Atkeson and Burstein (2008), Bilbiie et al. (2012,
2018) and Edmond et al. (2018), assumes perfect consumption sharing across households
and thus abstracts from distributional considerations. In such a setting markups only distort
production by introducing two sources of inefficiency. First, the aggregate markup acts as a
uniform tax on production. Second, firms with higher market shares charge higher markups,
and the resulting dispersion in marginal products reduces allocative efficiency and aggregate
productivity. In this environment a policy that subsidizes production in proportion to firm
markups restores efficiency. Even though this policy increases concentration and firm profits,
it makes the representative consumer, who owns all firms, unambiguously better off. This
policy prescription ignores, however, potentially important distributional consequences that
increased profits and concentration have.
        Our paper departs from the representative consumer framework. We study optimal prod-
uct market policies in an economy that matches the degree of inequality in the United States
and in which firm ownership is highly concentrated and markups increase with firm market
shares. We consider the problem of a utilitarian regulator implicitly guided by concerns
for both equity and efficiency. We first use a mechanism design approach and characterize
optimal regulation in a static Mirrleesian setting in which we impose no constraints on the
shape of the interventions, other than those stemming from informational frictions. Impor-
tantly, the regulator takes into account the general equilibrium effects of interventions. We
find that, despite its implicit equity concerns, the regulator improves allocative efficiency,
increasing product market concentration relative to the status quo. Intuitively, even though
optimal regulation does lead to greater inequality, it increases the equilibrium wage, which
benefits most households. We then show that our results extend to a richer dynamic setting
in which considerations of computational tractability lead us to restrict attention to policies
in a simple parametric class.
    1
        De Loecker et al. (2018), Hall (2018a), Autor et al. (2017), Hartman-Glaser et al. (2018).
    2
        See Stiglitz (2012), Atkinson (2015), Baker and Salop (2015), among others.



                                                         1
   The static economy we study consists of two types of agents, workers and entrepreneurs.
Workers are heterogeneous in their labor market efficiency and choose how many hours to
work at the equilibrium wage. Entrepreneurs differ in their ability, hire labor, and supply
a differentiated variety of a good. The assumptions we make on the demand system imply
that the demand elasticity a producer faces decreases in its market share, so larger producers
charge higher markups. Our framework thus parsimoniously captures the trade-off between
efficiency gains and markups that is at the heart of the debate about product market policies.
   We build on the approach of Baron and Myerson (1982) and study the problem of a
regulator who designs revenue-neutral optimal product market interventions. In contrast to
Baron and Myerson (1982), who study the problem of regulating a single monopolist, we
consider the problem of regulating all firms in a general equilibrium setting. Following the
Mirrleesian approach to optimal taxation, we assume that the regulator does not observe the
ability of individual entrepreneurs and thus faces incentive compatibility constraints. These
constraints generate informational rents, which increase with the equilibrium wage and the
amount of output the regulator prescribes that the entrepreneur produces.
   We use optimal control techniques to derive an expression that characterizes the optimal
distortions in producers' relative quantity choices as a function of entrepreneurial ability z .
The distortions balance the regulator's tradeoff between equity and efficiency. On one hand,
distorting the market share of an individual entrepreneur allows the regulator to redistribute
to less productive entrepreneurs and to workers. The gains from doing so depend on the
ratio of the average marginal utility of consumption of entrepreneurs with ability above z
and the regulator's marginal valuation of resources. Because entrepreneurs' informational
rents increase with the equilibirum wage, so do the desired distortions. On the other hand,
the distortions reduce employment and output, a cost that increases with productivity z and
the mass of producers at that point.
   In addition to distorting the market shares of individual entrepreneurs, informational
frictions also distort the equilibrium wage and the aggregate labor share. The regulator
recognizes that it can only increase the welfare of workers indirectly, by manipulating the
amount of labor to be hired by entrepreneurs and therefore the equilibrium wage. On one
hand, increasing the consumption of workers requires higher equilibrium wages and therefore
prescribes that entrepreneurs hire more labor. On the other hand, an increase in employment
raises the informational rents received by productive entrepreneurs.
   Since the solution to the regulator's problem is not available in closed form, we use nu-


                                               2
merical methods to characterize the equilibrium and solve for the optimal degree of product
market interventions. As in the Mirrleesian taxation literature, whether the distortions cho-
sen by the regulator are increasing or decreasing in entrepreneurial ability depends on the
distribution of ability and the regulator's relative welfare weight on workers. Nevertheless,
a robust result that emerges is that optimal regulation entails a higher degree of product
market concentration than under the status quo. Though optimal interventions do not fully
restore allocative efficiency, the degree of product market concentration is nearly as large as
that implied by the efficient allocations. Perhaps counter-intuitively, product market concen-
tration is higher when the regulator places a higher weight on the welfare of workers. This
is because product market interventions that encourage larger firms to expand bid up the
demand for labor and therefore the equilibrium wage.
      Having derived the optimal degree of product market interventions, we show how these
can be decentralized with an output subsidy schedule. We then show that this non-linear
schedule can be well approximated by a simple three-parameter subsidy function that allows
the regulator to achieve the bulk of the welfare gains attainable with the unrestricted policy.3
We find this restricted schedule useful because it allows us to provide sharper intuition for
the tradeoffs the regulator faces. The three parameters govern the lump-sum tax/transfer
to individual producers, the average marginal subsidy and the slope of the marginal subsidy
schedule. The average marginal subsidy determines the aggregate labor wedge and therefore
the equilibrium wage and employment. The slope of the marginal subsidy function determines
how a given amount of employment in the aggregate is allocated across producers and thus
the overall degree of product market concentration. We show that a steeper marginal subsidy
schedule has both benefits and costs. On the benefit side, it increases the equilibrium wage
by encouraging producers to expand. On the cost side, it increases inequality. The regulator
trades off these benefits and costs and chooses a slope of the schedule that nearly restores
allocative efficiency.
      Our static model is purposefully simple in order to highlight the key tradeoffs between
equity and efficiency entailed by product market interventions. We show, however, that our
results extend to a richer dynamic setting in which we introduce capital and wealth accumu-
lation, a corporate sector whose ownership is diversified, and a government which provides
some redistribution via income taxes and transfers. We restrict product market interventions
to the three-parameter subsidy class and calculate optimal regulation explicitly taking into
  3
      See Heathcote and Tsujiyama (2019) for an analogous exercise in the context of labor income taxation.



                                                      3
account that product market reforms generate long-lasting transition dynamics. We find that
the optimal intervention greatly increases the sales share of the largest firms, nearly elimi-
nating misallocation. The equilibrium wage increases by 3.2%, while consumption-equivalent
welfare increases by 2.2%. Interestingly, optimal regulation reduces long-run wealth and in-
come inequality because it redistributes market share from medium-size businesses, which
are primarily owned by entrepreneurs, to larger corporate firms. Since in our model, as in the
data, entrepreneurs are richer on average, this reallocation reduces their wealth and income
shares and therefore inequality.
       Our result that policies that encourage firms to expand are welfare-improving is robust
to many perturbations of the model. An earlier version of the paper, Boar and Midrigan
(2019), considered extensions of our dynamic model in which entrepreneurs are subject to
financial constraints, in which firm ownership is either perfectly diversified or fully concen-
trated, alternative ways of modelling entry, and reached similar conclusions. To save on
space, here we do not report the results of these experiments and study a simplified verison
of the model in which entrepreneurs do not face collateral constraints. Given our interest
in the distributional consequences of product market interventions, we calibrate the model
to match the distribution of wealth and income in the SCF data, as well as the share of
income and wealth held by entrepreneurs. We show, however, that our results are robust
to calibrating the model to match the process for business and labor income estimated by
DeBacker et al. (2020) using IRS data.
       We conclude that product market concentration is not necessarily costly, even in an
environment with highly unequal firm ownership. What is costly is dispersion in the marginal
product of factors of production across firms and wedges that depress the equilibrium wage
and the return on capital. Optimal product market interventions reduce these wedges and
in doing so increase product market concentration. Our results should not be interpreted,
however, as a call for subsidizing large firms. Such interventions would have to be done
at the level of individual product markets and there is considerable uncertainty regarding
markups in narrowly defined markets as well as in determining the boundary of a market.4
Rather, our results caution against the widely-held view that reducing concentration and
the market power of large firms would necessarily improve the welfare of the poor. Though
less concentration indeed reduces market power and markups in our model, the interventions
required to reduce the market share of large firms have the unintended consequence of also
   4
    See Berry et al. (2019) for a discussion of the difficulties of measuring markups and product markets,
and the caveats they imply for competition policy.


                                                    4
reducing the labor share, aggregate productivity and the equilibrium wage.


Related Work. In addition to the work on markups and optimal taxation discussed above,
our paper builds on studies of wealth and income inequality, originating with Castaneda et
al. (2003) and more recently Benhabib et al. (2017) and Hubmer et al. (2018). This line of
research typically assumes perfect competition in the product market or that markups are
constant. Several notable exceptions are the work of Brun and Gonzalez (2017) and Colciago
and Mechelli (2019) who study the effect of increasing markups in Bewley-Aiygari models
with homogeneous firms. In contrast to their work, we explicitly model firm heterogeneity
and study optimal product market interventions. Our work is also related to Kaplow (2019)
who studies income taxation in an economy with markups and Bhandari et al. (2018) who
study optimal monetary policy responses to markup shocks in an economy with heterogeneous
agents. A recent paper by Dworczak et al. (2020) also considers a mechanism design approach
to characterize the tradeoff between allocative efficiency and redistribution in a setting in
which buyers and sellers differ in their valuation of the good. In contrast to their paper,
which studies a market for a single good, we study a production economy with a large
number of goods and account for the general equilibrium effects of regulation.
     Our paper is also related to research studying the taxation of private businesses (Hurst and
Pugsley, 2017, Dyrda and Pugsley, 2018, Bhandari and McGrattan, 2018) and is motivated
by work documenting facts about allocative efficiency (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009, Baqaee and
Farhi, 2018), and the rise in inequality (Piketty and Goldhammer, 2014, Kuhn and Rios-Rull,
2016).


    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the static economy we
study. Section 3 solves the optimal regulation problem. Section 4 extends the analysis to a
dynamic setting. Section 5 concludes.


2      Static Model
For clarity we study the simplest environment that captures the interplay between markups
and inequality and allows us to understand the key forces that shape optimal product market
interventions. The insights we derive here carry to more complicated settings, such as the
dynamic model we study in Section 4.
     The economy is inhabited by two types of agents, a measure 1 -  of workers and a


                                                5
measure  of entrepreneurs. Workers are heterogeneous in their labor market ability e and
choose how many hours to work at a wage W . Entrepreneurs are heterogeneous in their
entrepreneurial ability z . They hire labor, supply a differentiated variety of a good and
receive income from profits. We first describe the problem of the agents, characterize the
equilibrium in the absence of product market interventions, and discuss the distortions due
to markups.

2.1    Workers
Workers have preferences of the form

                                                 c1-   h1+
                                    u (c, h) =       -     ,
                                                 1- 1+
where c denotes consumption and h hours worked. The parameters  and  represent the
coefficient of relative risk aversion and the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.
Their budget constraint is
                                              c = W eh.

Solving the workers' problem gives their optimal hours and consumption choices
                                       1-                                    1+
                    h(e, W ) = (W e)  +          and         c(e, W ) = (W e)  + .            (1)

The welfare of workers thus increases with the equilibrium wage
                                                          +           (1- )(1+ ) (1- )(1+ )
           v (e, W ) = u (c (e, W ) , h (e, W )) =                   W  + e  + .
                                                      (1 - ) (1 +  )

2.2    Entrepreneurs
Entrepreneurs do not work and have preferences of the form

                                                         c1-
                                            u (c) =          .
                                                         1-
They differ in their ability z and operate a production technology

                                               y = zl ,                                       (2)

where l is labor input, y is output and   1 is the span-of-control parameter. Their budget
constraint is
                                                 c = ,

                                                     6
where  are profits, the entrepreneurs' only source of income. Profits are equal to

                                          = p(y )y - W l,

where p(y ) is the inverse demand function faced by an entrepreneur. To derive this demand
function, we next describe the assumptions we make on the market structure.


Market Structure. We assume that there is a perfectly competitive final good sector
which aggregates differentiated varieties produced by entrepreneurs. Each entrepreneur is
the only supplier of a given variety. The technology of the final good sector is implicitly
defined by the Kimball aggregator
                                              
                                                        yi
                                                           di = 1,                                    (3)
                                          0             Y
where Y is the output of the final good, whose price we normalize to 1, and  is the mass of
entrepreneurs. The function (q ) is strictly increasing and concave. We follow Klenow and
Willis (2016) in assuming an aggregator of the form

                                               1                            1               q /
                 (q ) = 1 + ( - 1) exp                    -1               ,           -   ,      ,
                                                                                            
where (s, x) is the upper incomplete gamma function.5
      Taking the prices pi of the differentiated varieties as given, final good producers choose
how much of each variety yi to buy in order to maximize profits
                                                                   
                                      max Y -                         pi yi di,
                                       {yi }                   0

subject to the Kimball production function (3). The solution to this problem gives rise to
the demand function
                                                                   yi
                                       p (yi ) =                      D,                              (4)
                                                                   Y
where                                                                             -1
                                                     
                                                               yi yi
                                   D=                                di
                                                 0             Y Y
is an endogenously determined demand index.
      The Klenow and Willis (2016) functional form implies a demand elasticity
                                             (q )        
                                        -          = q -  ,
                                             (q )q
  5
   See Matsuyama and Ushchev (2020) for a general characterization of homothetic demand systems that
imply variable markups.

                                                           7
which falls with the entrepreneur's relative quantity q = y/Y or, equivalently, market share.
The Kimball specification of the demand system is widely used in both macroeconomics and
international economics (Chari et al., 2000, Gopinath and Itskhoki, 2010, Edmond et al.,
2018). We note that such a demand system can be micro-founded by explicitly modeling
search frictions (Benabou, 1988) or oligopolistic competition (Atkeson and Burstein, 2008),
which would give rise to a similar negative relationship between market shares and demand
elasticities. We think of this specification as capturing in a parsimonious way the widely held
view that firms that monopolize charge higher markups, but note that by setting  = 0 the
model nests the more conventional CES specification with constant markups.


Entrepreneur's Optimal Quantity Choice. Substituting the demand function (4) into
the profit function gives an individual entrepreneur's profit maximization problem
                                                                         1
                                                   y                 y   
                                     max D                 -W                .                  (5)
                                           y       Y                 z
The optimal output choice y (z ) is then implicitly given by
                                                                                 1
                                       y                          1   y              1
                             D                 =                    W                  ,        (6)
                                       Y           -       y          z              y
                                                           Y

where the left-hand side is equal to the firm's price and the right-hand side is the product of
the markup
                                                            
                                               m(q ) =         
                                                            - q
                                 1
                      1      y       1
and the marginal cost   W    z
                                 
                                     y
                                       .   If  > 0, the entrepreneur's optimal markup increases in
the relative output q = y/Y . For future reference, we let m(z ) = m(q (z )) denote the optimal
markup charged by an entrepreneur with ability z .

2.3    Equilibrium
Letting H (e) denote the distribution of workers' labor market efficiency and aggregating their
optimal choices in (1) gives the aggregate labor supply
                                                                1+                         1-
                        Lw (W ) = (1 -  )                      e  + dH (e) W  +
                                                       0

and total consumption of workers
                                                                1+                         1+
                        C w (W ) = (1 -  )                     e  + dH (e) W  + .
                                                       0


                                                       8
       Let F (z ) denote the distribution of entrepreneurial ability and f (z ) the corresponding
density. Integrating the production function (2) across entrepreneurs gives the aggregate
production function
                                                   Y = ZL .

Here                                                                             -
                                                                   1
                                                  
                                                      q (z )       
                                 Z=                                    dF (z )                       (7)
                                              0         z
denotes aggregate productivity, a harmonic average of individual productivities weighted by
                                    
relative quantities, and L =       0
                                       l(z ) dF (z ) is the aggregate demand for labor.
       Integrating (6) across producers gives the following relationship between the equilibrium
wage and the marginal product of labor in the aggregate
                                                        1 Y
                                                 W =      ,                                          (8)
                                                        M L
where Y /L is the aggregate marginal product of labor and M is the aggregate markup, a
harmonic average of individual markups weighted by the sales share6
                                                                                    -1
                                                   1
                             M=                          p(z )q (z ) dF (z )             .           (9)
                                          0       m (z )
       The equilibrium wage W equates the labor supply of workers to the labor demand by
entrepreneurs. By Walras' law, labor market clearing also implies goods market clearing
                                                                
                                 Y = C w (W ) +                     (z ) dF (z ).
                                                            0


2.4       Markup Distortions and Implications for Inequality
We next discuss the sources of inefficiency introduced by markups. In this economy markups
generate two production distortions. First, as equation (8) shows, the level of the aggregate
markup M acts as a uniform tax on overall employment and depresses the equilibrium wage
W relative to the marginal product of labor Y /L.7 Second, dispersion in markups generates
dispersion in the marginal product of labor across entrepreneurs and reduces the amount of
output that can be produced with a given amount of labor.
       To see this second effect, consider the problem of allocating a given amount of labor L
across entrepreneurs in order to maximize aggregate output Y subject to the the production
   6
    See, for example, Edmond et al. (2018).
   7
    Here we normalize the price of goods to unity, so markups depress the equilibrium wage. Equivalently,
we could normalize the wage to unity, in which case higher markups increase the price of the final good.

                                                        9
            Figure 1: Comparison of Decentralized and Efficient Quantity Choices




function implicitly defined by the Kimball aggregator and the labor resource constraint.
Formally,
                                                        max Y                                                                (10)
                                                        y (z ), Y
                                                        
                                                                        y (z )
                            subject to                                                   dF (z ) = 1,                        (11)
                                                    0                    Y
                                                                    1
                                             
                                                   y (z )           
                                                                        dF (z ) = L                                          (12)
                                         0           z
   The first-order conditions of this problem imply that the efficient relative output alloca-
tions satisfy
                                                                                 1
                                                        q                        
                                              (q ) q =                               ,                                       (13)
                                                        z
                1 -1
            1 Y 
where  =       D
                       depends on output, the demand index and the multiplier  on the labor
resource constraint. At the optimum, the marginal valuation of an additional unit of a
variety is equal to the marginal cost of producing it. In contrast, the quantity chosen by the
entrepreneur equates the marginal valuation of the variety (its price) to a markup over the
marginal cost
                                                                                         1
                                                                             q           
                                      (q ) q = m(q )                                         ,
                                                                             z
                                                                                     1 -1
                                                                         1 WY 
and is therefore distorted by markups. Here  =                               D
                                                                                                 depends on the equilibrium wage,
output and the demand index. If markups vary across firm, aggregate productivity falls.
   Figure 1 illustrates the impact markups have on the relative quantity choices of individual
entrepreneurs. The left panel of the figure shows that markups increase with entrepreneurial


                                                            10
ability z because more productive entrepreneurs produce more and have a larger market
share. The right panel of the figure contrasts the entrepreneurs' relative output choices
under the status quo to the efficient ones that maximize aggregate productivity. More pro-
ductive entrepreneurs sell too little compared to the efficient allocations, while unproductive
entrepreneurs sell too much.
      In the absence of distributional concerns, the two markup distortions would depress house-
hold welfare by implicitly taxing labor supply and by reducing aggregate productivity. See
Edmond et al. (2018) for a quantitative investigation of the magnitude of these distortions
in a representative agent setting. In our economy in which households are heterogeneous,
markups have an additional effect because they redistribute income from workers to firm
owners. To see this, notice that the consumption of workers is equal to
                                                       
                                          Cw = W L =     Y,
                                                       M
and decreases in the aggregate markup, while the consumption of entrepreneurs is equal to
                                                           
                                      Ce = Y - W L = 1 -     Y
                                                           M
and increases in the aggregate markup. In addition, since higher ability entrepreneurs earn
higher markups and profits, dispersion in markups increases inequality among entrepreneurs.

2.5       Parameterization
Since the solution to this model is not attainable in closed form, we use numerical methods to
characterize the equilibrium and solve for the optimal degree of product market intervention.
Though our main results are not driven by specific parameter choices, we find it useful to
center our discussion around some empirically plausible parameter values. We then conduct
a battery of robustness checks to demonstrate the generality of our results.
      As Table 1 shows, we assume that preferences are logarithmic in consumption, a Frisch
elasticity of labor supply of 0.5, and a span-of-control parameter  of 0.85. We set / equal
to 0.15 following Edmond et al. (2018) who use several data sources and obtain estimates
of the super-elasticity of demand in the neighborhood of this value. This number is also
consistent with the estimates surveyed by Klenow and Willis (2016). Finally, we set the
share of entrepreneurs to  = 0.117, the fraction of respondents in the 2013 SCF who own a
private pass-through business.8 Though this number is lower than the fraction of tax returns
  8
      See the Appendix for details.


                                                 11
                                        Table 1: Parameter Values

                            Assigned                                         Calibrated
                                                           2
                1      CRRA coefficient                   e    1.01   std. dev. Gaussian term, workers
                2      inverse Frisch elasticity          e    2.34   rate exponential term, workers
                                                           2
                0.85   span of control                    z    0.23   std. dev. Gaussian term, entrep.
          /     0.15   super-elasticity of demand         z    3.13   rate exponential term, entrep.
                0.12   fraction entrepreneurs                  8.81   demand elasticity at q = 1



                                 Table 2: Moments Used in Calibration

                                                                      Data    Model

                             Income share of entrepreneurs            0.31     0.32

                             Gini income, all households              0.64     0.64
                             Gini income, workers                     0.58     0.58
                             Gini income, entrepreneurs               0.68     0.68

                             Income share top 1%, all households      0.22     0.21
                             Income share top 1%, workers             0.13     0.14
                             Income share top 1%, entrepreneurs       0.24     0.23




that claim business income, we follow Cagetti and De Nardi (2006) and the large ensuing
literature on entrepreneurship which targets this narrower measure.
      We calibrate the remaining parameters to match salient features of income inequality in
the 2013 SCF data, reported in Table 2. These parameters characterize the distribution of
labor market efficiency and entrepreneurial ability, as well as the demand elasticity  of a
firm with relative size q = 1.9 We follow Heathcote and Tsujiyama (2019) in assuming that
the logarithm of idiosyncratic efficiency is drawn from an exponentially modified Gaussian
distribution with parameters i and i for both workers (i = e) and entrepreneurs (i =
z ). Here i represents the standard deviation of the Gaussian component and i the rate
coefficient of the exponential component. We choose these parameters to match the income
share of entrepreneurs, the income Gini coefficients for all households, as well as for workers
and entrepreneurs in isolation, and the income shares of the richest 1% of households in all
sub-groups. As Table 2 shows, the model matches the targeted moments well.
      Our choice of parameters implies that the aggregate markup is equal to 25%, a number
similar to the cost-weighted average reported by Edmond et al. (2018) and to the estimate
                                                    
  9
      Recall that a firm's demand elasticity is q -  .


                                                         12
of Hall (2018b) for 2013. Thus, markups in our baseline parameterization act like a 25%
tax on labor, reducing the share of payments to labor by 25%. In addition, markups reduce
aggregate productivity: reallocating labor across producers to ensure that (13) holds would
increase aggregate productivity by 0.73%.


3     Regulator's Problem
We consider the problem of a regulator who designs optimal product market interventions.
Following the Mirrleesian approach to optimal taxation, we assume that the regulator does
not observe the ability of individual entrepreneurs and thus faces incentive compatibility
constraints. We derive the optimal allocations chosen by the regulator under the assumption
that the interventions are revenue-neutral so that the net amount of transfers to entrepreneurs
is equal to zero. Though we mostly focus on the incomplete-information benchmark, we
briefly describe the allocations the regulator would choose in the absence of informational
frictions. Our approach builds on Baron and Myerson (1982) who study the problem of
regulating a single monopolist. We extend their analysis to a general equilibrium setting
and study the problem of a utilitarian regulator who regulates all producers and is implicitly
guided by equity, in addition to efficiency considerations.

3.1    Complete Information
We find it instructive to first analyze the problem of a regulator that has complete information
about each entrepreneur's ability. The regulator chooses how to allocate production y (z ) and
consumption c(z ) across entrepreneurs, recognizing that its prescription for how much it
requires entrepreneurs to produce determines aggregate output Y and the equilibrium wage
W . The regulator can only intervene in the product market, so it can only affect the welfare
of workers by changing the equilibrium wage. Assuming a utilitarian objective and letting
                                                                  
                              V w (W ) = (1 -  )                     v (e, W ) dH (e)         (14)
                                                              0

denote the overall welfare of workers and  the relative weight the regulator places on the
utility of entrepreneurs, the problem of the regulator is
                                                                         
                                                                            c(z )1-
                              max              V w (W ) +                           dF (z )   (15)
                         y (z ), c(z ), Y, W                         0       1-
                                                        
                                                                  y (z )
                          subject to                                         dF (z ) = 1,     (16)
                                                    0              Y

                                                           13
                                                              1
                                              
                                                     y (z )   
                                                                   dF (z ) = Lw (W ),       (17)
                                          0            z
                                                                  
                                      w
                                    C (W ) +                         c(z ) dF (z ) = Y.     (18)
                                                              0
The first two constraints are the aggregate production function and the labor resource con-
straint. The last constraint is the aggregate resource constraint which is implied by the
requirement that interventions are revenue-neutral.
      The solution to this problem implies that the regulator equates consumption across all
entrepreneurs, so that c(z ) = ce , and chooses production to equate the marginal benefit from
each variety to the marginal cost of producing it
                                                                                    1
                                                                           q (z )   
                                       (q (z )) q (z ) =                                ,   (19)
                                                                             z
                    1 -1
                1 Y 
where  =           D
                           depends on output, the demand index, as well as the marginal rate of
substitution between labor and consumption  , or equivalently, the ratio of the multipliers on
the labor and goods resource constraints.10 Equation (19) gives the relative output choices
q (z, ) as a function of the entrepreneur's productivity and . The latter is the unique
solution to the restriction implied by the Kimball aggregator
                                                  
                                                      (q (z, )) dF (z ) = 1.                (20)
                                              0
Note that equations (19) and (20) are identical to (13) and (11), which implies that the
regulator chooses the relative quantities that maximize allocative efficiency, that is, aggregate
productivity.
      Consider next how the regulator chooses the total amount of output that it requires
entrepreneurs to produce. The regulator recognizes that its choice of Y determines aggregate
labor demand and the equilibrium wage W . The optimality condition that determines W is
                     V w (W )             C w (W )     Y Lw (W )
                              =  (ce )-             -              .                (21)
                        W                    W         L W
The left-hand side is the marginal benefit of a higher wage given by the increase in the
overall welfare of workers V w . The right-hand side is the marginal cost due to a decline in
the resources available for entrepreneurial consumption, evaluated at their marginal utility
 (ce )- . All else equal, higher wages raise the consumption of workers and translate into a
one-for-one decline in the consumption of entrepreneurs, an effect captured by the first term
on the right-hand side. Higher wages also increase labor supply and therefore output, an
effect captured by the second term.
 10
      See the Appendix for derivations.

                                                                  14
                Figure 2: Optimal Outcomes Under Complete Information




   Figure 2 shows the solution to the regulator's problem for various values of . The higher
the weight on entrepreneurs, the lower is the equilibrium wage. Since we assume logarithmic
preferences, labor supply, output and the marginal product of labor are policy invariant. In
general, the wage is not equal to the marginal product of labor. To see why this is the case,
we note that when  = 1 equation (21) implies that
                                        Cw      ce
                                              = ,                                   (22)
                                       1-       
so the per-capita consumption of workers is equal to 1/ times the per-capita consumption
of entrepreneurs. The workers' consumption share, or equivalently the labor share, shown in
the right panel of the figure, is therefore equal to
                                       WL         1-
                                            =         .
                                        Y     1 -  + 
The regulator can only implement this desired labor share by influencing the aggregate de-
mand for labor and implicitly the equilibrium wage. If the regulator places a high weight on
workers, optimal regulation implies a greater demand for labor, which raises the equilibrium
wage above the marginal product. If instead the regulator values entrepreneurs more, optimal
regulation implies a lower demand for labor, which can reduce the equilibrium wage below
the marginal product. Thus, in contrast to the representative agent framework of Edmond
et al. (2018), in an economy with inequality a regulator would choose to introduce a wedge
between the wage and the marginal product of labor even in the absence of information
frictions.
   Nevertheless, the regulator implements the efficient relative quantity allocation q (z ). This
leads to greater product market concentration than under the status quo. However, since the

                                              15
                     Table 3: Product Market Concentration and Inequality

                                                Baseline        Complete        Incomplete information
                                                               information         = 0.1       =1

       Labor share                                0.68            0.88              0.71       0.66

       Sales share top 1% entrepreneurs           0.19            0.23              0.24       0.22
       Sales share top 5% entrepreneurs           0.40            0.45              0.47       0.43
       Sales share top 10% entrepreneurs          0.52            0.58              0.60       0.55

       Income share top 1% entrepreneurs          0.24            0.01              0.36       0.26
       Income share top 5% entrepreneurs          0.46            0.05              0.62       0.46
       Income share top 10% entrepreneurs         0.58            0.10              0.74       0.57

       Losses from misallocation, %               0.73              0               0.11       0.30




regulator can impose type-specific transfers, more product market concentration does not
translate into more income inequality between entrepreneurs.
   We illustrate these results in the first two columns of Table 3 which contrast the degree of
product market concentration and income inequality in the baseline economy and under the
complete information allocations. For this example we set  = 1, so the labor share is equal
to the population share of workers, namely 0.88. The remaining statistics in the table do
not depend on the assumed value of . Implementing the efficient allocations increases the
sales share of the largest firms. For example, the sales share of the largest 5% of producers
increases from 0.40 to 0.45. More product market concentration does not, however, translate
into more income inequality among entrepreneurs, which with complete information can be
perfectly eliminated.

3.2    Incomplete Information
We next assume that the regulator does not know an individual entrepreneur's ability. Its
choice of consumption c(z ) and output y (z ) must therefore satisfy incentive compatibility
constraints that ensure that an entrepreneur with ability z indeed chooses to produce the
quantity y (z ) and receive the consumption c(z ) prescribed by the regulator.
   Let  (z ) be a transfer received by an entrepreneur who claims to have ability z . The
entrepreneur's consumption when it truthfully reveals its type is
                                                                          1
                                       y (z )                    y (z )   
                        c (z ) = D                y (z ) - W                  +  (z ) ,                  (23)
                                        Y                          z

                                                     16
where the first two terms are the revenue net of the labor costs. If this entrepreneur instead
reports ability z
                ^, it receives transfers  (^
                                           z ) and consumption
                                                                                   1
                                         y (^
                                            z)                             y (^
                                                                              z)   
                        c (^
                           z , z ) = D               z) - W
                                                  y (^                                 +  (^
                                                                                           z) .               (24)
                                          Y                                  z
Without loss of generality we invoke the revelation principle and focus on a truth-telling
mechanism. The regulator's problem is to maximize the objective in (15), subject to the
production function (16), the labor resource constraint (17), the aggregate resource constraint
(18), as well as the incentive compatibility constraints

                                    c(z, z )  c(^
                                                z , z ) for all z, z
                                                                   ^.                                         (25)

As earlier, the aggregate resource constraint follows from our requirement that the regulator's
                                                   
interventions are revenue-neutral, so that        0
                                                        (z ) dF (z ) = 0.11
       We pursue a first-order approach and replace the global constraints in (25) with the local
constraints
                                           c (^
                                              z, z)
                                                                 = 0.                                         (26)
                                             z^
                                                         z
                                                         ^=z
We then verify numerically that the solution to this relaxed problem indeed satisfies the global
constraints. The local incentive constraints imply that the entrepreneur's consumption varies
with productivity according to
                                                                       1
                                              1               y (z )        1
                                      c (z ) = W                              .                               (27)
                                                                z           z
As in the Mirrleesian optimal taxation literature, more productive entrepreneurs earn in-
formation rents and enjoy more consumption. These rents increase with the equilibrium
wage W , and the amount of labor the regulator prescribes that the entrepreneur hires,
                   1
l(z ) = (y (z )/z )  , a point we return to below.
       We show in the Appendix, using optimal control techniques, that the solution to the regu-
lator's problem is characterized by the following condition that determines relative quantities
across producers
                                                                            
                                                 1W                     1                             1
                                                      (1 - F (z ))        -1
                                                                    1 Y                      q (z )   
                                   
                                                  z
                 (q (z )) q (z ) = 1 + µ (z )                                                             .   (28)
                                   
                                                       f (z )       D                          z
                                                                   
                                   
                                                       (z )

  11
    Note that the individual rationality constraints do not bind here because entrepreneurs have no other
source of income and have preferences that satisfy the Inada conditions.

                                                      17
The optimal relative quantity choice is distorted relative to the efficient one in equation
(13) by a wedge  (z ) that balances the regulator's tradeoff between equity and efficiency.
The expression for the wedge shares many similarities to that in the Mirrleesian taxation
literature.12 The term
                                                                        
                                          1    1
                             µ (z ) = 1 -                                  c (x)- f (x) dx
                                           1 - F (z )               z

depends on the ratio of the average marginal utility of consumption of entrepreneurs with abil-
                                      
ity above z , namely       1
                         1-F (z )    z
                                         c (x)- f (x) dx, to the regulator's valuation of an additional
unit of consumption, , and therefore captures the desire to redistribute from producers with
                                                                                                       1W
ability greater than z to less productive entrepreneurs and workers. The term                           z
                                                                                                            (1 - F (z ))
represents the amount of consumption that the regulator can collect from all entrepreneurs
with ability greater than z by distorting the production of entrepreneurs with ability equal
to z . To understand why this is the case, note that the incentive compatibility constraint can
                             1W
be rewritten as c (z ) =      z
                                l(z )    so by marginally reducing employment for entrepreneurs with
productivity z , the regulator is able to reduce the consumption of all entrepreneurs with pro-
                          1W
ductivity above z by       z
                                 times the mass of such entrepreneurs, 1 - F (z ). The redistributive
gains from distortions must be balanced against the output losses from reducing employment.
Since the mass of producers with productivity z is equal to f (z ), these losses, evaluated at
the marginal rate of substitution between employment and consumption,  , amount to f (z ).
      The marginal rate of substitution between employment and consumption (the ratio of the
multipliers on the labor and output resource constraints) is equal to
                                         Y  1
                                 =         -              c (z ) µ (z ) (1 - F (z )) dz.
                                         L L
The first term is equal to the marginal product of labor in the aggregate. The second term
recognizes that increasing overall employment requires more unequal consumption allocations
and subtracts the ensuing cost of inequality.
      Finally, assuming  = 1, we can write the per-capita consumption of workers as13
                                                           -1
             Cw   1                      -1                          
                =                   c (z )    f (z ) dz         -               µ (z ) c (z ) (1 - F (z )) dz.     (29)
            1-               0                                      1-

The first term on the right-hand side is the harmonic average of entrepreneurs' consumption,
adjusted by the relative weight . The second term represents the distributional costs of
 12
      See Diamond (1998), Saez (2001), Golosov et al. (2016), Heathcote and Tsujiyama (2019), among others.
 13
      See the Appendix for a more general characterization with  = 1.


                                                             18
increasing the consumption of workers. The regulator can only do so indirectly by increasing
the equilibrium wage which, recall, tightens the incentive compatibility constraint. Infor-
mational frictions therefore generate an additional tradeoff relative to that in the complete
information case in equation (22). On one hand, increasing the consumption of workers re-
quires higher equilibrium wages and therefore prescribes that entrepreneurs hire more labor.
On the other hand, an increase in employment raises the informational rents received by
productive entrepreneurs.
    We next illustrate the allocations chosen by the regulator and contrast them with those
under the status quo.14 We first assume a preference weight  = 1 on the welfare of en-
trepreneurs. The left panel of Figure 3 shows that the optimal wedge  (z ) is upward sloping,
reflecting that equity considerations dominate efficiency concerns in our environment with
a fat-tailed distribution of ability. Importantly, the wedge is less steep than the markup
wedge is under the status quo. Since allocative efficiency requires that the wedge is constant
across firms, the regulator's allocations feature less misallocation and therefore a higher level
of aggregate productivity. This result is reflected in the quantity choices of the regulator,
shown in the middle panel of the figure, which closely mimic the efficient allocations. Finally,
notice in the right panel of the figure that the regulator increases the consumption of both
the low- and high-ability entrepreneurs relative to the status quo. The former experience an
increase in consumption that reflects the regulator's equity concerns. The latter extract the
informational rents needed to implement a more efficient output allocation.
    Figure 4 illustrates the optimal allocations when the weight on the welfare of entrepreneurs
 is equal to 0.1. The optimal wedge schedule is now downward sloping in the high-density
region of the ability space, reflecting the regulator's stronger desire to redistribute from
entrepreneurs to workers by increasing the equilibrium wage. The regulator achieves redistri-
bution by raising the distortion on all entrepreneurs. Efficiency requires, however, that the
increase in distortions is relatively smaller at the top, resulting in a downward sloping wedge
schedule. Despite differences in the shape of the wedge schedules for different values of , the
middle panel of the figure shows that the regulator's quantity allocations mimic the efficient
allocations closely, especially for high productivity entrepreneurs who account for the bulk
of output in the economy. The right panel of the figure shows that low- and high-ability
  14
     As pointed out by Heathcote and Tsujiyama (2019), the solution to Mirrleesian optimal tax problems
can be highly sensitive to the number of nodes used in discretization. We therefore solve the system of
differential equations that characterize the optimal allocations using 25,000 Gauss-Legendre nodes and weights
to discretize the distribution of ability. Increasing the number of nodes to 100,000 makes no meaningful
difference to the results.


                                                     19
              Figure 3: Optimal Allocations Under Incomplete Information,  = 1




Notes: For visual clarity, we truncate the range of ability z . The wedge starts at zero at the low end of the
distribution and eventually declines to zero, reflecting the well-known result of no distortions at the top. We
report the sales-weighted density of z , f (z ) (q (z ))q (z ) in the left panel of the figure.


entrepreneurs once again benefit from the optimal intervention, with those in the middle of
the ability distribution experiencing a decline in consumption relative to the status quo.
    Table 3 summarizes the implications of optimal regulation for income inequality and
product market concentration. Optimal regulation implies a higher degree of product market
concentration, as measured by the sales share of the largest producers. This concentration
is comparable to that implied by the efficient allocations under complete information and
much greater than under the status quo. Informational frictions prevent the regulator from
increasing the labor share and require an increase in income inequality across entrepreneurs.
Perhaps counter-intuitively, both product market concentration and income inequality are
higher when the regulator places a higher weight on the welfare of workers. As explained
above, that income inequality is higher is a consequence of the greater informational rents
extracted by productive entrepreneurs in an environment with higher wages. Lastly, note
that the losses from misallocation, though positive, are much smaller under the optimal
allocations compared to the baseline.

3.3     Robustness
We next argue that our result that optimal regulation features more product market concen-
tration than under the status quo is robust to perturbations of the parameters governing the
distribution of markups and idiosyncratic labor and entrepreneurial ability.
    Figure 5 shows how product market concentration, measured by the sales share of the

                                                      20
              Figure 4: Optimal Allocations Under Incomplete Information,  = 0.1




Notes: For visual clarity, we truncate the range of ability z . The wedge starts at zero at the low end of the
discretized distribution and eventually declines to zero, reflecting the well-known result of no distortions at
the top. We report the sales-weighted density of z , f (z ) (q (z ))q (z ) in the left panel of the figure.


largest 5% of producers, changes as we vary the super-elasticity parameter / (left panel)
and the parameter  governing the elasticity of demand (right panel). These two parameters
determine the extent to which markups increase with market shares and the average level
of markups, respectively. As the left panel shows, a higher super-elasticity reduces prod-
uct market concentration because larger firms now charge larger markups.15 As the right
panel shows, product market concentration increases in  , because varieties become more
substitutable.
       We make two observations. First, the optimal degree of product market concentration
is greater than under the status quo throughout the parameter space. Second, optimal
product market concentration is higher, the higher is the weight on the welfare of workers. A
regulator with  = 0.1 increases product market concentration above the level that maximizes
allocative efficiency, while the opposite is true when  = 1.
       Figure 6 repeats this exercise by varying the fraction of entrepreneurs (left panel), by
scaling the variance of ability of both entrepreneurs and workers (middle panel), and by
changing the relative importance of the Gaussian, as opposed to exponential component of
the ability distribution (right panel). As earlier, optimal regulation implies more product
market concentration, more so the higher the welfare weight on workers.
  15
   We kept the level of the aggregate markup unchanged in this experiment, by adjusting the value of 
when perturbing /.




                                                      21
Figure 5: Top 5% Sales Share: Demand Elasticity




Figure 6: Top 5% Sales Share: Ability Distribution




                       22
                         Figure 7: Wedges in Economy Without Markups




Economy Without Markups. The Kimball aggregator is quite flexible and nests the
                                                           1
more popular CES specification with (q ) = q 1-  , as well as an economy with homogeneous
goods without markups with (q ) = q . The expression (28) that characterizes optimal
interventions in the product market thus applies to these settings as well. For completeness,
we briefly illustrate the shape of the optimal interventions in an economy without markups.
       In the absence of markups the status quo allocations satisfy allocative efficiency. Never-
theless, a utilitarian regulator may distort allocations to achieve redistribution, setting
                                                                    
                                               1W                            
                                                z
                                                    (1 - F (z ))    -1
                                                                             -1     1
                       y (z ) =   1 + µ (z )                                      z 1- .
                                                    f (z )               

       Figure 7 shows the optimal wedges introduced by the regulator.16 As in the economy
with markups, wedges are downward-sloping when  = 0.1. In contrast, they are nearly flat
when  = 1. Table 4 shows that when  = 0.1 optimal regulation increases product market
concentration relative to the status quo, thus generating misallocation. In contrast, when
 = 1 the degree of product market concentration is very close to that under the status quo.

3.4       Implementation and Intuition
We next show how the optimal product market interventions derived above can be decentral-
ized using an output subsidy schedule. We then show that this schedule is well-approximated
by a simple function characterized by three parameters that can be intuitively interpreted.
  16
    We re-calibrated the parameters of the ability distribution to reproduce the same moments as in the
economy with markups.


                                                      23
         Table 4: Optimal Product Market Interventions in Economy Without Markups

                                                             Baseline           Incomplete information
                                                                                   = 0.1       =1

                  Sales share top 1% entrepreneurs               0.23              0.28        0.24
                  Sales share top 5% entrepreneurs               0.44              0.52        0.45
                  Sales share top 10% entrepreneurs              0.57              0.66        0.58

                  Losses from misallocation, %                      0              0.50        0.01




Unrestricted Subsidy. Instead of the regulator choosing a menu of consumption and
output allocations that satisfy the incentive constraints, we can equivalently recast the regu-
lator's problem as choosing a function that specifies the after-subsidy revenue S (y ) of an en-
trepreneur who produces y units of output. We note that the assumption that entrepreneurial
ability z is private information precludes the regulator from conditioning S (·) on profits.17
       The entrepreneur maximizes profits
                                                                        1
                                                           y            
                                                S (y ) - W                  .
                                                           z
Solving the entrepreneur's optimal output choice and comparing the resulting first-order
condition with equation (28) reveals that the optimal subsidy function satisfies

                                                         p (y )    W
                                           S (y ) =                  ,
                                                      1 +  (z (y )) 

where p(y ) is the inverse demand function in (4) and z (y ) is the ability of an entrepreneur
who at the optimal allocation produces y units of output. This differential equation, together
with the constraint that S (y ) is revenue-neutral, so that
                                                                 
                                     S (y (z )) dF (z ) =           p(y (z ))y (z ) dF (z ),
                              0                              0

pins down the optimal subsidy function that decentralizes the regulator's allocations.18
  17
     In the absence of informational frictions, the regulator can implement the efficient allocations in Section
3.1 by imposing a 100% profit tax which would finance the output subsidies needed to restore efficiency.
  18
     As an additional check on the accuracy of our numerical solution, we have also parameterized S (y )
using neural networks and directly maximized the objective of the regulator by choosing the coefficients
characterizing the network. This reinforcement-learning approach produced very similar results to those
reported above.




                                                            24
                     Figure 8: Wedge Between Price and Marginal Cost




Restricted Subsidy. We next show that a much simpler parametric subsidy function can
achieve most of the welfare gains attainable using the unrestricted one. Specifically, let
                                 ^(y ) = 0 +          1    y      1+2
                                 S                        
                                                    1 + 2  Y
be the after-subsidy revenue received by an entrepreneur who produces y units of output.
Here 0 determines the lump-sum transfer, 1 determines the average level of marginal sub-
sidies and 2 determines the slope of the marginal subsidy schedule.
   The optimal quantity of a producer who faces this subsidy schedule satisfies
                                                        1       1
                              p (y (z )) y (z ) =              2 W l (z ),
                                                    1  (q (z )) 
                                                                                 1
so the wedge between the firm's price and its marginal cost is equal to      1 (q (z ))2
                                                                                           and decreases
with 1 . Moreover, since (·) is an increasing function, the wedge declines (increases) with
a producer's relative output whenever 2 > 0 (< 0). We find this formulation intuitively
appealing because by setting 2 = 0 the regulator can recover the efficient allocations that
entail no product market misallocation. More generally, 2 determines how a given amount
of labor is allocated across producers and thus the overall degree of product market concen-
tration. Indeed, it is straightforward to verify that for a given value of 2 , the value of 1 does
not change the relative quantity choices q (z ). In turn, 1 determines the aggregate wedge
between the wage and the marginal product of labor, and therefore the overall demand for
labor. Finally, for any given choice of 1 and 2 , 0 adjusts to ensure revenue neutrality.
   Figure 8 contrasts the wedge between the producer's price and marginal cost implied by
the unrestricted optimal policy chosen by the regulator and that implied by the optimally

                                                     25
              Table 5: Comparison of Unrestricted and Restricted Optimal Subsidy
                                                = 0.1                             =1
                                   unrestricted         restricted    unrestricted       restricted

           Sales share top 1%           0.24               0.26            0.22             0.21
           Sales share top 5%           0.47               0.50            0.43             0.43
           Sales share top 10%          0.60               0.63            0.55             0.56

           Labor share                  0.71               0.71           0.66             0.66
           Change in wage, %            5.16               4.24          -1.68            -1.65
           Welfare gains, cev, %        3.32               2.88           0.96             0.96




chosen restricted subsidy. As the right panel shows, when  = 1 the wedge implied by
the restricted subsidy closely aligns with that under the optimal policy in the high-density
region of the ability distribution. In this case 2 = -0.018, so the wedge increases with
firm size, implying a lower degree of product market concentration compared to the efficient
allocations.
       Although the restricted schedule does not reproduce the non-linear shape of the optimal
policy when  = 0.1, it shares the feature of the optimal policy that the wedge declines
with ability in the high-density region of the distribution. In this case 2 = 0.033, so the
wedge decreases with firm size, implying a greater degree of product market concentration
compared to the efficient allocations.
       Table 5 compares the allocations under the restricted and unrestricted optimal policies.
Notice that irrespective of the value of , the restricted schedule generates similar levels
of product market concentration as the unrestricted one. In addition, the labor share and
the equilibrium wage change by similar amounts relative to the status quo. Most impor-
tantly, the restricted schedule achieves nearly the same welfare gains as the unrestricted one.
For example, when  = 0.1, the restricted schedule increases utilitarian welfare by 2.9%
consumption-equivalent units, only slightly less than the 3.3% achieved by the unrestricted
optimal policy.19 When  = 1 the restricted policy generates the same welfare gains as the
unrestricted one, approximately 1%.
  19
     We calculate the consumption-equivalent welfare gains using the approach of Benabou (2002). Specifi-
cally, we first calculate the constant amount of consumption c ¯ every household would have to receive so that
society achieves the same level of utilitarian welfare as under the equilibrium allocations. We then define the
welfare gains as the percent change in c ¯. See Boar and Midrigan (2020) for details.




                                                      26
                              Figure 9: Comparative Statics, 2




Intuition. We find this simple three-parameter subsidy schedule useful because it allows us
to provide sharper intuition for the tradeoffs the regulator faces in determining the degree of
product market concentration. To build intuition, consider the following comparative statics
experiment in which, for clarity, we fix the lump-sum transfer at zero and trace out the
implications of increasing 2 while reducing 1 to ensure revenue neutrality.
   As the upper-left panel of Figure 9 shows, a higher 2 , which implicitly subsidizes larger
producers at the expense of smaller ones, has a cost: it leads to higher income inequality
among entrepreneurs. In addition, a higher 2 changes aggregate productivity Z , as illustrated
in the upper-right panel of the figure. Since 2 = 0 recovers the efficient allocations, aggregate
productivity is maximized at this point.
   Consider next the relationship between 2 and the labor share, which is proportional to
the employment-weighted average of the producer-level wedges between price and marginal
cost:                                                                     -1
                                          
                         WL                      1        l(z )
                            =                           2       dF (z )        .
                         Y            0      1  (q (z )) L
                                                       

As the lower-left panel of Figure 9 shows, a higher 2 leads to a higher labor share, even
though 1 falls in response to ensure revenue-neutrality. Intuitively, a higher 2 rewards




                                                  27
entrepreneurs who produce more, thus bidding up the demand for labor.20
    We finally discuss the consequences of a higher 2 for the equilibrium wage. The expression
for the labor share implies that
                                                  Y
                                          W =        = Z L-1 .
                                                  L
Since we assume logarithmic preferences, labor supply is policy invariant, so the wage is
proportional to Z . As the lower-right panel of Figure 9 indicates, the wage is hump-shaped
in 2 . When 2 is low, the wage increases with 2 , owing to the increase in both productivity
and the demand for labor. However, if 2 is sufficiently high, the wage declines with 2 due
to the decline in productivity.
    To summarize, if product market concentration is too low relative to the efficient alloca-
tions, revenue-neutral interventions that encourage producers to expand have a cost ­ higher
inequality among entrepreneurs, as well as a benefit ­ higher equilibrium wage. The larger
the regulator's weight on the welfare of workers, the more the benefits outweigh the costs,
and therefore the larger the degree of product market concentration chosen by the regulator.


Policies that Reduce Product Market Concentration. We have shown above that
optimal product market interventions in an environment in which markups increase with
market shares lead to greater product market concentration than under the status quo, even
at the cost of higher inequality. This result should not be interpreted as a call for subsidizing
large firms. Such interventions must be done at the level of an individual market or industry,
and there is considerable uncertainty about elasticity parameters and markups in narrowly
disaggregated industries, as well as in determining what constitutes the relevant market for
a given firm.
    Rather, our results caution against the widely-held view that policies that reduce con-
centration and the market power of large firms necessarily improve the welfare of workers.
Though less concentration indeed reduces firm market power in our model, the size-dependent
interventions required to reduce the market share of large firms have the unintended conse-
quence of reducing the labor share, productivity and the equilibrium wage.
  20
     The result that subsidies that encourage producers to expand lead to an increase in the labor share is not
driven by our assumption of monopolistic competition, Kimball demand, or heterogeneity in productivity.
To see this, consider an economy with identical firms with technology y = l . Consider an intervention that
                                                  1    1+2
changes the producer's after-subsidy revenue to 1+ 2 y     . It is straightforward to see that if for a given 2 we
                                                1    1+2
choose 1 to ensure revenue neutrality, so that 1+2 Y       = Y , the labor share is equal to W L/Y =  (1+ 2 ).
This size-dependent subsidy effectively increases the span-of-control to  (1 + 2 ), reducing the income share
of producers.

                                                       28
                 Table 6: Effect of Reducing Product Market Concentration

                                                         Baseline   2 = -0.15

                    Sales share top 1% entrepreneurs       0.19       0.14
                    Sales share top 5% entrepreneurs       0.40       0.31
                    Sales share top 10% entrepreneurs      0.52       0.42

                    Income share top 1% entrepreneurs      0.24       0.12
                    Income share top 5% entrepreneurs      0.46       0.28
                    Income share top 10% entrepreneurs     0.58       0.39

                    Labor share                            0.68       0.61
                    Losses from misallocation, %           0.73       4.41

                    Change in wage, %                                 -13.1
                    Welfare change, cev, %                            -4.61




    To illustrate this point, we consider a regulator that sets 2 = -0.15, a value that reduces
the market share of the largest firms relative to the baseline allocations. We then let the
regulator choose 1 optimally, adjusting the lump-sum transfer to ensure revenue-neutrality.
For concreteness, we set  = 1. Table 6 shows the consequences of reducing product market
concentration. On the benefit side, income inequality among entrepreneurs falls considerably.
On the cost side, so does the labor share and overall productivity. Overall, the equilibrium
wage falls by 13%, and welfare falls by approximately 4.6% relative to the status quo.


4     Dynamic Model
We have purposely abstracted above from a number of features in order to highlight the key
tradeoffs between equity and efficiency entailed by product market interventions. We next
enrich the model by introducing three additional ingredients. First, we allow for capital and
wealth accumulation to study the implications of product market interventions for wealth
inequality. Second, we assume that entrepreneurs co-exist with corporate firms, so that the
ownership of firms is more diversified compared to our static model. Third, we assume a
government that provides some redistribution via taxes and transfers. We use this setting to
study the optimal degree of product market interventions in the restricted class considered
above and show that our main result that optimal regulation features a greater degree of




                                                   29
product market concentration than under the status quo is robust in this richer setting.21
       As earlier, the economy is inhabited by workers and entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs have
the option to work and earn labor income, in addition to profits from the business. Private
business owners and corporate firms compete among themselves. As earlier, each firm supplies
a differentiated variety of a good and charges a markup that increases with its market share.
We abstract from aggregate uncertainty and study optimal unanticipated policy reforms,
taking into account the transition dynamics between steady states.

4.1       Households
Households seek to maximize their life-time utility given by
                                            
                                                      c1
                                                       t
                                                         -
                                                            h1+
                                       E0         t        - t
                                            t=0
                                                      1- 1+

subject to the budget constraint

                                   (1 + s )ct + at+1 = it - T (it ) + at ,

where at+1 are savings, s is a consumption tax, and

                                      it = rt-1 at + Wt et ht + t (zt ) ,

is pre-tax income, derived from the return on asset holdings, work and profits from the
business for the mass  of entrepreneurs. Households save with perfectly competitive financial
intermediaries at a risk-free rate rt . Financial intermediaries use the resources obtained from
households to purchase capital, shares in corporate firms and a risk-free government bond.
The income tax schedule is
                                                               -
                                                            i1
                                                             t
                                     T (it ) = it - (1 -  )      - t ,                                     (30)
                                                            1-
where  governs the level and  the slope of the marginal tax schedule, while t is a lump-sum
transfer. This specification has been shown to approximate well the U.S. tax and transfer
system (Heathcote et al., 2017 and Boar and Midrigan, 2020). We assume that labor efficiency
and entrepreneurial ability follow independent Markov processes with transition probabilities
H (et+1 |et ) and F (zt+1 |zt ).
  21
     In an earlier version of this paper, Boar and Midrigan (2019), we considered a number of additional ex-
tensions, such as allowing for financial constraints and an incorporation choice by entrepreneurs, oligopolistic
competition, mergers, as well as heterogeneity across firms in idiosyncratic distortions. Since our main
insights are robust to these extensions, we abstract from them here.

                                                      30
4.2       Final Good Firms
The final good Yt is used for consumption, Ct , investment Xt and government spending G,
so the aggregate resource constraint is

                                             Yt = Ct + Xt + G.

As earlier, the final good is assembled using the Kimball (1995) production function
                                                          +Nt
                                           yit                        yit
                                               di +                       di = 1,
                                 0         Yt                         Yt
where the second term adds the varieties produced by the mass Nt of corporate firms. The
optimal input choices of the final good producers give rise to identical demand curves as in
our static model. We implicitly assume that private businesses compete alongside corporate
firms in the product market.22

4.3       Intermediate Goods Producers
Each variety i  [0,  + Nt ] is produced by a single producer, either corporate or privately-
owned. The technology with which a producer with ability zt operates is

                                                       1-          
                                             yt = zt kt lt            .

The firm maximizes profits,
                                        t = pt (yt )yt - Wt lt - Rt kt ,

and chooses a price equal to a markup over its marginal cost. The relative quantity of a
producer satisfies
                                                   Rt       Wt (1-)                        1
                                            1              1-                  
                                                                               1
                                                                                 -1   qt   
                         (qt ) qt = m (qt )                               Yt                   ,
                                                           Dt                         zt

where the marginal cost depends on a geometric weighted average of the rental cost of capital
                                               /
Rt and labor Wt and m(qt ) = /( - qt ) is the markup.
       Corporate and privately-held firms produce with identical technology, so they only differ
in their ownership structure and tax treatment. Unlike private firms, which are pass-through
businesses, corporate firms are subject to a corporate profit tax. For ease of exposition only,
  22
    See Smith et al. (2018), who show that the two types of firms coexists across U.S. industries. An earlier
draft of our paper showed that the impact of product market interventions is similar in economies without
either corporations or entrepreneurs.


                                                      31
we assume that the productivity of corporate firms is constant over time. This assumption
is without loss of generality since the ownerwship of these firms is fully diversified and only
the stationary distribution of their productivity matters for equilibrium outcomes.
   Corporate firms exit with exogenous probability , so their mass evolves according to

                                      Nt+1 = (1 - )(Nt + t ),

where the mass of entrants t is pinned down by a free entry condition as in Hopenhayn
(1992),
                                                  
                                      Kt             Qt (z ) dF c (z ).
                                              0
The right-hand side of this expression is the expected return to creating a new variety, where
                                      1-
                          Qt (z ) =          [Qt+1 (z ) + (1 - c )t+1 (z )]
                                      1 + rt
is the price of a claim to the after-tax profits of a firm with productivity z , and c is the
corporate profit tax rate. Upon entering, a corporate firm draws its productivity from a
                                                                           
distribution F c (z ), so the expected return to entry is equal to        0
                                                                              Qt (z ) dF c (z ). The left-
hand side of the free-entry condition, Kt , is the cost of creating a new variety.
   We follow Gutierrez et al. (2019) in assuming that entry costs increase with the mass of
entrants, so entry responds inelastically to changes in the environment. Specifically,
                                                            1
                                                  ¯ t ,
                                             Kt = K

      ¯ determines the average level of entry costs, and  determines the elasticity of entry
where K
rates to changes in the value of corporate firms. If  is finite, a shock that changes the
profitability of firms leads to an increase in the value of corporate firms and therefore the
wealth of their owners, an effect absent in Hopenhayn (1992).

4.4       Government
The government issues a time-invariant stock of debt B . It finances interest on this debt and
an exogenously given amount of government spending G using personal income, consumption
and corporate profit taxes, so its budget constraint is

                                  rt-1 B + G = Tti + Tts + Ttc .




                                                     32
4.5    Financial Intermediaries
For notational convenience, we assume that households deposit their savings with financial
intermediaries who use these resources to purchase capital, government bonds and shares in
corporate firms. Since this is a closed economy, these must add up to the savings of the
households.
                      
   Letting Qt =      0
                         Qt (z ) dF c (z ) denote the price of a claim to a diversified portfolio of
corporate firms and t = (1 - c ) t (z ) dF c (z ) the dividends on such a claim, the budget
constraint of the financial intermediary is

Kt+1 + Bt+1 - At+1 + Qt St+1 = (Rt + 1 -  ) Kt + (1 + rt-1 ) (Bt - At ) + (Qt + t ) (1 - ) St ,

where St denotes the number of shares held. In equilibrium

                                           St+1 = Nt + t

and
                                          Nt = (1 - ) St .

Here At is the total assets of the households, Kt+1 is the capital stock and Bt+1 is the
government debt purchased by the intermediary in period t. Since financial intermediaries
can choose Kt+1 freely, the return on capital is equal to

                                           Rt+1 = rt + .

4.6    Equilibrium
For notational convenience, we let z = 0 denote the ability of a household that cannot
operate a business, and summarize a household's state with the triplet (a, e, z ) that encodes
its wealth, labor market and entrepreneurial ability.
   An equilibrium consists of: (i) aggregate prices Wt , Rt , rt , Qt , (ii) consumption, saving and
labor supply decisions for households ct (a, e, z ), at+1 (a, e, z ), ht (a, e, z ), (iii) employment,
capital, output and price choices of producers lt (z ), kt (z ), yt (z ), pt (z ), (iv) measures of
households over their idiosyncratic states nt (a, e, z ), and (v) mass of corporate firms Nt and
new entrants t , such that

   1. Given prices, the households' consumption, saving and labor supply decisions maximize
      their life-time utility and the production choices maximize firm profits.

                                                 33
  2. Total output satisfies the Kimball aggregator
                             yt (z )                                      yt (z )
                                           dnt (a, e, z ) + Nt                          dF c (z ) = 1.
                               Yt                                           Yt

  3. Markets clear period by period. The labor market clearing condition is

                 lt (z ) dnt (a, e, z ) + Nt       lt (z ) dF c (z ) =       eht (a, e, z ) dnt (a, e, z ) .

      The asset market clearing condition is

                              at+1 (a, z, e) dnt (a, z, e) = Kt+1 + Qt St+1 + B.

      The capital market clearing condition is

                              kt (z ) dnt (a, e, z ) + Nt        kt (z ) dF c (z ) = Kt .

      The goods market clears by Walras' Law. We note that investment includes both
      investment in physical capital, as well as in creating new corporate firms, Xt = Kt+1 -
      (1 -  )Kt + Kt t .

  4. The budget constraints of the financial intermediary and of the government are satisfied
      period by period.

  5. The law of motion for the measure nt (a, e, z ) evolves according to an equilibrium map-
      ping dictated by the households' optimal savings choice and the stochastic process for
      labor market efficiency and entrepreneurial ability.

  6. The mass of corporations evolves according to

                                              Nt+1 = (1 - ) Nt + t ,

      and the mass of new entrants t satisfies the free-entry condition.

4.7    Markup Distortions
The production choices of individual firms give an aggregate production function
                                                          -       
                                            Yt = Zt Kt L1
                                                        t            ,

where aggregate productivity is a harmonic weighted average of individual productivities
                                       1                                            1             -
                            qt (z )                                      qt (z )    
                                                                                           c
              Zt =                         dnt (a, e, z ) + Nt                          dF (z )       .
                               z                                            z

                                                       34
Markups once again distort the relative output choices qt (z ) of individual producers and
reduce aggregate productivity.
       In addition, markups implicitly tax labor and capital, the demand for which is given by
                                           1 Yt                               1 Yt
                        Wt =  (1 - )                     and       Rt =              ,
                                           Mt Lt                              Mt K t
where the aggregate markup depends on the markups mt (z ) of individual producers
                                                                                                      -1
                        1                                            1
           Mt =               pt (z )qt (z ) dnt (a, e, z ) + Nt           pt (z )qt (z ) dF c (z )        .
                      mt (z )                                      mt (z )

4.8       Parameterization
We next describe how we choose parameters for our quantitative analysis. We assume the
economy is in a steady-state in 2013, so we target statistics for this year.


Assigned Parameters. We assume logarithmic preferences and a Frisch elasticity of labor
supply of 0.5. We set the elasticity of capital in production  equal to 1/3 and the span
of control parameter  equal to 0.85. We assume that a period is one year and set the
depreciation rate of capital  = 0.06. As earlier, we assume that the fraction of entrepreneurs
is equal to  = 0.117, the fraction of respondents in the 2013 SCF who own a private pass-
through business. We set / = 0.15, consistent with the evidence in Edmond et al. (2018).
We set  = 0, which implies that entry into the corporate sector is inelastic, so the number of
new entrants is constant over time. This is a conservative assumption because it implies the
largest response of stock prices to product market interventions and thus an upper bound
on the distributional costs that determine the equity-efficiency tradeoff of such policies.23
We set the exit rate  = 0.04, to match that exiting firms account for approximately 4% of
employment according to the Statistics of US Businesses. We summarize these parameter
choices in the left panel of Table 7.
       As for the tax parameters, we use the estimates of the income tax function from Boar
and Midrigan (2020),  = 0.255,  = 0.049 and  = 0.164. These are derived from the CBO
data on pre- and post-tax income for various income groups. They imply that the median
marginal tax rate is equal to 0.26, the marginal tax rate at the 95th percentile is 0.34, and the
lump-sum transfer is equal to 0.16 of per-capita GDP. We follow Bhandari and McGrattan
(2018) and set the sales and corporate profit tax, s = 0.065 and c = 0.36, consistent with
  23
    See our earlier draft, Boar and Midrigan (2019), which considers the opposite scenario with perfectly
elastic entry and no changes in stock prices, and obtains similar implications of product market interventions.

                                                       35
the United States tax code. The unanticipated product market interventions we consider
give rise to one-time unexpected capital gains due to the change in the rental rate of capital
and the value of corporate firms. We assume that these are taxed at a rate of k = 0.20, the
capital gains tax in the United States in 2013. Finally, we set the stock of government debt
B equal to 100% of GDP, as in the US data.

                         Table 7: Parameter Values in Dynamic Model

                        Assigned                                      Calibrated

           1       CRRA                                   0.965   discount factor
           2       inverse Frisch                    e    0.987   AR(1) e
           1/3     capital elasticity                e    0.148   std. dev. e shocks
           0.85    span of control                   z    0.973   AR(1) z
           0.06    capital depreciation rate         z    0.139   std. dev. z shocks
           0.117   fraction of entrepreneurs              12.21   demand elasticity at q = 1
     /     0.15    super-elasticity of demand        µc   1.343   mean productivity corporations
           0       elasticity entry rate             ¯
                                                     K    0.068   fixed entry cost / GDP
           0.04    exit rate, corporations




Calibrated Parameters. We choose the remaining parameters to match salient facts
about the distribution of wealth and income in the United States and the relative size of
the corporate sector. We assume that labor market and entrepreneurial ability follow inde-
pendent AR(1) processes with persistence parameters e and z and Gaussian innovations
with standard deviation e and z , respectively. We assume that the productivity of corpo-
                                                                         2
rate firms is drawn from a normal distribution with mean µc and variance z /(1 - 2
                                                                                 z ), the

unconditional variance of entrepreneurial productivity. The parameter µc thus determines
how much more productive and larger are corporate firms on average.
    In addition to these five parameters, we calibrate the discount factor  , the fixed cost
         ¯ , and the parameter  governing the demand elasticity to minimize the distance
of entry K
between a number of moments in the model and in the data. We report the parameter values
in the right panel of Table 7 and the moments we target in Table 8. We target the average
wealth to income ratio, the share of wealth and income held by entrepreneurs, the wealth
and income Gini coefficients for all households, as well as separately for entrepreneurs and
workers. All these statistics were computed using the 2013 SCF.
   We associate entrepreneurial firms in our model with privately-held pass-through busi-
nesses in the data, so the 11.7% fraction of entrepreneurs does not include owners of C-


                                                36
corporations. Similarly, we associate corporate firms in our model with C-corporations in
the data, regardless of whether they are privately held or publicly listed. Though imperfect,
this mapping allows us to capture two key distinctions between pass-through businesses and
C-corporations in the data: their tax status (pass-through vs. double taxation) and the
concentration of ownership.24 We therefore choose the fixed cost of creating a new corporate
     ¯ and the mean productivity µc of corporate firms to match the 63% sales share of C-
firm K
corporations and the 5% share of businesses that are C-corporations in the data, as reported
by Dyrda and Pugsley (2018) for 2012, the latest year in their sample.
      As Table 8 reports, the model matches the targeted moments well. As in the data, en-
trepreneurs are much wealthier and earn more income than workers. The model matches the
Gini coefficients of both wealth and income. As is well-known, absent a fat-tailed distribution
of ability shocks, the model cannot reproduce the very top wealth and income shares. For
example, the top 1% of households hold 35% of all wealth in the data and 28% in the model.
We show however that our results are robust to introducing a super-star state that allows
the model to match inequality at the very top.

                        Table 8: Moments Used to Calibrate Dynamic Model

                                     Data    Model                                      Data   Model

          Wealth to income ratio     6.57     6.58        Gini wealth, entrepr.         0.78   0.78
          Wealth share of entrepr.   0.46     0.46        Gini income, entrepr.         0.68   0.68
          Income share of entrepr.   0.31     0.31        Gini wealth, workers          0.83   0.82
          Gini wealth, all hhs       0.85     0.85        Gini income, workers          0.59   0.59
          Gini income, all hhs       0.64     0.64        Fraction of corporate firms   0.05   0.05
                                                          Sales share corporate firms   0.63   0.63




      The right panel of Table 7 reports the values of the calibrated parameters. The discount
factor is  = 0.965. To match the large degree of inequality in the data the model requires
very persistent processes for both entrepreneurial (z = 0.973) and labor market ability
(e = 0.987). The standard deviations of the innovations are equal to z = 0.139 and
e = 0.148. In the robustness section below we compare our model's implications for the
volatility and persistence of labor and business income with those computed by DeBacker
et al. (2020) using IRS data and report results from an alternative parameterization that
reproduces their estimates.
                         ¯ implies that entry costs amount to 6.6% of GDP. The elasticity
   Finally, the value of K
 24
      See Dyrda and Pugsley (2018) for a detailed discussion.


                                                     37
parameter  , identified by the income share of entrepreneurs, implies that the aggregate
markup is equal to 1.22. Intuitively, the higher markups are, the larger the profits and
therefore the income share of entrepreneurs in our economy.

4.9    Optimal Product Market Interventions
Recall that the restricted subsidy schedule considered in Section 3.4 captures the vast major-
ity of the welfare gains achievable by the Mirrleesian regulator in a static setting. Motivated
by this result, we consider a regulator who contemplates a once-and-for-all unanticipated
product market intervention of this form. Specifically, the regulator levies size-dependent
subsidies or taxes which change the producer's post-tax revenue to
                                                                       1+2
                                 ^t (y ) =          1             y
                                 S            0 +                             Yt .
                                                  1 + 2           Yt

The regulator takes into account that its intervention alters the paths for the equilibrium
wages and interest rates as the economy transitions to the new steady state. Letting  =
(0 , 1 , 2 ) denote the parameters describing the intervention, cit ( ) and hit ( ) denote the
implied equilibrium paths for consumption and hours, determined as described in Section
4.6, and
                                                  
                                  V0 ( ) =              t u (cit ( ), hit ( )) di
                                                 t=0

denote the utilitarian objective, the problem of the regulator is to choose  to maximize
V0 ( ), subject to the constraint that the intervention is revenue-neutral at all dates, so that
subsidies on some firms are financed by taxes on other firms,

           ^t (yt (z )) - pt (z )yt (z ) dnt (a, e, z ) + Nt
           S                                                      ^t (yt (z )) - pt (z )yt (z ) dF c (z ) = 0.
                                                                  S

We implicitly assume that the subsidy an individual firm receives does not depend on its
incorporation status and that the regulator places the same welfare weight on entrepreneurs
and workers. Because a particular policy intervention  changes equilibrium prices, it also
changes the amount of revenue that the government collects in taxes. We assume that this
additional revenue is rebated lump-sum to all households, so t adjusts residually at each
date to ensure that the government budget constraint is satisfied. We do not restrict 0
to be positive and thus allow the regulator to impose lump-sum taxes on producers. The
regulator takes into account, however, the individual rationality constraints: it cannot force
firms to operate if they receive negative profits. Thus, for every choice of  we solve for the

                                                         38
             Table 9: Optimal Product Market Intervention in Dynamic Model

                                                           Status quo   Optimal

                 Change in output, %                           ­         1.03
                 Change in wage, %                             ­         3.17
                 Interest rate, %                             3.95       4.07
                 Losses from misallocation, %                 0.72       0.05

                 Sales share top 1% firms                     0.52       0.61
                 Sales share top 5% firms                     0.87       0.92
                 Sales share corporations                     0.63       0.70

                 Wealth share entrepreneurs                   0.46       0.38
                 Income share entrepreneurs                   0.31       0.26

                 Gini Wealth                                  0.85       0.82
                 Gini Income                                  0.64       0.62

                 Change in welfare, cev, %                     ­         2.17
                 Fraction households better off                ­         0.93
                 Change in welfare workers, cev, %             ­         2.97
                 Change in welfare entrepreneurs, cev, %       ­        -3.72




fraction of firms that find it optimal to produce given a particular intervention, and calculate
the equilibrium in the product and labor markets given the endogenously determined mass
of producers. Scaling the post-tax revenue function by output Yt is convenient because it
ensures that aggregate productivity Zt , the wedge t between factor prices and their marginal
product, and the value of 0 needed to ensure revenue-neutrality jump immediately to a new
constant level after the policy reform.
   The regulator finds it optimal to set 1 = 0.795 and 2 = 0.009. The lump-sum transfer
^(0) implied by revenue-neutrality amounts to 2.2% of per-capita GDP. Since the values of
S
1 and 2 are not directly interpretable, we note that they imply that the median marginal
subsidy is equal to -23.7%, while the 99.9th percentile is equal to 3.9%. The regulator subsi-
dizes the largest 1% of producers by taxing the remaining firms. In doing so, the regulator
reduces the wedge between factor prices and their marginal product in the aggregate from
1.22, the aggregate markup under the status quo, to 1.20. Moreover, since 2 is nearly zero,
the regulator eliminates almost entirely the dispersion in the marginal product of labor and
capital across producers.
   Table 9 reports the effect of implementing the optimal product market intervention. With
the exception of the welfare gains, which take into account transition dynamics, all other


                                                39
statistics reflect steady-state comparisons. As in the static model, optimal product market
regulation increases the equilibrium wage, by 3.17%. The interest rate increases as well,
from 3.95% to 4.07%, as does output, by 1.03%. Because the regulator eliminates most
misallocation, aggregate productivity increases by 0.67%.
   Consistent with the predictions of the static model, the regulator increases product market
concentration. For example, the sales share of the largest 1% of producers increases from
52% to 61%. Since corporate firms are larger than privately-held firms, the subsidies on
large producers increase the corporate sales share from 63% to 70%. Interestingly, optimal
regulation reduces long-run inequality: the wealth and income Gini coefficients fall from 0.85
to 0.82 and from 0.64 to 0.62, respectively. This result reflects the loss of market share of
the relatively smaller businesses owned by entrepreneurs, whose wealth and income shares
fall from 0.46 to 0.38 and from 0.31 to 0.26, respectively.
   Before discussing the welfare implications of optimal regulation, we first summarize, in
Figure 10, the transition dynamics of the key macroeconomic aggregates. We note that output
jumps by 1% in the immediate aftermath of the optimal policy reform, while consumption
responds more gradually, owing to an increase in investment. The consumption of workers
increases by a large amount, 5% on average in the long-run, while that of entrepreneurs falls
by more than 10% eventually. Wages increase by approximately 2% on impact and continue
increasing due to the additional capital accumulation that results from the reduction in
product market distortions. The stock market value of corporate firms increases substantially,
by approximately 7%, owing to the subsidies to larger producers. Interest rates overshoot
their long-run level and gradually decline as households accumulate more wealth.
   Consider finally the welfare implications of optimal regulation. Utilitarian welfare, ex-
pressed in consumption-equivalent units, increases by 2.2%. The majority of households,
93%, are better off. The gains from the reform disproportionately accrue to the workers,
whose welfare increases by 3%. Entrepreneurs experience an average welfare loss of 3.7%.
   These results once again reinforce our earlier conclusions that product market concentra-
tion is not necessarily costly, even in an environment with highly unequal firm ownership.
What is costly is dispersion in the marginal product of factors of production across firms and
a large wedge between factor prices and their marginal products. Optimal regulation reduces
these wedges and in doing so actually increases product market concentration. Though the
largest producers benefit from such interventions at the expense of medium-sized firms, the
median household is better off due to higher wages.


                                              40
                Figure 10: Transition Dynamics After Optimal Intervention




4.10     Robustness
We show here that our results are robust to alternative parameterizations of the processes
for entrepreneurial and labor market ability. In particular, we first allow for a fat-tailed
distribution of ability to better match top income and wealth inequality. We then consider
a parameterization that targets statistics reported by DeBacker et al. (2020) using IRS data
on labor and business income.


Super-Star Ability State. As is well known, matching top wealth and income inequality
in an incomplete markets economy like ours requires departures from a Gaussian distribution
of ability. Following Castaneda et al. (2003), we consider an extension with a super-star state
that allows the model to match the top income and wealth shares.
   An agent can be in either a normal or a super-star state. In the normal state labor
market ability follows an AR(1) process as earlier. In the super-star state, labor market
ability is relatively high, e
                            ¯ times higher than the average. We assume that agents transit
from the normal to the super-star state with probability pe and remain in the super-star state
with probability qe . When agents return to the normal state, they draw a new ability level
from the ergodic distribution associated with the AR(1) process. An analogous process for
entrepreneurial ability is characterized by parameters z , z , pz , qz and z
                                                                           ¯.
   To calibrate the additional parameters describing the super-star state, we augment the

                                              41
original set of moments we target in Table 8 with statistics describing the wealth and income
shares of the top 1% of households, as well as the top 1% of workers and entrepreneurs
in isolation. We show in the Appendix that the model reproduces these moments well. For
example, the top 1% of households hold 35% of all wealth in the data, 37% in this calibration,
and 28% in our baseline model without a super-star state.
   The second column of Table 10 reports the effects of implementing the optimal product
market regulation in this version of the model. The regulator now sets the lump-sum transfer
to firms equal to zero, while the values of 1 and 2 are nearly the same as in the baseline
parameterization. Once again, the regulator subsidizes larger firms and increases their market
share by 0.09. Wages, output and productivity increase slightly more, as does overall welfare,
which increases by 2.3% compared to 2.2% in the baseline model. Workers benefit more and
experience a welfare gain of 3.7% compared to 3%. Entrepreneurs lose much more now and
experience a welfare loss of 7.6% compared to 3.7% in the baseline model.


Matching Moments on Labor and Business Income from IRS. Our baseline param-
eterization targets moments describing wealth and income inequality in the 2013 SCF. We
now consider an alternative that targets statistics describing the persistence and volatility of
labor and business income computed by DeBacker et al. (2020) using a large panel of income
tax returns for the 1987-2009 period. These researchers estimate error-component models
to describe the processes for labor and business income. They do so by first applying an
inverse hyperbolic sine transformation to business income and a logarithmic transformation
to labor income. They then remove the component of income accounted for by observable
characteristics and fit a process characterized by a fixed effect and an AR(1) component to
the residuals. The first column of Table 11 reports the implied persistence, unconditional
standard deviation and the standard deviation of changes of transformed income implied by
their estimates.
   We apply identical transformations to data on labor and business income from our model
and find that while our baseline parameterization reproduces the persistence of business
income, it generates a standard deviation that is twice as high. We also find that our baseline
model predicts too much persistence in labor income (a serial correlation of 0.99 compared
to 0.91 in the IRS data) and 75% larger unconditional dispersion. We conjecture that these
discrepancies are accounted for by several factors. First, our baseline model abstracts from
additional sources of dispersion in wealth, such as heterogeneity in rates of return, that would
arise, for example, in the presence of financial frictions. Second, our baseline model targets

                                              42
inequality moments for 2013, while the DeBacker et al. (2020) estimates use data that go
back as far as 1987 when inequality was much lower. Third, our baseline model targets broad
measures of inequality, while DeBacker et al. (2020) remove the component accounted for by
observable characteristics.
      We argue, however, that our results are robust to the parameters describing the process
for labor and entrepreneurial ability. To that end, we calibrate a version of our model to
match the moments implied by the DeBacker et al. (2020) estimates. In addition to these
moments, we target a broader measure of entrepreneurship which includes all households
who file some source of business income, namely 25%, the number they report for 2009, the
latest year in their sample. We also target that 10% of all income is business income, as
DeBacker et al. (2020) report. Table 11 shows that our alternative calibration reproduces all
these targets well.25 We note that this parameterization implies a much lower markup (1.14
compared to 1.22 in our baseline) and losses from misallocation (0.28% compared to 0.72%
in our baseline), owing to the lower dispersion in productivity.
      The third column of Table 10 reports the effects of implementing the optimal product
market regulation in this version of the model. The regulator now imposes a lump-sum tax
on producers which amounts to 1.25% of per-capita GDP, thus forcing the least productive
1% of firms to shut down. The regulator sets 1 = 0.87 and 2 = 0.006, once again subsidiz-
ing larger firms, even more than required to restore allocative efficiency, thereby increasing
concentration. The model's implications for wages, output and productivity are similar to
our baseline. Overall welfare increases by less now (0.8% compared to 2.2% in the baseline),
but once again workers greatly benefit from optimal regulation. Their welfare increases by
2.6%, very similar to the 3% increase in the baseline model.
      We therefore conclude that our results are robust to changes in the process for labor and
entrepreneurial ability.


5       Conclusions
We study optimal product market interventions in an economy that matches the degree of
inequality in the United States and in which firms ownership is highly concentrated and
markups increase with firm market share. We use a mechanism design approach to charac-
terize optimal regulation in a static setting in which we impose no constraints on the shape
of the interventions, other than those stemming from informational frictions. Importantly,
 25
      See the Appendix for the parameter values in this and all other robustness checks.


                                                      43
        Table 10: Optimal Product Market Intervention, Robustness

                                            Baseline      Super-star state      IRS moments
^(0), rel. per-capita GDP, %
S                                                2.22            0.00             -1.25
1                                                0.795           0.791             0.871
2                                                0.009           0.010             0.006

Change in sales share top 1% firms               0.09            0.09              0.06

Change in steady-state wage, %                   3.17            3.87              2.81
Change in steady-state output, %                 1.03            1.48              1.36
Change in aggregate productivity, %              0.67            0.71              0.25

Change in welfare, cev, %                     2.17               2.30              0.83
Change in welfare workers, cev, %             2.97               3.69              2.58
Change in welfare entrepreneurs, cev, %      -3.72              -7.56             -4.26




                       Table 11: Calibration to IRS Data

                                                         Data           Model

            Fraction with business income                0.25            0.25
            Share business income in all income          0.08            0.10

            Business Income Process

            Standard deviation                           2.11            2.12
            Autocorrelation                              0.96            0.96
            Standard deviation of changes                0.60            0.60

            Labor Income Process

            Standard deviation                           0.71            0.69
            Autocorrelation                              0.91            0.90
            Standard deviation of changes                0.30            0.30




                                            44
we take into account the general equilibrium and distributional effects of interventions. We
find that optimal regulation nearly restores allocative efficiency and leads to more product
market concentration than under the status quo. Optimal regulation encourages firms to
expand, thus bidding up the equlibrium wage and benefiting most households. This result is
robust to details of the parameterization, including an extension to a dynamic setting with
capital and wealth accumulation.
   We conclude that product market concentration is not costly in and of itself, even in an
environment in which firms are owned by a small fraction of households. What is costly is
dispersion in the marginal product and wedges that depress the equilibrium wage and the
return on capital. Optimal regulation reduces these wedges and in doing so actually increases
product market concentration. Our results therefore caution against the widely-held view
that reducing concentration and the market power of large firms would necessarily improve
the welfare of the poor. Though policies that reduce concentration indeed reduce market
power and markups, they have the unintended consequence of also reducing the labor share,
aggregate productivity and the equilibrium wage.


References
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, "Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and Interna-
 tional Relative Prices," American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1998­2031.

Atkinson, Antony B., Inequality: What Can Be Done?, Harvard University Press, 2015.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van
 Reenen, "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms," 2017. MIT
 working paper.

Baker, Jonathan and Steven Salop, "Antitrust, Competition Policy, and Inequality,"
 The Georgetown Law Journal Online, 2015, 104 (1), 1­28.

Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi, "Productivity and Misallocation in General
 Equilibrium," 2018. LSE working paper.

Baron, David P. and Roger B. Myerson, "Regulating a Monopolist with Unknown
 Costs," Econometrica, 1982, 50 (4), 911­930.

Benabou, Roland, "Search, Price Setting and Inflation," The Review of Economic Studies,
 1988, 55 (3), 353­376.

  , "Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy: What Levels of Redis-
  tribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?," Econometrica, 2002, 70 (2), 481­517.


                                             45
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Mi Luo, "Earnings Inequality and Other Determi-
 nants of Wealth Inequality," American Economic Review, May 2017, 107 (5), 593­97.

Berry, Steven, Martin Gaynor, and Fiona Scott Morton, "Do Increasing Markups
 Matter? Lessons from Empirical Industrial Organization," Journal of Economic Perspec-
 tives, August 2019, 33 (3), 44­68.

Bhandari, Anmol and Ellen McGrattan, "Sweat Equity in U.S. Private Business," 2018.
 Minneapolis Fed Staff Report 560.

  , David Evans, Mikhail Golosov, and Thomas Sargent, "Inequality, Business Cycles,
  and Monetary-Fiscal Policy," 2018. working paper.

Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz, "Endogenous Entry, Product
  Variety, and Business Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 304­345.

  , , and , "Monopoly power and endogenous product variety: Distortions and reme-
  dies," 2018.

Boar, Corina and Virgiliu Midrigan, "Markups and Inequality," Working Paper 25952,
 National Bureau of Economic Research June 2019.

   and , "Efficient Redistribution," Working Paper 27622, National Bureau of Economic
  Research July 2020.

Brun, Lidia and Ignacio Gonzalez, "Tobin's Q and Inequality," 2017. working paper.

Cagetti, Marco and Mariacristina De Nardi, "Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and
 Wealth," Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (5), 835­870.

Castaneda, Ana, Javier Diaz-Gimenez, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, "Accounting for
 the U.S. Earnings and Wealth Inequality," Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (4),
 818­857.

Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, "Sticky Price Models
 of the Business Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Problem?,"
 Econometrica, 2000, 68 (5), 1151­1179.

Colciago, Andrea and Rajssa Mechelli, "Competition and Inequality: Aiyagari meets
 Bertrand and Cournot," 2019. Working Paper.

De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger, "The Rise of Market Power and
 the Macroeconomic Implications," 2018.

DeBacker, J., Vasia Panousi, and Shanthi P. Ramnath, "A Risky Venture: Income
 Dynamics within the Non-Corporate Private Business Sector," Working Paper 2020.

Diamond, Peter A, "Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern of
 Optimal Marginal Tax Rates," American Economic Review, March 1998, 88 (1), 83­95.


                                          46
Dworczak, Piotr, Scott Duke Kominers, and Mohammad Akbarpour, "Redistribu-
 tion through Markets," Econometrica, 2020, forthcoming (3).

Dyrda, Sebastian and Benjamin Pugsley, "Taxes, Regulations of Businesses and Evo-
 lution of Income Inequality in the US," 2018. Working Paper.

Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu, "How Costly Are Markups?,"
 Working Paper 24800, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2018.

Golosov, Mikhail, Maxim Troshkin, and Aleh Tsyvinski, "Redistribution and Social
 Insurance," American Economic Review, February 2016, 106 (2), 359­86.

Gopinath, Gita and Oleg Itskhoki, "Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-Through,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 675­727.

Gutierrez, German, Callum Jones, and Thomas Philippon, "Entry Costs and the
 Macroeconomy," Working Paper 25609, National Bureau of Economic Research February
 2019.

Hall, Robert E, "New Evidence on the Markup of Prices over Marginal Costs and the Role
 of Mega-Firms in the US Economy," Working Paper 24574, National Bureau of Economic
 Research May 2018.

  , "Using Empirical Marginal Cost to Measure Market Power in the US Economy," Working
  Paper 25251, National Bureau of Economic Research November 2018.

Hartman-Glaser, Barney, Hanno Lustig, and Mindy Xiaolan, "Capital Share Dy-
 namics When Firms Insure Workers," Journal of Finance, 2018, forthcoming.

Heathcote, Jonathan and Hitoshi Tsujiyama, "Optimal Income Taxation: Mirrlees
 Meets Ramsey," 2019. working paper.

  , Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante, "Optimal Tax Progressivity: An
  Analytical Framework," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1693­1754.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A., "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,"
 Econometrica, 1992, 60 (5), 1127­1150.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
 China and India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.

Hubmer, Joachim, Per Krusell, and Anthony A. Smith Jr, "A Comprehensive Quan-
 titative Theory of the U.S. Wealth Distribution," 2018. Working Paper.

Hurst, Erik and Benjamin Pugsley, "Wealth, Tastes, and Entrepreneurial Choice," in
 Miranda Schoar Haltiwanger, Hurst, ed., Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current
 Knowledge and Challenges, 2017.

Kaplow, Louis, "Market Power and Income Taxation," 2019. NBER Working Paper 25578.


                                         47
Kimball, Miles S., "The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model," Jour-
 nal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 1995, 27 (4, Part 2), 1241­1277.

Klenow, Peter J. and Jonathan L. Willis, "Real Rigidities and Nominal Price Changes,"
 Economica, July 2016, 83, 443­472.

Kuhn, Moritz and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, "2013 Update on the U.S. Earnings, Income,
 and Wealth Distributional Facts: A View from Macroeconomics," Quarterly Review, 2016,
 (April), 1­75.

Matsuyama, Kiminori and Philip Ushchev, "When Does Procompetitive Entry Imply
 Excessive Entry?," Working Paper 2020.

Piketty, Thomas and Arthur Goldhammer, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Har-
  vard University Press, 2014.

Saez, Emmanuel, "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 01 2001, 68 (1), 205­229.

Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick, "Capitalists in the
 Twenty-First Century," 2018. NBER Working Paper 25442.

Stiglitz, Joseph, The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our
  Future, W.W. Norton & Company, 2012.




                                          48
