                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TAKING STOCK OF TRADE POLICY UNCERTAINTY:
                   EVIDENCE FROM CHINA'S PRE-WTO ACCESSION

                                    George A. Alessandria
                                      Shafaat Y. Khan
                                     Armen Khederlarian

                                     Working Paper 25965
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25965


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




We are extremely grateful to Mario Crucini, Costas Arkolakis, Yan Bai, Mark Bils, Dario
Caldara, Dan Lu, Kim Ruhl, and Joseph Steinberg for numerous comments and suggestions. We
also thank seminar participants at the University of Rochester, the 2019 Federal Reserve Trade
Dynamics Workshop and the Spring 2019 Midwest Macroeconomics Meetings (UGA). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by George A. Alessandria, Shafaat Y. Khan, and Armen Khederlarian. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Taking Stock of Trade Policy Uncertainty: Evidence from China's Pre-WTO Accession
George A. Alessandria, Shafaat Y. Khan, and Armen Khederlarian
NBER Working Paper No. 25965
June 2019
JEL No. E32,E60,F12,F13,F14

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the effects on trade from the annual tariff uncertainty about China's MFN status
renewal prior to joining the WTO. We have three main findings. First, counter to the evidence
elsewhere, trade increases strongly in anticipation of uncertain future increases in tariffs. Second,
even though the trade response can be quite large, the probability of a tariff increase was
perceived to be relatively small, with an average annual probability of non-renewal of about 5.5
percent. And third, what matters more is the expected future tariff rather than the uncertainty
around it. We identify these effects using within-year variation in the risk of trade policy changes
around the renewal vote and trade flows. We show that an (s,s) inventory model generates this
behavior and that variation in the strength of the stockpiling in advance of the vote is increasing
in the storability of goods. The model is also consistent with a sizeable fraction of the cross-
industry variation in annual trade flows documented elsewhere. Our results explain why trade
may hold up well in advance of a prospective policy change such as Brexit or the US escalating
tariff war of 2018-19, but may fall off sharply even if expected tariff increases do not materialize.


George A. Alessandria                             Armen Khederlarian
Department of Economics                           238 Harkness Hall
University of Rochester                           University of Rochester
Harkness 204                                      Rochester, NY 14620
Rochester, NY 14627                               akheder2@ur.rochester.edu
and NBER
george.alessandria@rochester.edu

Shafaat Y. Khan
238 Harkness Hall
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
United States
Shafaatyar.k@gmail.com
1     Introduction

    As the world rethinks the benefits of globalization, the path of future trade policy has become

increasingly uncertain. This uncertainty requires firms making long-lived decisions to participate

in foreign markets to form expectations over the future path of tariffs. Forecasting this path

can be challenging as the timing, size, and likelihood of policy changes are all uncertain. Yet

firms do form these expectations and move on. In this paper, we show how to estimate the path

of expected future tariffs based on the behavior of firms in advance of a possible policy change

whose size and timing is known but whose probability is not. We apply these ideas to China's

annual renewal of normal trade relations (NTR) status in the US prior to access to the World

Trade Organization (WTO).

    We have three main findings. First, counter to the evidence elsewhere (Pierce and Schott

(2016), Handley and Limao (2017), Graziano et al. (2018)), we find that trade increases strongly

in anticipation of uncertain future increases in tariffs. Second, even though the trade response

can be quite large, the probability of a tariff increase is viewed as relatively small, with an annual

probability of non-renewal of about 5.5 percent and annual probabilities that ranged from 0 to

10 percent. And third, the expected future tariff is the primary driver of trade dynamics instead

of the pure uncertainty. The "wait-and-see" real option forces from uncertainty only slightly

weaken the incentives to anticipate the future tariff increase.

    We use the timing of the annual renewal of China's NTR status and within-year variation in

trade flows around this renewal to identify the impact of uncertain future changes in trade policy.

Our identification leverages the fact that the NTR status renewal decision was legislated to occur

in the summer of each year. Thus, prior to renewal firms faced greater near-term risk about

trade policy than immediately after Congress renewed NTR. Using a generalized triple difference

approach, we show that trade flows rise when facing a risk of higher tariffs in the months in

advance of the renewal decision but then fall off sharply when renewal occurs. Essentially, trade


                                                  1
policy risk induces a seasonal component into trade flows that is related to the expected change

in trade policy and the ability of products to be stored.

   Our findings can be best understood through the lens of an (s,s) inventory model applied

to international trade as in Alessandria et al. (2010b). In this model, firms purchase a storable

commodity infrequently to economize on a fixed ordering cost and as a buffer in the presence of

demand uncertainty. Firms trade off higher inventory costs against lower international transac-

tion costs. Facing an uncertain increase in tariffs firms shift the timing of their purchases so they

have relative high purchases and stocks of inventories in advance of the possible tariff increase.

Upon a successful renewal and fixed tariffs for the next 12 months, firms already hold high

inventory levels and hence are less likely to purchase until they have run down their stockpile.

These effects are larger for goods for which holding inventories is less costly in the model and

the data.

   The finding that prospective future increases in tariffs increase trade stands in contrast to

previous findings in the literature because we are using within-year variation in trade flows rather

than annual trade flows. Our approach is complementary to other approaches that identify the

role of trade policy uncertainty but operates at a different frequency since it is based on within-

year variation of firms already active in the export market who are figuring out when to send their

shipments. This analysis generates a time-varying path of the probability of non-renewal that

can then be plugged into models of the export decision. By compounding these probabilities,

we find that nearing its access to the WTO in 2002, China's probability of retaining its MFN

status to the US market is much higher than those estimated in other studies such as Handley

and Limao (2017).

   Moreover, armed with a model that captures the dynamics of trade flows in in the presence of

uncertainty, we more generally quantify the role of pure uncertainty in the presence of inventory

holdings and fixed costs of ordering. In particular, we compare the trade-dampening wait-



                                                 2
and-see effect with the trade-boosting effect of an expected tariff hike. We simulate multiple

spreads around the same expected tariff increase and decompose the anticipatory growth into

the contribution of the first moment and the second moment. The results indicate that the

standardized effect of an expected tariff change is 3.5 times the effect of pure uncertainty and

almost all the variation in anticipatory import growth is explained by just the expected tariff

change.

   Next, we show that the frictions giving rise to within-year anticipatory stockpiling contribute

to the negative effect of uncertainty on annual trade flows in the literature. Anticipatory stock-

piling entails additional inventory holding costs that increase overall costs and reduce trade flows.

Using a difference-in-difference technique, we confirm the finding of significant negative effects

of uncertainty on annual US imports from China. We further find that the year-specific effects

of uncertainty were highest in the early years of 1990s which is in line with high non-renewal

probability for the same period.

   Finally, having established the reduced form effects of uncertainty, we test the direct mech-

anism of inventory holding costs through which uncertainty worsens annual imports. Firms

advance their purchases in anticipation of revocation of China's MFN status which leads to

lumpier imports. We quantify the effect of uncertainty through lumpiness using a two-stage

least squares approach and find significant negative effects operating through the lumpiness of

trade. Further, we are able to generate 50% of the effects on annual import flows using the

inventory model. We conclude that large sunk trade costs are not the necessary to explain

the dampening effects of trade policy uncertainty on trade as long as there is some mechanism

making trade a dynamic decision.

   This paper is most related to early work evaluating the impact of uncertainty on international

trade. Starting with Baldwin (1986), Baldwin and Krugman (1989) and Dixit (1989), models

with sunk costs of exporting have been employed to argue that uncertainty depresses trade, since



                                                 3
entering firms prefer to wait and see how uncertainty resolves. While entry decisions have been

shown to be important in international trade (Roberts and Tybout (1997), Alessandria and Choi

(2007)), we focus on the behavior of incumbent firms in the short window before the resolution

of uncertainty.

    More recent work has focused on the impact of Trade Policy Uncertainty (TPU) by consid-

ering exporter market participation decisions in the presence of a possible tariff increases.1 In

particular, in our model firms stockpile in the months before uncertainty is resolved thereby lead-

ing to a rise in trade. We use the rise in trade to study the underlying uncertainty surrounding

these events.2

    Recent papers have used the structure of models with sunk costs of exporting and found large

effects of uncertainty on trade in various episodes of TPU (Crowley et al. (2018), Feng et al.

(2017), Handley and Limao (2014)). One of the most studied episode is the one studied in this

paper, namely the renewal of China's MFN status during the 1990s. Although applied tariffs

on US imports from China did not change after its accession to the WTO, Pierce and Schott

(2016) find that US industries most exposed to the threat of protectionist tariffs experienced

large declines in employment and increased imports from China after the threat was eliminated.

Handley and Limao (2017), using the structure of a sunk cost models, find that uncertainty

accounted for one third of China's export growth. By comparing trade patterns between 2000

and 2005, their model-implied probability of MFN access reversal is 13%, or more than twice

as large as the one found in this paper. Our approach is complementary to their approach and

instead focuses on high frequency trade patterns, overcoming concerns of confounding long run

factors. Our probabilities can be used as inputs to models with entry decision. In contrast

with this literature, in our framework, pure uncertainty has little impact on trade patterns as

anticipation is mostly driven by expected trade cost changes. In this sense, our results are more
   1
       An exception to the recent literature using sunk costs of exporting to assess the role of TPU is Caldara et
al. (2019), that considers investment adjustments costs and sticky prices.
     2
       Ruhl (2011) uses a similar framework to determine the expected duration of a worldwide temporary export
ban of Canadian beef following the discovery of a cow infected with Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy.

                                                        4
in line with Steinberg (2019), who finds a minimal impact of trade policy uncertainty on UK's

aggregate trade due to Brexit. Our framework provides an alternative mechanism to explain

why the UK's trade has not experienced any declines despite the looming threat of Brexit.

   There is a growing literature that applies inventory models to explains high frequency dynam-

ics of international trade at the producer level or in the propagation of shocks. In Alessandria et

al. (2010a), stronger inventory management considerations in international trade are shown to

have contributed to the sudden drop in trade during the Great Recession, while in Alessandria

et al. (2010b) it captures implosions of trade and pricing dynamics of retail goods following large

devaluations in emerging economies. In Bekes et al. (2017) demand volatility raises the motive

for precautionary inventory holdings and explains variation in trade lumpiness across French

exporter markets. These papers as well as ours build on the non-convexities from fixed ordering

or shipment costs, that have been widely documented.3

   Our paper is also related to some recent papers that study anticipation to policy changes.

Baker et al. (2018) show that households increase their stocks in anticipation of a future sales

tax rate increase. Khan and Khederlarian (2019) find de-stocking by US imports from Mexico

to upcoming tariff reductions from NAFTA substantially biases estimates of the trade elasticity.

Unlike these papers, we study the effects of an uncertain policy change that did not materialize.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out a model in which stockpiling

in anticipation of a possible tariff rise increases trade before the resolution of uncertainty. We

show that the trade boost increases in the probability of the tariff hike. In Section 3 we show

that exports from China to the US rose in anticipation of the resolution of China's MFN status

renewal. In Section 4 we simulate the model matching the anticipatory growth of Chinese exports

to the US during this episode to determine the probability of MFN status being revoked. In

Section 5 we separate the contribution to the anticipatory increase in trade of pure uncertainty

(second moment) versus the expected tariff change (first moment). In Section 6 we show that

   3
       See Alessandria et al. (2010b), Kropf and Saure (2014), Blum et al. (2019).

                                                         5
the frictions giving rise to inventories explain a sizeable fraction of the cross-industry variation

in trade flows emphasized elsewhere. In the final section, we conclude.




2       Model: Anticipation to TPU through Inventories

    While previous work on trade policy uncertainty has focused on firms entry decisions (Han-

dley and Limao (2017), Crowley et al. (2018), Steinberg (2019)), we study how it affects the

shipment decisions of incumbent firms. Lumpiness in trade flows is pervasive and there is strong

evidence that exporters ship their goods infrequently to economize on the fixed costs of ship-

ments (Alessandria et al. (2010b), Kropf and Saure (2014), Hummels and Schaur (2013), Bekes

et al. (2017)). When facing a possible tariff increase, a firm deciding on when to export (import)

its goods has strong incentives to expedite their shipments before tariffs might be raised. In this

section we describe a model in which imports rise in anticipation of TPU resolution, leading to

short run reversals in trade flows. In particular, we introduce TPU into a standard (s,s) in-

ventory model4 as in Alessandria et al. (2010b), in which firms stockpile before a possible tariff

increase.



2.1     Environment

    We consider a partial equilibrium model5 of an industry in which goods are storable and

a continuum of monopolistically competitive retailers decide whether to import or not every

period. Ordering entails a fixed shipment cost, causing firms to order infrequent but large

shipments. On top of the fixed cost, retailers face demand uncertainty and a one period delivery

lag, leading to precautionary inventory holdings. These frictions give rise to a (s,s) policy, where

    4
      Other models with durable goods, such as capital or durable consumer goods, display similar anticipation
effects. We chose an inventory model because inventory dynamics have been proven to be very successful in
accounting for the short run dynamics of international trade flows (See Alessandria et al. (2010b), Alessandria
et al. (2010a), Charnavoki (2017).
    5
      We abstract from general equilibrium considerations since we focus on high frequency dynamics of trade
policy.

                                                      6
producers run down their stocks to a level s and then replenish it up to s. Retailers are identical

except for their history of demand shocks, that determines their current inventory holdings.

    Let pj,s,t denote the retail prices charged by importer j industry s and j,s,t the demand shock

in period t. Importers face a CES demand function with the elasticity of substitution denoted

by  :



                                                cj,s,t = ej,s,t p- 
                                                                 j,s,t                                         (1)



    The variable cost of importing is s,t =  (1 + s,t ) where s,t belongs to a finite set of possible

tariffs, T . The cost of importing is the same for each firm in a industry and suppliers are assumed

to be perfectly competitive, so that the pass-through of the tariff reduction is complete.6 . TPU

is reflected in the markov process of t , which has a transition matrix denoted by  . At the

beginning of each period retailers observe their inventory holdings, sj,s,t and their demand shock,

j,s,t iid N (0, 2
                  ), assumed to be i.i.d. across firms and time7 , and then price their good and

decide to import or not. To import, retailers need to pay a fixed cost f 8 . We assume that

imported goods cannot be returned, mj,s,t  0. Because of demand uncertainty, importers will

never run down their inventories to zero i.e. ss > 0, and because of the delivery lag, sales can

never exceed current inventory holdings:



                                         qj,s,t = min[ej,s,t p- 
                                                              j,s,t , sj,s,t ]                                 (2)



    Assuming the goods in transit (mj,s,t ) depreciate at the same rate, s 9 , as in the warehouse,



   6
      Perfectly competitive suppliers allow us to rule out changes prices charged by exporters. We test this in the
empirical section.
    7
      The iid demand shock is necessary to obtain variation in the anticipation to a tariff reduction. Without
demand shocks the distribution over imports would degenerate and simulations would be irrelevant. With
perfectly correlated demand shocks all firms would respond equally to the incentives of anticipating the demand
shock.
    8
      We assume that the fixed cost of importing is the same across industries.
    9
      Industries vary in their depreciation rate.

                                                          7
the law of motion for the inventories is:



                                 sj,s,t+1 = (1 - s )[sj,s,t + mj,s,t - qj,s,t ]                           (3)



   For the following discussion, considering the partial equilibrium nature of our environment,

we will characterize the optimal policies and tariff process for an industry by dropping the indus-

try subscript. Denote firm's value of adjusting by V a (s, ,  ) and not adjusting by V n (s, ,  ).

Every period retailers optimize by choosing V (s, ,  ) = max[V a (s, ,  ), V n (s, ,  )], where:



           V a (s, ,  ) = max q (p, s,  )p - (1 +  )m - f + (1 + r)-1 EV [s ,  ,  |s,  ]                  (4)
                         p,m>0


           V n (s, ,  ) = max q (p, s,  )p + (1 + r)-1 EV [s ,  ,  |s,  ]
                           p




   are subject to (3) and (2). Solving for the optimal policies generates an (s,s) policy of ordering

that depends on current inventory holdings and the demand shock, m = m(s, ,  ). Similarly,

the pricing schedule is characterized by a constant markup over the discounted marginal value

of an additional unit of inventory next period, p =          
                                                             -1
                                                                (1 + r)-1 (1 -  )Vs (s   ,  ,  ). When facing

an expected increase in  , importers trade-off expediting imports and buying cheaper today

at the expense of paying the fixed cost today and assuming higher inventory holding costs. In

what follows we describe how under different shock processes this trade-off leads to different

anticipatory dynamics.



2.2    Trade Policy Uncertainty and Stockpiling

   We introduce TPU into this environment by formulating a non-stationary markov process in

the form of a time-dependent transition matrix, denoted by t . Allowing importers to anticipate


possible tariff changes, leads them to stockpile before the resolution of the uncertainty. In light of




                                                       8
the empirical application in the next section, we fix the period in which uncertainty is resolved10 .

Let mres be the last period before the possible tariff change, so that in period mres + 1 the

uncertainty is resolved.

                                                                                     
                              
                               I|T |    if t = mres
                              
                                                                   (1 -  )  
                              
                      t   =                               ,   ~ = 
                                                                             
                                                                             
                              
                               
                               ~        if t = mres                   0    1



      Conditional on (,  ), the key parameters determining anticipation are the fixed cost of

ordering and the cost of inventory holding, that is, the interest rate and the depreciation rate.

For now, we calibrate the model with the sole purpose of illustrating its qualitative response to

TPU. In Table 1 we describe the parameter values of the model. We set the fixed cost per order

to match the Herfindahl-Hirschman (HH) index of 0.32, that is, an average of shipments 3 per

year. We calibrate the model at the monthly frequency by setting the discount rate equal to
12
     0.97. The monthly depreciation rate is set at 2.5%, yielding an annual rate of around 30%.

We set the elasticity of substitution equal to 411 . Finally the delivery lag is set to be a month

and the dispersion of taste shock is set at 0.8.

      We now show that, conditional on a tariff increase, the magnitude of the anticipatory stockpil-

ing is increasing in the probability of the tariff increase taking place. Initially, trade is tariff-free,

i.e. 1 = 0. In period mres + 1, importers face the possibility of either remaining at 0 or facing

a tariff of 10%. Hence, the set of possible set of tariffs is T = {0, 0.10}. Afterwards, the new

state is absorbing in the sense that t = mres +1  t > mres + 1 i.e. the tariff level will remain

unchanged. To study how trade responds to different probabilities of the same tariff increase

taking place, we vary transition probabilities in ~mres . In particular, importers face either a


20%, 50% or 100% chance of tariffs being raised to 10%. We provide importers with 12 months

     10
      In general, there can be a lot of uncertainty about the timing of a possible policy change. However, US
Congress voting on the renewal of China's MFN status took place every year by July and August. For more see
section 4.
   11
      The elasticity of substitution does not affect anticipatory behavior.

                                                      9
to anticipate this event.

    Figure 1 plots the aggregate industry response of imports. In all cases, the expected tariff

increase is not realized. Imports spike before the shock reaching its peak the month in mres

and then falling sharply afterwards. This reversal in trade flows is short lived. Imports start

rising only in the two to three months before the resolution of uncertainty12 . The size of these

changes in import flows in anticipation of the uncertainty resolution are clearly increasing in the

probability of the tariff rise. However, qualitatively the responses are very similar. In Figure 2

we observe that the rise in trade flows in the three months before the resolution is paralleled

by a similarly strong increase in the aggregate inventory-sales ratio. Since importers want to

avoid paying possibly higher tariffs, they stockpile so that they begin the possibly high tariff

period with high level of inventory-sales ratio. From the figure, it is clear that beginning of the

period inventory holdings over sales reach their peak in the months of uncertainty resolution. In

the case of a 50% change of the tariff increase occurring the the inventory-sales ratio is around

35% above its equilibrium level. Again, how strong these effects are depend on the probability

importers assign to the tariff increase taking place. Once, uncertainty is resolved, trade drops

temporarily as importers have amassed enough inventories to satisfy their demand.

    Finally, note that these dynamics take place in a window of 5 months before and 5 months

after the resolution of uncertainty. Uncertainty over renewal of China's MFN status was re-

solved annually for a period of more than 10 years. In this framework, the dynamics driven by

anticipation in one year settle before the beginning of next year's anticipitory dynamics.13 . In

the next section we show that high frequency anticipatory dynamics of the US imports from

China were similar to the one predicted by this model.




  12
      Before imports start rising, echo-effects lead to temporary drops in imports in month 8. These are due to
the fact that all importers are now timing their purchases similarly to have enough inventories before the possible
increase in tariffs while saving on the fixed ordering cost
   13
      In Figure A.1 of the Appendix we show that the value functions at mres for the case of only one episode of
TPU exactly overlaps with the case of two episodes of TPU with 12 months in between them.

                                                        10
3     Anticipation during Annual Renewals of China's MFN

      Status

    In this section we study anticipatory dynamics during the single most studied episode of

TPU. During the 1990s US imports from China were only temporarily granted MFN status.

Every year, China's MFN status had to be renewed by the President and the possibility of

revoking was voted in Congress. Uncertainty ultimately resolved when China joined the World

Trade Organization (WTO) in December 2001 and the US Congress granted China Permanent

Normal Trade Relation (PNTR) status. Even though applied tariffs to China's imports to

the US were unchanged during this period, previous literature has found large implications of

China's access to PNTR on posterior China's export growth (Handley and Limao (2017)) and

US manufacturing employment (Pierce and Schott (2016)), attributing those to the elimination

of TPU. We abstract from the post uncertainty period and focus on the period between 1990

to 2001 to study how high frequency imports anticipated the annual renewal of China's MFN

status. This episode of TPU is particularly suitable to this purpose because the implied trade

cost change and the timing of the possible policy change are well established. According to the

framework of the previous section, anticipation will only depend on the probability importers

assign to the event of MFN status revoking. But before we calculate this probability in the

next section, we examine the existence of anticipatory dynamics during this episode. First

some background to this particular episode is provided. Then the empirical strategy built on a

generalized triple difference approach is described. The results indicate that US imports from

China responded significantly to the threat of reverting to NNTR rates and that imports peaked

in the immediacy of uncertainty resolution. However, economically the elasticities are only

modest.




                                              11
3.1       Background

   In the 1990s and until China's accession to the WTO in December 2001, US-China trade

relations were subject to substantial policy uncertainty (See Handley and Limao (2017), Pierce

and Schott (2016), Crowley et al. (2018)). With the eruption of the Cold War, the US applied

protectionist non-NTR tariff rates14 established by the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 to

non-market economies. With the Trade Act of 1974, the US would grant access to non-market

economies in the presence of (1) a bilateral commercial agreement and (2) the compliance of

freedom-of-emigration requirement. The US President was given authority to waive the second

requirement on annual renewable basis, subject to approval by the US Congress. A bilateral

commercial agreement in 1980 gave MFN status to China's exports to the US. During the 1980s

the waiver was renewed annually without any sign of objection in the Congress. But after the

events of the Tiananmen Square in 1989, concerns about human rights violations led the US

House of Representative to introduce and vote on the disapproval of the President's waiver

authority and legislation to revoke China's temporary NTR status. Indeed, the House voted on

this issue every year from 1990 until 2001. Although China's MFN status was never actually

revoked it came close in 1990, 1991 and 1992 when the House passed legislation to revoke it but

the Senate failed to sustain the vote.

   The President's waiver renewal expired annually every 3rd of July. During the entire period,

all presidents waived China's requirement to meet the freedom-of-emigration principle. Before

being elected, President Bill Clinton announced he would link China's MFN status to human

rights progress beginning in 1993, but went along with the waiver during his presidency. If

renewed, Congress would have had 60 calendar days to consider a disapproval vote on the

President's waiver authority. As can be seen in Figure 3 voting would generally take place

between the end of July and beginning of August. Since in all years except 1992 legislation to

revoke the President's waiver authority and legislate revoking of China's MFN status failed to
  14
       Normal Trade Relations (NTR) is the term used by the United States for the MFN principle.

                                                      12
be passed by the Senate, uncertainty resolved by August. In 1992 such legislation passed both

chambers of Congress. However, because legislation was vetoed by the President, uncertainty

only resolved by the end of September, when the Senate failed to override the President's veto

and China's MFN status remained in place. The annual nature of the waiver authority and the

timing of the voting allows us to fix the period of uncertainty resolution between the months of

July and September, included.



3.2     Identification of Anticipation to Annual Renewals

    In this section we describe our empirical strategy to identify anticipatory behavior in the face

of TPU. We follow a generalized triple difference approach, focusing on high frequency trade

flows before the resolution of TPU. Following the literature, we measure uncertainty as the gap

between the prevailing MFN rate and the threat tariff rate defined by Non-NTR (NNTR) rates,

also known as column 2 tariff rates15 . We obtain the NNTR gap at HS-8 product level from

Pierce and Schott (2016). Our analysis is at the industry level16 , and in particular we consider

6-digit NAICS industries, which provides us with a panel of 446 industries over a 12 year period

of TPU. Every year between 1990 and 2001 China's exporters to the US were facing the threat

of tariff rates being reverted to NNTR rates. We exploit variation in industries and time across

NNTR gaps to study how imports prior to the TPU resolution responded to this threat. We

                                                                   NNT R   MF N
denote the independent variable and our first difference as Xs,t  (s,t   - s,t  ), where s

indexes industries. As you can see in Figure 4, the NNTR gaps were sizeable throughout the

entire period, with the median gap being around 30 percentage points. Revoking the MFN status

would have meant facing four times larger tariffs for the median industry. There was little time

variation within industry gaps. Only between 1996 and 1997, due to lower MFN rates from the


  15
      Because those were defined in 1930 by the Smoot-Hawley Trade Act, it is argued that industry variation in
NNTR rates is exogenous to political economy motives in 1990.
   16
      Because we are interested in high frequency trade flows, lumpiness in trade flows becomes pervasive at HS-6
product level. Although most results hold at HS-6 level they are smaller in magnitude.

                                                       13
Uruguay Round, the gap increased. As you can see in Figure 5 there is substantial variation in

NNTR gaps across industries17 .

   We consider growth rates of trade flows at high frequencies in order to capture short run

dynamics of trade in the immediacy of TPU resolution. In our baseline, we fix the uncertainty to

be resolved by the beginning of October. We calculate the growth as the monthly average of trade

flows between July and September relative to a reference level of monthly trade flows, which we

define to be the average between February and April. Hence, our dependent variable is defined

as the log growth rate of exports from country j to country i of industry s in year t, considering

the monthly average between the month m1 and mres (September and July respectively) relative

to the reference average between the months m2 and m3 (Feburary and April respectively). We

                                     i,j,s,t      i,j,s,t
denote the dependent variable as ln(vm  1 :mres
                                                /vm  3 :m2
                                                           ). In section 3.4, we perform robustness tests

on the choice of combinations of m1 , m2 , m3 and mres . Trade flows are in CIF value of imports

for consumption.

   One of the main concerns when considering high frequency growth rates are within year

changes in aggregate variables, such changes in aggregate price indexes or demand (e.g. China's

New Year, Christmas, etc.). To address these we implement a second and third difference,

controlling for importer and exporter fixed effects. As a reference importer we consider a group

of 12 EU member countries18 (EU). China's exports to the EU were granted unconditional MFN

status in the 1980. As a reference exporter we consider a group of 135 countries that were granted

unconditional MFN status and no preferential rates19 by both the US and the EU. Hence, our

sample considers 4 different directions of trade flows, j  {CHN, RoW } to i  {U S, EU }.




  17
     Within industries, HS-8 NNTR gaps were highly correlated at industry level.
  18
     These are Austria, Belgium, France, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Spain, and Portugal.
  19
     See the list of countries in Table A.1 of the Appendix

                                                    14
   Our baseline estimation equation is the following:


                  i,j,s,t
              ln(vJul        i,j,s,t
                      :Sep /vF eb:Apr ) =           i ,j 1{i=i } 1{j =j } Xs,t + s + i,j,t + i,j,s,t     (5)
                                            i   j



   We introduce destination-source-year fixed effects for each direction of aggregate trade flows,

i,j,t , to control for the aforementioned concerns of confounding changes in aggregate variables.

Industry specific fixed effects at 2-digit NAICS, s , are introduced to control for seasonal effects

specific to industries. Our coefficient of interest is i ,j with i = U S, j = CHN , that is the

sensitivity of anticipatory import growth to NNTR spreads for the specific US imports from

China. If imports rise in anticipation of TPU resolution, as predicted by the model in section

2, then i ,j > 0 for i = U S, j = CHN . Moreover, since the other three trade flows were not

subject to the threat of reverting to NNTR rates, we expect i ,j  0 for i = U S or j = CHN .

Note that we set the NNTR gap, Xs,t , to be the same for all directions of trade flows. Since

only China's exports to the US were subject to the threat of non-renewal of its MFN status,

coefficients of i ,j on non-US-China trade flows should be interpreted as placebo tests20 .



3.3     Baseline Results

   In Table 2 we present our baseline results. In all specifications the anticipatory response of

US imports from China (row 1) to the resolution of uncertainty is positive and significant as

expected. However, its magnitude is rather small21 . In column one we don't control for changes

in aggregate variables nor industry specific seasonal effects. Results indicate that the response

of US imports from China responded significantly at the 5% significance level. In column two

we incorporate changes in aggregate variables and the coefficient of interest drops but is more

  20
      We could have set Xs,t = 0 for all non-US-China trade flows. This would not significantly affect the
coefficient on US-China trade flows. The importance of introducing non-US-China trade flows relies in the
inclusion of relevant fixed effects.
   21
      To provide a comparison, Khan and Khederlarian (2019) estimates the counterpart to this anticipatory
elasticity during the NAFTA phaseouts (when the tariff change was certain to take place) to be around 4 to 6,
or two thirds of their long run trade elasticities

                                                        15
precise. Column three is the result of estimating equation (5) and our baseline estimate. The

anticipatory elasticity during the entire period of TPU is 0.40. An industry that faced the median

NNTR threat of 30pp on average responded to the threat by increasing its imports before the

resolution of uncertainty by 12% with respect to the baseline level of imports. Importantly,

we find that for the other 3 directions of trade there is no significant response of trade flows

to the NNTR gap, consistent with these trade flows not being subject to the uncertainty. The

coefficients are insignificant and their magnitude is well below that of US imports from China.

In column four we group non-US-China trade flows into one group.

   In Figure 6 we report the results of estimating equation 5 with different values of mres i.e.

running 12 regressions with equating mres to each month of the year, that is we estimate


                 i,j,s,t
             ln(vm  res -2:mres
                                  i,j,s,t
                                /vm  res -7:mres -5
                                                    )=                 m ,i ,j 1{mres =m } 1{i=i } 1{j =j } Xs,t   (6)
                                                         m    i    j


                                                         + s + i,j,t + i,j,s,t



   for mres = 1, 2, .., 12. As you can see, the peak response in the growth rate of imports for US

imports from China is in September22 and is significantly above zero between July and October.

After the uncertainty resolution, imports drop significantly, reaching their trough in March and

April. In the model described above, the drop in imports is explained by the fact that importers

have amassed sufficient inventories in the run up tp the uncertainty resolution. It is notorious

that almost throughout the entire year imports from China to the US responded significantly

to the threat of facing the NNTR gap after September. The growth rate of non-US-China trade

flows is never significantly different from zero, as one would expect to be the case if those trade

flows are unresponsive to the NNTR threat faced by China.




  22
       This is why we establish September as our baseline month of uncertainty resolution.

                                                              16
3.4    Robustness

   The baseline results are robust to several potential issues which we discuss below.

   Different Time Horizons. - In columns two to four of Table 3 we vary the time horizons

considered in the calculation of the short run growth rates of imports. In column two we

consider the import peak before the uncertainty resolution to be between June and August and

fix the baseline period between January and March. In column three we consider the import

peak before the uncertainty resolution to be between June and September and include all 4

months before June in the calculation of the reference import level, i.e. the average between

February and May. In column four we consider the peak to be between June and September

again but use the average between January and April. The main result is unchanged. Only

US imports from China respond significantly to the NNTR gap. The size of the coefficients is

slightly smaller than our baseline. This suggests that, as predicted by the model, import growth

was more concentrated in a few months.

   Different Industry Fixed Effects. - In the first column of Table 3 we apply industry fixed

effects at the 4-digit NAICS level to allow for more control over seasonal effects at the cost of

variation in the identification of the effect of the NNTR gap on import growth. The magnitude

of the coefficient on US imports from China falls slightly from to 0.4 to 0.3 and not surprisingly

falls in its estimation precision. All other coefficients remain insignificant.

   Quantities and Unit Values. - In column five and six of Table 3 we measure the short

run response of quantities and unit values to the tariff threat. On the one hand, the quantity

response is positive and significant and its size exceeds the value response, although it is less

precisely estimated. In turn, there is no significant response in unit values. This suggests that

anticipation was taking place in terms of goods and not because of pricing dynamics.

   More Placebos: Post-WTO & Taiwan - In column seven of Table 3 we extend the sample

period from 1990 to 2009 and set the NNTR Gap after 2001 to be the same as in 2001. On



                                                 17
top of the source-destination interactions, we interact the NNTR gap with a dummy variable

for whether the period corresponds to pre- or post-WTO accession year. We expect the short

run import growth not to persist after China's WTO accession, given that it granted China

permanent NTR status. In effect, in row 5 we report that after China's accession is insignificant

and negligible in size. Finally, in column eight we perform another placebo test and check

whether Taiwan's exports to the US displayed a similar response to the NNTR gap. Taiwan

was not subject to the annual renewal of their MFN status and hence its exports to the US are

not expected to respond to the NNTR gap. We estimate our baseline estimation equation but

instead china define the source dummy on Taiwan. We find that indeed Taiwan's exports to the

US did not respond significantly to the tariff threat.

   Others. - We also exclude those industries with more than 50% of their HS-8 goods affected

by the Multifiber Arrangement and winsorize the import growth rates at at their 5% (95%)

percentile level. Results are unchanged.



3.5     Anticipation and Storability

   Before we estimate the model implied probability of MFN access withdrawal, we investigate

the relationship between storability of a good and anticipation dynamics. Although we do not

observe inventory holdings at the desired level of disaggregation, we can infer from the lumpiness

with which a good is traded how storable it is. As in Khan and Khederlarian (2019) we use the

HH index of concentration of annual imports to proxy storability. In that sense, and consistent

with the model of 2 goods that are more storable will display more infrequent orders and hence

an HH index close to unity. To calculate the HH index, we consider goods, indexed by g , at

HS-6 level exported from China to the US during the second year they enter our sample and
                                                      12
calculate their HH index23 , that is HHg =            m=1 (vg,m /    vg )2  [1/12, 1]. We then take the

   23
      We consider RoW trade flows instead of China's trade flows to preclude contamination of the HH index with
the endogenous lumpiness stemming from the TPU studied. We consider the second year of their appearence in
the sample to rule out any partial-year effects.

                                                      18
mean over HHg to calculate the HH index at 6-digit NAICS level. To elicit whether anticipatory

dynamics are stronger for industries characterized by more storable (lumpier) goods we interact

our independent variable with an indicator variable that is one if the industries' HH index is above

the median. Results are presented in Table 4. Indeed, for goods above the median HH index

the coefficient of interest is around 50% larger than in for goods with below median lumpiness.

Moreover, these industries are driving the aggregate anticipatory response. We consider this an

evidence of more storable goods driving our baseline results which is in line with the model in

Section 2.




4     TPU Estimation: Likelihood of MFN Revocation

    After having identified anticipatory import growth in the months before China's MFN status

was under the risk of being revoked, we use the structure of the model described in section 2

to estimate the likelihood with which importers expected the revocation to take place. In this

particular episode, two of the three uncertainty components are observed: (1) the timing of

the resolution, and (2) the size of the tariff threat, namely the NNTR gap. By matching the

import growth driven by anticipatory dynamics, and imposing (1) and (2) we can obtain the

probability importers were assigning to the MFN access being revoked. For an incumbent firm,

once the Congress had voted over the MFN status renewal, the risk of revoking MFN status

was eliminated for the next 12 months. In contrast with other measures of the probability of

this event, our methodology exploits within-year variation of the risk of revocation. This is

appealing because it overcomes concerns of confounding long run factors driving trade patterns.

It generates a time-varying path of the probability of non-renewal that can then be used as

inputs to the models with export decision. We first show that the probability of revocation

was relatively small. We then provide an estimate of the probability of this event for each

year between 1990 and 2002. Finally, we disentangle the role of uncertainty from the expected


                                                19
downside risk in the anticipatory response.



4.1     Model Calibration

    The magnitude of the anticipatory import growth displayed in the model in section 2 depends

on the trade-off between (1) saving on the future variable cost of goods mres +1 /mres in case

revocation occurs and (2) the cost incurred while expediting the purchase order, namely f, s , r.

The details of the calibration are displayed in Table A.5. We calibrate the model to the monthly

frequency by setting (1+ r)-1 = 0.97(1/12) , yielding a mean annual interest rate of 3%. We set the

fixed ordering cost, f, at the value of 0.095 borrowed from AKM. We calibrate industry-specific

deprecation rates, s , to match each industry's concentration of annual US imports from the rest

of the world during the 1990s24 . Higher fixed cost and lower depreciation rates are associated with

more infrequent purchases and hence with higher HH indexes. In that sense, goods with lower

rates of depreciation are more storable, providing stronger incentives to stockpile in anticipation

of a possible tariff increase. We set the elasticity of substitution equal to 4. The elasticity of

substitution does not significantly impact the results, since the dynamics before the uncertainty

resolution are determined the trade-off between possible tariff increase and the ordering costs.



4.2     Baseline Result

    To obtain the probability with which importers expected the China's MFN status to be

revoked we simulate the model described in section 2. In particular, we simulate it separately25

for each industry, s, considered in the empirical analysis of section 3. We assume all industries

assigned a common probability  to China's MFN status revocation. In each simulation, all firms

                                                                                          ^s,
face a tariff increase of the size of the industry's mean NNTR gap between 1990 and 2001, X
  24
      We first calculate the HH index for each HS10 product in the second year it appears in our sample. Then
we take the mean for each NAICS industry. We use imports from the rest of the world for HH indexes to capture
the nature of the good while ruling out any confounding effects of TPU on our lumpiness measure.
   25
      Effectively we assume there are no general equilibrium effects through movements of aggregate price indexes
and substitution across industries. We believe that at relatively high frequency this assumption is a reasonable
simplification.

                                                       20
that occurs after 12 months with probability  . From the simulations, we generate a dataset with

the within-year industry-level import growth rates before the uncertainty resolution and estimate

the anticipatory import response to the tariff threat as in the empirical section. We measure

                                                                   s               s
import growth as in our baseline estimation equation, that is, ln(vm res -2:mres
                                                                                 /vm res -5:mres -7
                                                                                                    ),

where mres + 1 is the period in which uncertainty is resolved. We estimate the model analog of

 26 from estimation equation 5 in the empirical section using the following equation27 :



                               s               s                    sim       sim
                           ln(vm res -2:mres
                                             /vm res -5:mres -7
                                                                ) = 1   X s + 2   s +  s                        (7)



                                                          sim
   We repeat this procedure while varying  until we match 1   to ^ estimated in the empirical

analysis of section 3. In particular we target ^ = 0.4 from our baseline estimation equation,

                                 sim
reported in column 3 of Table 2. 2   is the simulation counterpart to the industry fixed effects

in our empirical exercise and prevents the joint distribution of s and Xs from clouding the

probability estimate. The estimated probability ^ that matches the coefficient on spread from

the model to the one from the empirical analysis is 5.5%. This implies an expected probability

of China's MFN status revocation that is significantly lower than the one obtained by Handley

and Limao (2017). In the next subsection we estimate a probability of revocation for each year

between 1990 and 2001.



4.3       Annual Probabilities

   The implied probability above reflects the average probability assigned to the MFN status

withdrawal over the entire period. However, uncertainty varied across the years, with the early

1990's presumably being the most uncertain. Our empirical strategy allows us to study antic-

ipatory behavior in every single year of this period. We do so by interacting the NNTR gap

with an indicator variable for every year and then applying the estimation approach from above
  26
       For this section, let us simplify the notation by using ^=  ^i ,j where i = U S, j = CHN
  27
       We don't need to control for seasonalities nor aggregate fixed effects since these are absent in the model.

                                                         21
to the year-specific estimates of ^ to back out the year-specific ^ . The underlying assumption

here is that the distribution over industries with respect to storability does not change over this

decade which allows us to use the same calibration of s for each year. More specifically, we run


                                               2009
                 i,j,s,t
             ln(vJul        i,j,s,t
                     :Sep /vF eb:Apr )   =                      year,i ,j 1{t=year} 1{i=i } 1{j =j } Xs,t   (8)
                                             year=1990 i   j


                                             + s + i,j + i,j,s,t



   The estimates from (8) show variation in the annual probability of non-renewal over the

decade of 1990's. Table 5 contains the annual implied probabilities. The annual coefficients for

year,i ,j are taken from Table A.3. There are three major takeaways that emerge from the table.

First, in ten out of twelve years we find that there was a statistically significant estimate of the

probability of China losing its MFN status. Second, the spikes in the probability estimates are

in line with the contemporaneous political developments. For instance, the probability estimates

are significantly high in 1991 and 1992, which were the only years in which the House passed

bills (later vetoed by the President) that would have revoked China's MFN status. Moreover,

President Clinton announced to link China's MFN status to human rights conditions in 1994,

which is the year in which we obtain the highest probability of non-renewal of around 10%. Also,

as reflected in Figure 7, our measure of TPU is not at odds with the measure of newspaper article

counts by Pierce and Schott (2016) although we do find a more stable probability than suggested

by their measure. Third, there is some variation in the estimated ^ over the years. Among the

years with statistically significant probability, the chances of revoking China's MFN access ranges

from 1.5% to 10%. Therefore, since our approach is based on within-year movements in imports,

it is able to capture the time varying feature of uncertainty.

   Further, we use our estimated annual probabilities to infer the time-varying likelihood of

China maintaining MFN status for the years until 2001 when the process of annual renewal



                                                           22
ended with China's WTO accession. We can infer this likelihood by compounding our estimated

annual probability of not revoking China's MFN status in the years prior to 2001. Figure 8

contains the result of this calculation. We see that, because of the low estimated ^ during this

period, the probability in 1990 of China enjoying MFN benefits during the uncertain period

was considerably high at around 50%. This probability grows as China MFN status is renewed

annually until its WTO accession. Next, we turn to the effect of pure uncertainty by looking at

the certainty equivalent of the uncertain tariff increase.



4.4       Role of Pure Uncertainty

   In this section we separate the effects of change in expected tariffs from the effects of uncer-

tainty about the change. Theoretically, the real options literature has suggested that uncertainty

about future states of the world acts as a deterrent to irreversible investments28 . Irreversibility

of investments in such models necessitates a large gap between expected benefits and costs to

incentivize entry which creates action and inaction regions within the state space. However, the

importance of pure uncertainty depends on the sensitivity of these cutoffs and the distribution

of firms around it both of which make the role of pure uncertainty dependent on the calibration

and the nature of the experiment.

   Since the real options models have a similar stopping time formulation as our inventory

model, we investigate the role of pure uncertainty by simulating the certainty equivalent of the

expected tariff change. Specifically, we give industry s a change in tariffs equal to ^ Xst with

certainty and estimate equation (5) with the simulated data. For a certain change of ^ Xst , ^ is

0.53. This is higher than the estimate of 0.4 when the tariffs are expected to increase by Xst with

a probability of ^ . Therefore, when we keep the expected increase in tariffs the same, we find

that the uncertainty depresses anticipatory import growth by 13pp on average. The negative

effect of uncertainty is in line with the wait-and-see effect widely reported in the literature. It
  28
       See Bernanke (1983), Dixit (1989), Pindyck (1991) and more recently Kellogg (2014)

                                                      23
arises because there is a chance of tariffs staying at the same level, in which case paying fixed

ordering costs in anticipation will not be worthwhile.

     To illustrate the mechanism, consider the ordering cutoffs in the uncertain and certain case

in Figure 929 . The top-left region is the ordering region i.e. firms order if they have fewer goods

in inventories or higher demand shock. The ordering region in the uncertain case is smaller than

the inaction region with the same expected but certain tariff change. The region between the two

curves is the inaction region due to pure uncertainty. In this example, the expected tariff change

is much larger than the ones face by imports from China during 1990's where the maximum

expected tariff increase was around 8%30 . This explains the minor difference in the coefficient

of ^ of the certainty equivalent. Nevertheless, in the next section we use model simulations to

study the role of pure uncertainty in this setup and its effect on the response to expected tariff

change.




5        Pure Uncertainty in Inventory Models

     In this section we simulate the model described in Section 2 to explore the role of pure

uncertainty in a more general setting. By considering multiple spreads around different expected

tariff changes, two features of the anticipatory response to possible tariff hikes are illustrated.

In first place, the anticipatory trade surge is decreasing over the expected tariffs, that is, for

larger expected tariff increases, anticipatory rises in imports flatten out. Secondly, the variance

or uncertainty component becomes relatively more important in dampening the anticipatory

trade surge for larger expected tariff hikes. Because the implied probabilities (expected tariff

hikes) we found in 4.4 were low, the findings in this section explain why uncertainty contributed

relatively little in driving the anticipatory rise to the NNTR threat. Moreover, they illustrate

    29
      For demonstration purpose, Figure 9 plots the ordering cutoffs when the tariff change is 40% in expectation.
The solid blue line shows cutoffs when tariffs are scheduled to rise by 40% with certainty. Dashed red line plots
the case when with equal chance tariffs stay the same or increase by 80%.
   30
      ^ × maxs {Xs,t } = 10% × 80.
      

                                                       24
that uncertainty becomes more operative when tariff threats are large.

    In all simulations, the parameter values are held constant and the same as in Table 1, with

exception of the expected tariff change. For the rest of the section, the combination of future

tariff and its probability is indexed by n and tilde denotes the simulation counterpart of the data

variables in Section 3. We consider multiple expected tariff increases ranging from 1pp to 20pp

by varying the probabilities,                            ~ n , in order to have multiple spreads
                              ~n and the tariff changes, X

around the same expected change. For example, an expected tariff increase of 10pp can occur

through a 25% chance of a 40pp increase or through a 50% chance of 20pp increase. We then

analyze the anticipatory response through different estimation specifications. The anticipatory

growth for each simulation is plotted in Figure 10. As expected, the response is non-linear and

decreasing over    ~ n . Moreover, conditional on an expected tariff change, the anticipatory rise
                ~n X

in imports is increasing in the probability of the change. This is the trade dampening effect of

uncertainty.

    We formalize these findings31 through different estimation specification that disentangle the

role of the first, E(X
                     ~n) =    ~ n , and second moment32 , V ar(X
                           ~n X                                ~n) = ~n (1 -     ~n
                                                                             ~n )X 2
                                                                                     , of the tariff

hike. Results are presented in Table 5. In all regression the left hand side variable is the anticipa-

                                                                       n                n
tory import growth before the resolution of uncertainty, measured as v
                                                                     ~m  res -2:mres
                                                                                     /v
                                                                                      ~m  res -7:mres -5
                                                                                                         ,

as above. In the first and third column, we estimate the linear relationship between the antici-

pation and the expected tariff change. As expected the relationship is positive. This is the trade

boosting effect of anticipation. Moreover, it explains the majority of the variation as can be

seen in the R2 . In column 4 we include the square of the expected tariff change. The negative

coefficient on the square term indicates that the trade boom is decreasing in the expected tariff

change. Further, the R2 increases and explains 93% of the variation, highlighting the importance

  31
      We focus on simulations of a quantitative version of the model rather than on a simplified analytical model
to enhance the understanding of the main results of the paper, namely the probability of non-renewal of China's
NTR status.
   32
      The formula for variance is determined by considering the tariff change as a bernouli process where the only
two outcomes are a tariff staying zero with probability (1 -  ~i ) or increasing to Xs with probability ~s .

                                                       25
of the first moment in explaining the anticipatory response.

    In column two and five we introduce the pure uncertainty or variance term into the estimation.

In both cases the coefficient on the variance is negative. This is the trade dampening effect. In

column 2, we standardize all variables for ease of interpretation. The effect of the first moment

is 3.5 times larger than that of the second moment. In column 5, including the first moment, the

non-linear term and the variance, all the variation in the anticipatory trade response is captured.

Finally, in column six we interact the expected tariff change with the variance to show that as

the tariff change increases the variance strongly dampens the anticipatory rise in trade. In

fact, the coefficient on the variance term itself is now insignificant and variance only matters

through its interaction with the expected tariff change. The coefficient is negative indicating

that conditional on a variance, the trade dampening effect is stronger for higher expected tariff

changes.

    Through the lens of an (s,s) inventory model, in section 4 we found that US importers

assigned a relatively low probability to the non-renewal of China's MFN status. In this section,

we demonstrated that in this model and for the relevant expected tariff change uncertainty

played a minor role in importers' behavior and that anticipation was close to linear. However,

when expected tariff changes become large stockpiling effects flatten out and uncertainty strongly

depresses anticipatory stockpiling.




6     Effect on Annual Trade Flows

    In this section, we explore the effect of within-year anticipatory stockpiling on annual trade

flows. The stockpiling in anticipation of a possible rise in trade barriers implies extra holding

and depreciation costs that depress trade. We find significantly negative effects of uncertainty

on imports across industries. These effects are larger during the early years of 1990s when

the probability of revoking MFN status was higher. We then explore the mechanism of these


                                                26
negative effects by specifically looking at the effect of uncertainty operating through the lumpi-

ness of trade. Comparison with the effects found in the simulations from Section 4 shows that

the inventory model matches the effect of spreads operating through this channel in the data.

Moreover, the results suggest that the costs associated with anticipatory stockpiling account

for around 50% of the cross-sectional trade reduction caused by the NNTR threat during the

pre-WTO period.



6.1       Reduced-Form Effect

   Since the resolution of uncertainty occurs in the middle of the year, annual trade flows

include the anticipatory rise as well as the ensuing fall after the resolution. In this section

we consider the impact of uncertainty on the annual level of trade. The dampening effects of

the NNTR threat have been widely studied previously (Pierce and Schott (2016), Handley and

Limao (2017), Crowley et al. (2018)). We follow a standard approach but focus on the negative

impact in the pre-WTO period.

   We implement a generalized difference-in-difference approach to isolate the effect of spreads

on the level of annual imports during the period preceeding China's accession to the WTO.

This approach is similar to the one used by Pierce and Schott (2016). In contrast with Pierce

and Schott (2016) we incorporate a reference importer to overcome US specific fixed effects and

aggregate at 6-digit NAICS level33 . Our choices of the reference importer and exporter group

are the same as in section 3. Again, the identification strategy is based on the cross-sectional

effect of NNTR spreads. Since we are interested in the treatment effect of spreads on US-China

trade, the NNTR spreads, Si,j,s,t , take a value of zero for the non-US-China trade flows. We run

the following specification,



                   ln(v i,j,s,t ) = 0 Si,j,s,t + 1 1{wto=0} Si,j,s,t + i,s,t + j,s + i,j,t + i,j,s,t     (9)

  33
       Appendix A contains the comparison of our approach to the one used by Pierce and Schott (2016).

                                                         27
    where v i,j,s,t is i's annual imports from j of industry s in year t where i  {U S, EU } and

j  {China, RoW }. i,s,t and j,s denote the destination-industry-year and source-industry

fixed effects to capture the demand and supply determinants of imports34 . In addition to these,

source-destination-year fixed effects, given by i,j,t , are added to prevent contamination from the

pair-specific (pre-)trends as shown in Figure A.2. We set SU S,CHN,j,t = SU S,CHN,j,2001 t  2002

and interact the NNTR spreads with an indicator variable for the period before China's accession

to WTO. 0 is the effect of spreads after China joined the WTO. Our object of interest is 1 which

is the difference-in-difference effect of uncertainty on annual trade flows during the treatment

period.

    We find negative significant effects of uncertainty on annual trade flows. Results from (9) are

presented in Table 7. First column contains result without any fixed effects and shows a high

negative estimate of 1 . We control for time-invariant demand factors in the second column and

find a negative significant coefficient of -0.56 on annual imports. Our baseline specification is

reported in the third column where we control for time-varying industry-specific demand term.

We find a negative significant coefficient of -0.8235 . Also the estimate for 0 falls significantly

after the inclusion of the fixed effects. This estimate of 1 translates into 18% lower annual US

imports from China as we move from 25th percentile (16pp) industry to a 75th percentile (38pp)

industry.

    We next assess how the negative uncertainty effect evolved as China neared its accession to

the WTO. By augmenting the previous specification with year indicator variables instead of the

post-WTO indicator, year specific coefficients on the difference-in-difference term are obtained




  34
      These high-dimensional fixed effects capture the importer- and exporter-specific aggregate terms from a
standard armington setup. More precisely, the destination-industry-year fixed effects capture the time-varying
industry demand effect and the source-industry fixed effects account for a supplier's comparative advantage in a
sector.
   35
      In accordance with the difference-in-difference approach, when we replace the pre-WTO indicator variable
with post-WTO variable, we get the same coefficient with a positive sign.

                                                      28
from estimating,


                                                    2006
               ln(v   i,j,s,t
                                ) = 0 Si,j,s,t +            t 1{y=t} Si,j,s,t + i,s,t + j,s + i,j,t + i,j,s,t   (10)
                                                   t=1990



    The resulting estimates of {t } are plotted with 1 standard error bands in Figure 11 where

the dashed red line denotes the first year after China joined the WTO. Table A.4 contains the

point estimates from (10). The strongest response of t is obtained during the early years of

1990's when the probability of revocation of China's MFN status found Section 4.3 was the

highest. Moreover, {t } declines as China came closer to its WTO accession, after which the

point estimate becomes insignificant.



6.2     Trade Dampening Effect of Stockpiling

    Having found robust negative effect of uncertainty on the cross-sectional level of trade flows,

we now examine the mechanism behind it. In particular, we test whether anticipatory stockpiling

and de-stocking due to the within year changes in uncertainty lead trade flows to decline. In the

model described in section 2, uncertainty lead firms to concentrate their purchases in the months

before was uncertainty resolved, thereby deviating from the optimal inventory holding path. We

show that in the model the resulting lumpiness leads to a dampening of annual purchases36 . We

find that in the data, increased lumpiness due to the NNTR threat lead to similar effects on

annual trade flows.

    Empirically annual imports and trade lumpiness are jointly determined creating a simul-

taneity bias in a simple OLS specification. To overcome this, we use a two stage least squares

(TSLS) method to quantify the causal effect of spread that operates only through the HH index.

Following the specification in (9), we replace the NNTR spreads with the HH index. Further,



   36
      This is because holding costs go up and ultimately this leads to higher relative prices of goods affected by
the NNTR threat.

                                                                  29
the HH index is instrumented using the NNTR spreads. We use the following specification,



                      ln(v i,j,s,t ) =0
                                      HH                  HH
                                         ln(HHi,j,s,t ) + 1  1{wto=0} ln(HHi,j,s,t )        (11)

                                   + i,s,t + j,s + i,j,t + i,j,s,t

                                   HH
                   ln(HHi,j,s,t ) =0             HH
                                      Si,j,s,t + 1  1{wto=0} Si,j,s,t + s + t               (12)



   where HHi,j,s,t is the source-destination-industry-year specific lumpiness of imports. We use

(12) as the first stage regression which captures the period-specific effects of spreads on the

lumpiness of trade after controling for the industry determinants and time trends. Next, we

apply the predicted HH index to (11) and consider how it affects the volume of trade. Therefore

HH
1  is the effect of spreads on annual imports that operates through our proposed mechanism.

   The results indicate a strong negative effect of NNTR spread on imports through its effect

on the lumpiness of trade. Table 8 reports the result of TSLS regression. The result of the first

stage is reported in the third column. As predicted by the model, the NNTR threat caused a

strong rise in lumpiness of annual imports some of which also holds in the post-WTO period.

The first column contains the result of a simple OLS regression of (11) where the effect of HH

index in the pre-WTO period is positive. However, using the TSLS approach in the second

column, we find significant negative effect of lumpiness on annual imports during the uncertain

period.

   Next, we compare the effect in the data to the model simulations from Section 4. We run

the TSLS regression from (11) on the simulated data. Since the steady state HH index was

calibrated using the depreciation rate, we also control for the depreciation rate of the industry

in our regressions. Results, presented in Table 9, indicate a similar effect of spreads on the

import flows through the lumpiness of trade. The coefficient from the model is not significantly

different from the coefficient found in the data.

   Using the results from our TSLS estimates, we can quantify the contribution of increased

                                                  30
inventory holding costs to the aggregate dampening effect of the NNTR threat. We use the point

estimates from Tables 7 and 8 and look at the effect of moving to an industry with a 1pp higher

NNTR spread. Plugging this increase into the third and then second column of Table 8 suggests

a reduction of imports of around 0.41%37 . This back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that

the negative effect of spreads operating through increased lumpiness of trade flows is around

50% of the total cross-sectional negative effect.




7         Conclusion

     The aim of this paper is threefold. First, we show that uncertain future changes in tariffs

have sizeable effects on trade flows in the interval before and after these proposed policy changes

even when no change in tariff is realized. Second, we show how to use these trade dynamics

through the lens of a standard (s,s) inventory model to identify the probability distribution of

future trade policy. Third, we demonstrate that these frictions give rise to more costly inventory

holdings that can account for a sizeable portion of the cross-sectional dampening of trade flows.

     China's annual US NTR renewal provides the ideal setting to achieve these aims. In models

with storable goods and fixed ordering costs, incumbent importers anticipate uncertain future

trade policy changes by increasing their purchases before a possible policy change. Given two

possible policy outcomes, the magnitude of anticipatory dynamics depend on three components

of uncertainty, (1) the size of the policy change, (2) its probability, and (3) the amount of time

until the uncertainty resolution. The features of China NTR fixes the timing and size of the

policy change good-by-good and and allows us to use the model to estimate the probability of the

policy change. We find a lower mean probability of non-renewal than elsewhere but year-to-year

variations that match up well with some other qualitative measures.

     We also use the model to distinguish between the role of pure uncertainty and the level-effect


    37
         Given by 0.28 × -1.49.

                                                 31
of the expected tariff change. Even though the "wait-and-see" effect due to pure risk is present in

the (s,s) model, its relative contribution is shown to be quite small relative to the first moment

of the policy change.

   A benefit and limitation of our approach to identify the path of future trade policy is that

it hinges on a relatively short-run dynamic decision on the timing of purchases. As the frictions

from trade and inventory costs lead importers to hold 3-4 months of imported inventories, future

trade policy outside this window has almost no effect on ordering behaviour. Thus our approach

can be applied to numerous other episodes to estimate the near term path of policy. For instance

import decisions soon after the Trump election can help identify the expected tariff in 2017.

   To learn about the longer-run path of trade policy it will be useful to consider more durable

investments such as exporting or FDI as in Alessandria and Mix (2018). Ruhl and Willis (2017)

find that the expected duration of exporting of a new exporter is only about three years compared

to 9 years for a continuing exporter and so perhaps by leveraging these different horizons we can

recover a longer path of future trade policy. Of course, these alternative approaches must remain

consistent with the information recovered using the approach here. Indeed, our estimates can

be used as inputs into models with alternative margins that could be affected by TPU.

   Finally, our results provide a mechanism to explain why trade has held up fine in advance of

a future policy change such as Brexit. Likewise, trade may not fall in the presence of an increase

in tariffs provided they are expected to escalate further as in the case of US-China trade war of

2018-19. Our results suggest that trade could fall off sharply following a possible increase in tariffs

that is unrealized owing to an inventory overhang, although general equilibrium considerations

could mitigate this effect. Indeed, revisiting these findings in a general equilibrium framework

would be useful to explore the effects on trade policy uncertainty on the aggregate economy.




                                                  32
References
Alessandria, George and Carter Mix, "Trade Policy is Real News: An Analysis of Past,
 Present, and Future Trade Costs," 2018.

   and Horag Choi, "Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net Export Dynamics?," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122(1), 289­336.

  , Joseph Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan, "The Great Trade Collapse of 2008-09: An
  Inventory Adjustment?," IMF Economic Review, 2010, 58, 254­294.

  , , and , "Inventories, lumpy trade, and large devaluations," American Economic Review,
  2010, 100(5), 2304­2339.

Baker, Scott, Lorenz Keung, and Stephanie Johnson, "Shopping for Lower Sales Tax
 Rates," 2018.

Baldwin, Richard, "Hysteresis in Trade," MIT mimeo prepared for 1986 NBER Summer
 Institute, April 1986, 1986.

   and Paul Krugman, "Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate Shocks," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1989, 104 (4), 635­654.

Bekes, Gabor, Lionel Fontagne, Balazs Murakozy, and Vincent Vicard, "Shipment Fre-
 quency of exporters and demand uncertainty: An inventory management approach," Review
 of World Economics, 2017, 153, 779­807.

Bernanke, Ben S., "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment," Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 1983, 98(1), 85­106.

Blum, Bernardo, Sebastian Claro, Kunal Dasgupta, and Ignatius Horstmann, "In-
  ventory Management, Product Quality, and Cross-Country Income Differences," American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2019, 11(1).

Caldara, Dario, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Andrea Prestipino, and Andrea
 Raffo, "The Economic Effects of Trade Policy Uncertainty," 2019.

Charnavoki, Valery, "Retail Sales of Durable Goods, Inventories and Imports after Large
 Devaluations," 2017.

Crowley, Meredith, Ning Meng, and Huasheng Song, "Tariff scares: Trade policy uncer-
 tainty and foreign market entry by Chinese firms," Journal of International Economics, 2018,
 114, 96­115.

Dixit, Avinash, "Entry and Exit Decisions under Uncertainty," Journal of Political Economy,
 1989, 97(3), 620­38.

Feng, Ling, Zhiyuan Li, and Deborah Swenson, "Trade Policy Uncertainty and Exports:
  Evidence from China's WTO Accession," Journal of International Economics, 2017, 106,
  20­36.

Graziano, Alejandro, Kyle Handley, and Nuno Limao, "Brexit uncertainty and trade
 disintegration," NBER WP, 2018, 25334.

Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limao, "Trade Investment under Policy Uncertainty: Theory and
 Firm Evidence," American Economic Journal: Policy, 2014.

                                             33
   and , "Policy uncertainty, trade, and welfare: Theory and evidence for China and the
  United States," American Economic Review, 2017, 107(9), 2731­2783.

Hummels, David and Georg Schaur, "Time as a Trade Barrier," American Economic Re-
 view, 2013, 103(7), 2935­2959.

Kellogg, Ryan, "The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment: Evidence from Texas Oil Drilling,"
 American Economic Review, 2014, 104(6), 1698­1734.

Khan, Shafaat Y. and Armen Khederlarian, "How Trade Responds to Anticipated Tariff
 Changes: Evidence from NAFTA," Working Paper, 2019.

Kropf, Andreas and Philip Saure, "Fixed Cost per Shipment," Journal of International
 Economics, 2014, 92, 166­184.

Pierce, Justin and Peter Schott, "The surprisingly swift decline of US manufacturing em-
  ployment," American Economic Journal, 2016, 106(7), 1632­1662.

Pindyck, Robert S., "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment," Journal of Economic Lit-
  erature, 1991, 29(3), 1110­48.

Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout, "The Decision to Export in Colombia: An
 Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs," American Economic Review, 1997, 87(4), 545­
 64.

Ruhl, Kim, "Trade dynamics under policy uncertainty," American Journal of Agricultural
 Economics: Papers and Proceedings, 2011, 93 (2), 450­456.

Ruhl, Kim J. and Jonathan L. Willis, "New Exporter Dynamics," International Economic
 Review, 2017, 58 (3), 703­726.

Steinberg, Joseph, "Brexit and the macroeconomic impact of trade policy uncertainty," Jour-
  nal of International Economics, 2019, 117, 175­195.




                                            34
                    Table 1: Moments and Parameters for Section 2

Parameter                                      Value                Source
 (1 + r)-1   Annual Discounting factor          0.97            St. Louis Fed
             Elasticity of Substitution          4                Literature
     f       Fixed Cost Ordering               0.095           Match HH index
     µ       Delivery lag                      1 pd                 AKM
             Std Dev of Taste Shocks            0.8                 AKM
             Annual Depreciation Rate          30%                  AKM
Moments
             HH Index                         0.32      75th pctile - Imports from China
             Median Inventory-Sales       3.64 months
             Mean(Fixed Cost/Revenue)        26.34%




                                          35
Table 2: Baseline - Anticipation to Resolution of Uncertainty over China's MFN Status
             i,j,t,s    i,j,t,s
         ln(vJul :Sep /vF eb:Apr )                 (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)

         1{U S } × 1{CHN } × Xt,s                0.83       0.56 0.40
                                                 (0.25)     (0.16) (0.06)

         1{EU } × 1{RoW } × Xt,s                  0.04       0.29        0.11
                                                 (0.23)     (0.21)      (0.05)

         1{U S } × 1{RoW } × Xt,s                 0.18       0.33        0.16
                                                 (0.21)     (0.31)      (0.12)

         1{EU } × 1{CHN } × Xt,s                  0.45       0.21        0.04
                                                 (0.24)     (0.23)      (0.09)

         1{U S,CHN } × Xt,s                                                        0.37
                                                                                   (0.06)

         1{=U S   or =CHN }   × Xt,s                                                 0.10
                                                                                    (0.06)
         2-Digit NAICS FE                           No        No
         Destination-Source-Year FE                 No
         Observations                             18743     18743       18743       18743
         Adjusted R2                               0.03      0.04        0.05        0.04
 Note: The dependent variable is the log growth rate in monthly CIF value of imports before the
 resolution of uncertainty. In the baseline this is the growth rate from the average between September
 and July, with respect to the baseline period, set to be the monthly average between February and
 April. Sample period is from 1990 until 2001. Columns (3) to is the result of estimating our
 baseline estimation equation 5. Columns one and two don't include full controls and column 4
 groups non-US-China trade flows into one group. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at
 2-digit NAICS industry level, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                  36
                                   Table 3: Robustness - Anticipation to Resolution of Uncertainty over China's MFN Status
                                                       i,j,t,z         i,j,t,z            i,j,t,z         i,j,t,z
                                                   ln(vJul :Sep )- ln(vJun:Aug )- ln(vJun:Sep )- ln(vJun:Sep )-                          Unit      Post
                     i,j,t,z    i,j,t,z                 i,j,t,z         i,j,t,z            i,j,t,z          i,j,t,z
     Baseline:   ln(vJul :Sep /vF eb:Apr )          ln(vF eb:Apr )  ln(vJan   :M ar ) ln(vF  eb:M ay ) ln(vJan   :Apr ) Quantities      Values     WTO       Taiwan

     1{EU } × 1{RoW } × Xt,s                           -0.01             -0.10            0.08               0.00            0.12         0.00
                                                      (0.11)            (0.10)            (0.04)            (0.07)          (0.06)       (0.06)

     1{U S } × 1{RoW } × Xt,s                          0.03              0.01              0.20              0.16            0.18         -0.06
                                                      (0.16)            (0.12)            (0.15)            (0.13)          (0.18)       (0.11)

     1{EU } × 1{CHN } × Xt,s                           -0.03             0.05             0.07               0.02            0.07         0.03
                                                      (0.15)            (0.13)            (0.03)            (0.08)          (0.08)       (0.05)

     1{U S } × 1{CHN } × Xt,s                         0.29              0.40              0.29             0.38             0.29          -0.01
                                                      (0.14)            (0.11)            (0.06)           (0.08)           (0.12)       (0.18)

     1{U S } × 1{CHN } × 1{P reW T O=1} × Xt,s                                                                                                      0.33




37
                                                                                                                                                   (0.18)

     1{U S } × 1{CHN } × 1{P reW T O=1} × Xt,s                                                                                                     0.39
                                                                                                                                                   (0.06)

     1{U S,T W N } × Xt,s                                                                                                                                      0.11
                                                                                                                                                              (0.24)
     4-Digit NAICS FE                                                     No                No               No               No          No         No         No
     2-Digit NAICS FE                                   No
     Destination-Source-Year FE
     Observations                                     18743             18709             18894             18839           18330        18330     31915      18077
     Adjusted R2                                       0.08              0.03              0.04              0.04            0.03         0.01      0.05       0.02

        Note: Column one includes industry FE at the 4-Digit level. Columns two to four vary the time horizon of the import growth rate. Column five takes
        quantities of imports of consumption instead of CIF value of imports for consumption. In column six we extend the sample until 2009 and include an
        interaction for the pre- and post-WTO period. We only report the two coefficients for US imports from China. In column seven we perform another placebo
        and consider Taiwan's exports to the US, which were not subject to the threat of MFN revoking. In the last column we exclude industries with more than a
        50% of their HS8 goods affected by the Multifiber Arrangement. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at 2-digit NAICS industry level, * p < 0.10,
        ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                             Table 4: Anticipation & Storability
              i,j,t,s    i,j,t,s
          ln(vJul :Sep /vF eb:Apr )                                   (1)         (2)

          1{=U S   or =CHN }    × 1{HHs <med(HHs )} × Xt,s           -0.03       -0.03
                                                                    (0.10)      (0.11)

          1{=U S   or =CHN }    × 1{HHs med(HHs )} × Xt,s            0.11        0.11
                                                                    (0.08)      (0.09)

          1{U S,CHN } × 1{HHs <med(HHs )} × Xt,s                    0.23        0.25
                                                                    (0.07)      (0.08)

          1{U S,CHN } × 1{HHs med(HHs )} × Xt,s                     0.41        0.45
                                                                    (0.08)      (0.09)
          2-Digit NAICS FE
          Destination-Source FE                                                   No
          Destination-Source-Year FE                                   No
          Observations                                               18743      18743
          Adjusted R2                                                 0.05       0.05
Note: The dependent variable is the log growth rate in monthly CIF value of imports before the
resolution of uncertainty. In the baseline this is the growth rate from the average between September
and July, with respect to the baseline period, set to be the monthly average between January and
March. Sample period is from 1990 until 2001. The HH index is calculated as the mean over the
HH index of HS-6 goods imported by the US from China in the second year they appear in our
sample. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at 2-digit NAICS industry level, * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 38
                                           Table 5: Annual Simulation Result

                                          Year            ^
                                                                            ^
                                          1990            0                0%
                                          1991            0.62***         8.5%
                                          1992            0.75***        10.3%
                                          1993            0.35**          4.8%
                                          1994            0.73***         10%
                                          1995            0.5***          6.9%
                                          1996            0.54***         7.4%
                                          1997            0.7***          9.6%
                                          1998            0.14**          1.9%
                                          1999            0.38**          5.2%
                                          2000            0.22*            3%
                                          2001            0.1            1.4%
                                          Pooled
                                          1990 - 2001     0.4***         5.5%

 Note: The annual   ^ coefficients used in this table are taken from Table A.3. Negative coefficients
 are replaced by zeros. Annual   ^'s are estimated using the simulated method of moments described
 in the main text.



                        Table 6: Decomposing Level Effect from Pure Uncertainty

                                          Standardized Standardized    Level     Level        level      Level
  n                  n
~m
v   res -2:mres
                  /v
                   ~m  res -7:mres -5
                                      :        (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)
Standardized E(~         n X  ~n)            0.94***      1.1***
Standardized V ar(Xn )                                   -0.32***
E(~ n X  ~n)                                                          8.85***    17.1***     17.1***    10.5***
[E(~ n X  ~ n )]2                                                               -39.29***   -32.73***
V ar(Xn )                                                                                    -6.06***     0.56
E(~ n X  ~ n ) × V ar(Xn )                                                                              -41.7***
Oberservations                                80            80          80         80          80          80
R2                                           0.89          0.96        0.89       0.93         1          0.97

 Note: This table contains the results from the regression on the simulated data from Section 5.
 The data is simulated by changing the expected tariff change in the interval [0.01,0.2] by varying
 probabilities and the level of tariff change. The dependent variable is the standardized and level
 anticipatory import growth and the independent variables are the mean and variance terms of the
 tariff change. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                            39
                     Table 7: Effect of Uncertainty on Annual Flows

                  ln(v i,j,s,t )                 (1)         (2)         (3)

                  1{wto=0} × Si,j,s,t          -5.50      -0.56       -0.82
                                                (0.18)     (0.17)      (0.19)

                  Si,j,s,t                     2.45         -0.18     -0.05
                                               (0.12)      (0.18)     (0.16)


                  Dest-Source-Year FE
                  Source-NAICS FE
                  Dest-NAICS FE
                  Dest-NAICS-Year FE

                  Observations                  33887      33878       32776
                  Adjusted R2                    0.02       0.90        0.92

Note: This table contains results from estimation of (9). The dependent variable is the log annual
imports from j to i of industry s in year t. The explanatory variables are NNTR spread and its
interaction with the dummy for China's pre-WTO period. Interacted industry fixed effects are at
6-digit NAICS level. Robust standard errors are in in the parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                40
         Table 8: Effect of Uncertainty on Annual Flows Through HH index

                                             OLS             2SLS            1st Stage
                                           ln(vi,j,s,t )   ln(vi,j,s,t )   ln(HHi,j,s,t )

             1{wto=0} × ln(HHi,j,s,t )      0.27            -1.49
                                            (0.08)           (0.67)

             ln(HHi,j,s,t )                 -1.59             -0.22
                                             (0.08)          (0.71)

             1{wto=0} × Si,j,s,t                                              0.28
                                                                              (0.02)

             Si,j,s,t                                                         0.23
                                                                              (0.01)
             Dest-Source-Year FE
             Source-NAICS FE
             Dest-NAICS-Year FE
             NAICS FE
             Year FE
             Observations                    32876           32776            33887
             Adjusted R2                      0.93            0.92             0.44

Note: This table contains results from estimation of (11). The dependent variable in the first and
second columns is the logged annual imports from j to i of industry s in year t. The dependent
variable in the third column is the logged annual HH index. The explanatory variables in the first
two columns are logged HH index and its interaction with the dummy for China's pre-WTO period.
Interacted industry fixed effects are at 6-digit NAICS level. Robust standard errors are in in the
parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                41
     Table 9: Effect of Uncertainty on Annual Flows in the Model Simulations

                                           OLS        2SLS        1st Stage
                                          ln(~
                                             vs )     ln(~
                                                         vs )     ln(HH s )

                    ln(HH s )            -1.20        -1.19

                    s                    -1.04        -1.18

                    Ss                                             0.09
                                                                   (0.01)
                    Observations           446          446          446
Note: The table presents results from the estimation of (11) and (12) on the simulations-generated
data. It uses the calibration from Table A.5. The dependent variable in the first and second columns
is the logged annual imports. The dependent variable in the third column is the logged annual HH
index. The explanatory variables in the first two columns are logged HH index and its interaction
with the dummy for China's pre-WTO period. Robust standard errors are in in the parentheses, *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 42
          Figure 1: Import Response to Different Probabilities of Tariff Hike




Note : This plot illustrates the anticipatory response of Imports to an uncertain change in tariff. We
assign different probabilities to the event of 10% increase in tariffs 12 months ahead. The vertical
dotted line denotes the time of the uncertainty resolution. In all cases, the uncertain shock does
not realize.




                                                 43
        Figure 2: Inventory Response to Different Probabilities of Tariff Hike




Note : This plot illustrates the anticipatory response of aggregate Inventory-Sales ratio to an un-
certain change in tariff. We assign different probabilities to the event of 10% increase in tariffs 12
months ahead. The vertical dotted line denotes the time of the uncertainty resolution. In all cases,
the uncertain shock does not realize.




                                                 44
                                        Figure 3: Congressional Consideration of MFN for China: 1989-2000




45
     Source : Congressional Research Service, Report for Congress, "Voting on NTR for China Again in 2001, and Past Congressional Decisions".
                          Figure 4: NNTR Gap form 1990-2005




Note : Spread percentiles are calculated each year over 6-digit NAICS industries. Gaps are means
over HS-8 product lines from Pierce & Schott (2016).




                                              46
             Figure 5: Distribution over HS-6 of the NNTR Gap in 1999




Note : NNTR gaps are at 6-digit NAICS industry level in 1999. NNTR gaps are means over HS-8
lines from Pierce & Schott (2016).




                                            47
                      Figure 6: Monthly Coefficient of NNTR Gap




Note : These are the coefficients of ^ for each month mres = [1, 12] from estimating equation 6.
Dashed lines are the [5%,95%] confidence interval. The month of September corresponds to our
baseline estimate from estimating equation 5. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at
2-digit NAICS industry level. Results corresponding to the figure are in the Table A.2 of the
Appendix.




                                              48
     Figure 7: Model Estimated Probabilities of Revoked Access to MFN Rates




Note: On the left y-axis are our model implied probabilities from simulating the model for all
6-digit NAICS industries. Coefficients for t are reported in Table A.3 of the Appendix. On the
right y-axis is the percent of news articles of the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and the
Washington Post discussing the uncertainty of China's NTR status.




                                              49
Figure 8: Time-varying Estimated Probabilities of China maintaining MFN Access




Note: On the y-axis are our model implied probabilities of China maintaining its MFN status
till 2001 and years are on the x-axis. To obtain these we simulate the model for 6-digit NAICS
industries and match the coefficients from (8) by changing probability input to the model.




                                             50
Figure 9: Time-varying Estimated Probabilities of China maintaining MFN Access




Note : On the y-axis is the level of demand shock and inventory holdings relative to steady-state
average sales is on the x-axis. The area towards the top-left side of the curves is ordering region.
Blue solid line shows the ordering cutoffs in the case of a 40% tariff change with certainty. Red
dashed line shows the ordering cutoffs in the uncertain case of tariff staying the same or increasing
by 80% with equal probabilities.




                                                 51
         Figure 10: Simulation Result with Varying Expected Tariff Change




Note : On the y-axis plots the log of anticipatory import growth in the months prior to the expected
tariff change. X-axis plots the expected tariff change. We have multiple observations for similar
expected tariff change with different spreads around the same tariff change. For example, we can
have a expected tariff increase of 10pp through either 100% probability of 10pp increase or 25%
probability of 40pp increase. The dashed line shows the maximum expected tariff change faced
by China which is obtained by using maximum annual probability of non-renewal (8%) and the
maximum spread (80%).




                                                52
           Figure 11: Effects of Spreads on Annual US Imports from China




Note : These are the annual coefficients, t,i=U S,j =CHN , from (10). Blue Dashed lines are the 95%
confidence interval and red dashed line denotes the first year of China's WTO accession. Results
correspond to Table A.4.




                                                53
Appendix

A        Comparison of Methodologies
    In this section, we compare our difference-in-difference approach in Section 6 to the one
applied in Pierce and Schott (2016). Although, their main variable of interest is industry-level
employment, they also explore the channels of employment effects of uncertainty reduction.
To do that, the paper considers the effect of uncertainty reduction on annual imports using a
triple-difference strategy. They use the following specification at HS 8-digit level,

               ln(v j,h,t ) = 1j =China 1wto=1 Xh + Tariffj,h,t + ct + ch + ht +  + j,h,t    (13)

    Where vj,h,t denotes the US import of good h from country c in year t and Xh is the product-
specific NNTR spread. There are three notable differences between this specification and our
equation (9). Firstly, while (13) uses exporter-product-year level import flows, we also add a
reference importer in our analysis to control for the exporter-specific factors. This addition is
particularly useful since it controls for the China-specific factors which were common to both US
and EU such as structural changes within China. Similarly, we can use the EU to account for
the difference in exporter-specific trends as shown in Figure A.2. Since the uncertainty was only
US-China specific38 , adding a reference importer improves the identification of the uncertainty
effect.
    Secondly, the technical details of difference-in-difference methodology are different in our
approach. We set US-China as our treatment group and US-RoW as the control group with the
treatment being uncertainty driven by NNTR spreads. Accordingly, the intervention period is set
to be China's pre-WTO period. In line with this, we employ a double-difference strategy instead
of a triple-difference since our comparison is of high-spread US-China imports with low-spread
US-China imports during the intervention period. As mentioned earlier, additional information
from reference importer helps in controlling for the exporter-fixed factors.
    Our third departure from Pierce and Schott (2016) is related to the treatment variable. The
NNTR spreads in (13) are set to be the same for all importing countries whereas actually the
NNTR spreads were only a threat for imports coming from China. We account for this and use,

                                             Xs,t   for i = U S, j = China
                                Si,j,s,t =
                                             0      otherwise

    We use time-varying spreads as it is in the data, however most of the variation in the spreads
is across industries. This expression for spreads also embeds the fact that the treatment was
specific to the US-China import flows and not common across all exporting countries.
    The double-difference approach is better at conforming to the data. We bring information
from a reference importer to control for supply-related factors in the import demand equation.
Moreover, since the treatment of uncertainty was only given to the US-China imports, we improve
identification of the uncertainty effect by using the relevant control group i.e. low-spread US-
China imports.




  38
       EU granted China unconditional MFN status in 1980.

                                                      54
                          Table A.1: Reference Exporter Countries
Afghanistan       Gabon         Norfolk Is     Angola        Gambia            North Korea
Antigua Barbuda   Ghana         Norway         Argentina     Greenland         Oman
Aruba             Grenada Is    Pakistan       Australia     Guatemala         Palau
Bahamas           Guinea        Panama         Bahrain       Guinea-Bissau     Papua New Guin
Bangladesh        Guyana        Paraguay       Barbados      Haiti             Peru
Belize            Honduras      Philippines    Benin         Hong Kong         Pitcairn Is
Bermuda           India         Qatar          Bhutan        Indonesia         Rwanda
Bolivia           Iran          Samoa          Botswana      Jamaica           Saudi Arabia
Brazil            Japan         Senegal        Brunei        Kenya             Seychelles
Burkina Faso      Kiribati      Sierra Leone   Burundi       Korea             Singapore
Cambodia          Laos          Solomon Is     Cameroon      Lesotho           Somalia
Cape verde        Liberia       Sri Lanka      Cayman Is     Libya             St Kitts-Nevis
Cen African Rep   Macao         St Lucia Is    Chad          Madagascar        St Vinc & Gren
Chile             Malawi        Sudan          Fiji          Malaysia          Suriname
Christmas Is      Maldive Is    Swaziland      Cocos Is      Mali              Switzerland
Colombia          Marshall Is   Niue           Comoros       Mauritania        Tanzania
Congo (DROC)      Mauritius     Thailand       Congo (ROC)   Mongolia          Togo
Cook Is           Montserrat Is Tonga          Costa Rica    Mozambique        Trin & Tobago
Cote d'Ivoire     Namibia       Tuvalu         Cuba          Nauru             Uganda
Djibouti          Nepal         United Arab Em Dominica Is   Netherlands Ant   Uruguay
Dominican Rep     New Caledonia Venezuela      Ecuador       New Zealand       Vietnam
El Salvador       Nicaragua     Yemen          Eq Guinea     Niger             Zambia
Ethiopia          Nigeria       Zimbabwe




                                            55
             Table A.2: Anticipation - Monthly Responses to NNTR Gap


                       i,j,t,s          i,j,t,s
                   ln(vm  res -2:mres
                                      /vm  res -7:mres -5
                                                          )              (1)

                   1{mres =January} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s               -0.19
                                                                       (0.12)
                   1{mres =F ebruary} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s           -0.38
                                                                       (0.06)
                   1{mres =M arch} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s              -0.53
                                                                       (0.02)
                   1{mres =April} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s               -0.55
                                                                       (0.03)
                   1{mres =M ay} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s                -0.26
                                                                       (0.04)
                   1{mres =June} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s                  -0.01
                                                                       (0.02)
                   1{mres =July} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s                0.25
                                                                       (0.01)
                   1{mres =August} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s              0.47
                                                                       (0.03)
                   1{mres =September} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s           0.63
                                                                       (0.07)
                   1{mres =October} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s             0.52
                                                                       (0.06)
                   1{mres =N ovember} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s           0.25
                                                                       (0.07)
                   1{mres =December} × 1{U S,China} × Xt,s               0.03
                                                                       (0.13)
                   2-Digit NAICS FE
                   Destination-Source-Year FE
                   Observations                                       215194
                   Adjusted R2                                         0.01
Note: The dependent variable is the log growth rate in monthly averages of CIF value of imports
between mres - 2 to mres and mres - 7 to mres - 5. Sample period is from 1990 until 2001. Estimates
are obtained from equation 6. We only report coefficients for i = U S, j = China. Standard errors,
in parentheses, are clustered at 2-digit NAICS industry level, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 56
                       Table A.3: Annual Anticipation 1990-2001

                                                                (1)
                         1{1990} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    -0.25
                                                              (0.13)
                         1{1991} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    0.62
                                                              (0.07)
                         1{1992} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    0.75
                                                              (0.03)
                         1{1993} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    0.35
                                                              (0.11)
                         1{1994} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    0.73
                                                              (0.16)
                         1{1995} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    0.50
                                                              (0.11)
                         1{1996} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    0.54
                                                              (0.10)
                         1{1997} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    0.70
                                                              (0.20)
                         1{1998} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    0.14
                                                              (0.05)
                         1{1999} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s    0.38
                                                              (0.12)
                         1{2000} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s     0.22
                                                              (0.11)
                         1{2001} × 1{i=U S,j =CHN } × Xt,s     0.10
                                                              (0.10)
                         2-Digit NAICS FE
                         Destination-Source FE
                         Observations                          18743
                         Adjusted R2                            0.05

Note: This table contains the results from (8). Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at
6-digit NAICS industry level, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                               57
                Table A.4: Year-specific Effects on Annual Trade Flows

                                                            (1)
                                                         ln(v i,j,s,t )
                              11990 × Si,j,s,t            -1.09

                              11991 × Si,j,s,t            -1.18

                              11992 × Si,j,s,t             -0.64

                              11993 × Si,j,s,t             -0.59

                              11994 × Si,j,s,t            -1.14

                              11995 × Si,j,s,t             -0.70

                              11996 × Si,j,s,t            -1.09

                              11997 × Si,j,s,t             -0.66

                              11998 × Si,j,s,t             -0.67

                              11999 × Si,j,s,t             -0.73

                              12000 × Si,j,s,t              -0.35

                              12001 × Si,j,s,t              -0.12

                              12002 × Si,j,s,t             -0.037

                              12003 × Si,j,s,t              -0.25

                              12004 × Si,j,s,t              -0.17

                              12005 × Si,j,s,t             0.054

                              12006 × Si,j,s,t              0.25

                              Dest-Ind-Year FE
                              Source-Ind-Year FE
                              N                            46636
                              adj. R2                       0.91

Note: This table contains the results from (10). * p < 0.32, ** p < 0.10, *** p < 0.05.




                                                 58
                            Table A.5: Simulation Moments

              Data           Model
                                                                 Data           Model
NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s
                                                   NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s
111110   0.171    0.492   0.492 0.010
                                                   212112   0.000    0.520   0.520 0.010
111120   0.056    0.309   0.309 0.025              212113   0.000    0.117   0.117 0.177
111130   0.131    0.472   0.472 0.010              212210   0.000    0.301   0.301 0.026
111140   0.057    0.403   0.403 0.014              212221   0.016    0.407   0.407 0.014
111150   0.027    0.456   0.456 0.010              212222   0.297    1.000   1.000 0.010
111160   0.002    0.106   0.106 0.217              212231   0.333    1.000   1.000 0.010
111199   0.065    0.670   0.670 0.010              212234   0.025    0.530   0.530 0.010
111211   0.116    0.713   0.713 0.010              212291   0.000    0.290   0.290 0.029
111219   0.130    0.220   0.220 0.052              212299   0.110    0.244   0.244 0.043
111310   0.001    0.280   0.280 0.031              212311   0.244    0.149   0.149 0.115
111320   0.128    0.309   0.309 0.025              212319   0.114    0.358   0.358 0.018
111331   0.020    0.263   0.263 0.037              212322   0.020    0.135   0.135 0.138
111332   0.020    0.564   0.565 0.010              212324   0.009    0.148   0.149 0.115
111333   0.017    0.613   0.613 0.010              212325   0.062    0.500   0.500 0.010
111334   0.018    0.321   0.321 0.023              212391   0.000    0.453   0.453 0.010
111335   0.029    0.294   0.294 0.028              212392   0.000    1.000   1.000 0.010
111339   0.071    0.214   0.214 0.055              212393   0.101    0.270   0.270 0.034
111411   0.090    0.171   0.171 0.089              212399   0.021    0.477   0.477 0.010
111421   0.138    0.305   0.305 0.026              311111   0.100    0.094   0.094 0.273
111422   0.126    0.098   0.098 0.248              311119   0.143    0.208   0.208 0.057
111910   0.344    0.470   0.470 0.010              311211   0.073    0.411   0.411 0.014
111920   0.017    0.511   0.511 0.010              311212   0.053    0.156   0.156 0.105
111930   0.014    1.000   1.000 0.010              311213   0.009    0.119   0.119 0.171
111940   0.035    0.355   0.355 0.019              311221   0.107    0.232   0.232 0.047
111991   0.000    1.000   1.000 0.010              311222   0.115    0.435   0.435 0.012
111992   0.094    0.960   0.960 0.010              311223   0.059    0.229   0.229 0.049
111998   0.061    0.239   0.239 0.044              311225   0.082    0.537   0.537 0.010
11211X   0.052    1.000   1.000 0.010              311230   0.087    0.147   0.147 0.116
112210   0.000    1.000   1.000 0.010              31131X   0.054    0.304   0.304 0.026
1123XX   0.021    0.188   0.188 0.073              311320   0.181    0.361   0.361 0.018
112410   0.119    0.171   0.171 0.090              311340   0.150    0.122   0.122 0.162
112420   0.087    0.540   0.540 0.010              311411   0.204    0.238   0.238 0.045
112511   0.003    0.233   0.233 0.047              311421   0.212    0.187   0.187 0.073
112512   0.000    0.179   0.179 0.081              311422   0.203    0.141   0.141 0.127
112910   0.043    0.121   0.121 0.166              311423   0.078    0.391   0.391 0.015
112920   0.068    0.368   0.368 0.017              311511   0.048    1.000   1.000 0.010
112930   0.039    1.000   1.000 0.010              311512   0.083    0.419   0.419 0.013
112990   0.032    0.125   0.125 0.158              311513   0.196    0.356   0.357 0.019
113210   0.084    0.135   0.135 0.138              311514   0.113    0.478   0.478 0.010
113310   0.023    0.465   0.465 0.010              311520   0.008    0.634   0.634 0.010
114111   0.018    0.233   0.233 0.047              311611   0.096    0.392   0.392 0.015
114112   0.018    0.179   0.179 0.081              311613   0.109    0.253   0.253 0.040
                                                   311615   0.087    0.247   0.247 0.042
114119   0.055    0.098   0.098 0.249
                                                   311711   0.132    0.198   0.198 0.064
211111   0.004    0.088   0.088 0.319
                                                   31181X   0.282    0.100   0.100 0.241
211112   0.000    0.502   0.502 0.010




                                         59
              Data           Model
                                                           Data           Model
NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s
                                             NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s
311822   0.093    0.335   0.335 0.021
                                             315234   0.468    0.316   0.316 0.024
311823   0.084    0.096   0.096 0.260        315239   0.540    0.285   0.285 0.030
311911   0.082    0.631   0.631 0.010        315291   0.564    0.301   0.301 0.026
311919   0.273    0.197   0.197 0.065        315292   0.418    0.098   0.098 0.249
311920   0.034    0.199   0.199 0.063        315991   0.362    0.248   0.248 0.041
311930   0.431    1.000   1.000 0.010        315992   0.378    0.231   0.231 0.048
311941   0.257    0.100   0.100 0.241        315993   0.463    0.509   0.509 0.010
311942   0.030    0.123   0.123 0.161        315999   0.592    0.362   0.362 0.018
311991   0.024    0.226   0.226 0.050        316110   0.211    0.204   0.204 0.060
311999   0.120    0.198   0.198 0.064        316211   0.321    0.154   0.154 0.107
312111   0.074    0.459   0.459 0.010        316212   0.274    0.280   0.280 0.031
312112   0.057    0.104   0.104 0.223        316213   0.173    0.249   0.249 0.041
312113   0.000    0.158   0.158 0.102        316214   0.201    0.224   0.224 0.050
312120   0.093    0.087   0.087 0.325        316219   0.229    0.181   0.181 0.079
312130   0.207    0.204   0.204 0.060        316991   0.311    0.120   0.120 0.168
312140   0.446    0.388   0.388 0.016        316992   0.413    0.180   0.180 0.081
312221   0.479    0.100   0.100 0.238        316993   0.405    0.134   0.134 0.140
312229   0.183    0.652   0.652 0.010        316999   0.297    0.389   0.389 0.015
313111   0.322    0.296   0.296 0.027        321113   0.043    0.314   0.314 0.024
313113   0.331    0.102   0.102 0.230        321114   0.000    1.000   1.000 0.010
313210   0.441    0.503   0.503 0.010        321211   0.321    0.212   0.212 0.056
313221   0.530    0.140   0.140 0.129        321212   0.303    0.346   0.346 0.020
313230   0.552    0.156   0.156 0.105        321213   0.239    0.175   0.176 0.085
313249   0.584    0.187   0.187 0.074        321219   0.261    0.194   0.194 0.067
313312   0.252    0.764   0.764 0.010        321911   0.280    0.086   0.086 0.350
313320   0.473    0.208   0.208 0.058        321918   0.201    0.108   0.108 0.210
314110   0.426    0.158   0.158 0.103        321920   0.149    1.000   1.000 0.010
314121   0.781    0.135   0.135 0.137        321992   0.354    0.761   0.761 0.010
314129   0.586    0.187   0.187 0.074        321999   0.292    0.142   0.142 0.126
314911   0.556    0.108   0.108 0.207        322110   0.016    0.549   0.549 0.010
314912   0.500    0.212   0.212 0.055        322121   0.255    0.316   0.316 0.024
314991   0.440    0.114   0.114 0.188        322122   0.088    0.246   0.247 0.042
314992   0.251    0.107   0.107 0.211        322130   0.273    0.260   0.260 0.038
314999   0.365    0.180   0.180 0.080        322211   0.273    0.146   0.146 0.118
315111   0.640    0.338   0.338 0.021        322212   0.329    0.090   0.091 0.296
315119   0.567    0.159   0.159 0.102        322213   0.310    0.112   0.112 0.196
31511X   0.656    0.255   0.255 0.039        322214   0.329    0.170   0.170 0.091
315221   0.632    0.437   0.437 0.012        322215   0.317    0.150   0.150 0.112
315222   0.400    0.482   0.482 0.010        322222   0.249    0.117   0.117 0.177
315223   0.435    0.526   0.526 0.010        322223   0.558    0.090   0.090 0.303
315224   0.450    0.344   0.344 0.020        322232   0.320    0.112   0.112 0.193
315228   0.483    0.369   0.369 0.017        322233   0.286    0.228   0.228 0.049
                                             322291   0.302    0.096   0.096 0.261
315231   0.680    0.292   0.292 0.028
                                             322299   0.345    0.140   0.140 0.128
315232   0.540    0.317   0.317 0.023
                                             323116   0.225    0.154   0.154 0.108
315233   0.555    0.204   0.204 0.060




                                        60
              Data           Model                         Data           Model
NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s            NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s
323117   0.000    0.113   0.113 0.191        326211   0.165    0.095   0.095 0.265
323118   0.301    0.100   0.100 0.240        326212   0.112    0.219   0.219 0.052
323119   0.119    0.109   0.109 0.204        326220   0.257    0.101   0.101 0.234
323122   0.391    0.120   0.120 0.169        326299   0.350    0.117   0.118 0.176
324110   0.059    0.174   0.174 0.087        327111   0.534    0.088   0.088 0.319
324121   0.022    0.136   0.136 0.137        327112   0.456    0.092   0.092 0.287
324122   0.290    0.168   0.168 0.093        327113   0.501    0.097   0.097 0.254
325110   0.080    0.477   0.477 0.010        327121   0.136    0.575   0.575 0.010
325120   0.216    0.553   0.553 0.010        327122   0.365    0.090   0.090 0.303
325131   0.175    0.141   0.141 0.126        327123   0.315    0.248   0.248 0.041
325132   0.464    0.145   0.145 0.120        327124   0.268    0.086   0.086 0.342
325181   0.103    0.320   0.320 0.023        327125   0.280    0.302   0.302 0.026
325182   0.200    0.131   0.131 0.146        327211   0.370    0.159   0.159 0.101
325188   0.167    0.226   0.226 0.050        327212   0.476    0.127   0.127 0.152
325191   0.103    0.148   0.148 0.115        327213   0.200    0.125   0.125 0.157
325192   0.170    0.209   0.209 0.057        327215   0.447    0.121   0.121 0.165
325193   0.615    0.183   0.183 0.077        327310   0.023    0.285   0.286 0.030
325199   0.259    0.232   0.232 0.047        327331   0.258    0.117   0.117 0.178
325211   0.265    0.113   0.113 0.190        327390   0.268    0.391   0.391 0.015
325212   0.201    0.123   0.123 0.160        327410   0.079    0.507   0.507 0.010
325221   0.369    0.302   0.302 0.026        327420   0.188    0.253   0.253 0.040
325222   0.366    0.137   0.137 0.134        327910   0.098    0.107   0.107 0.210
325311   0.011    0.219   0.219 0.052        327991   0.394    0.103   0.103 0.229
325312   0.000    0.615   0.615 0.010        327992   0.175    0.137   0.137 0.134
325320   0.191    0.277   0.277 0.032        327993   0.366    0.214   0.214 0.055
325411   0.225    0.243   0.244 0.043        327999   0.265    0.248   0.248 0.041
325412   0.194    0.198   0.198 0.064        331111   0.150    0.228   0.228 0.049
325414   0.029    0.817   0.817 0.010        331112   0.135    0.327   0.327 0.022
325510   0.216    0.117   0.117 0.178        331221   0.213    0.091   0.091 0.291
325520   0.204    0.176   0.176 0.085        331222   0.198    0.129   0.129 0.149
325611   0.235    0.151   0.151 0.111        331311   0.052    0.086   0.086 0.342
325612   0.222    0.115   0.115 0.185        331312   0.149    0.339   0.339 0.020
325613   0.217    0.207   0.207 0.058        331314   0.233    1.000   1.000 0.010
325620   0.641    0.105   0.105 0.219        331315   0.156    0.286   0.286 0.030
325910   0.082    0.144   0.144 0.122        331316   0.264    0.178   0.179 0.082
325920   0.231    0.198   0.198 0.064        331319   0.218    0.299   0.299 0.027
325992   0.205    0.126   0.126 0.154        331411   0.099    0.333   0.333 0.021
325998   0.189    0.162   0.162 0.098        331419   0.133    0.329   0.329 0.022
326113   0.263    0.095   0.095 0.264        331421   0.273    0.251   0.251 0.040
326121   0.330    0.325   0.325 0.022        331422   0.246    0.225   0.225 0.050
326122   0.325    0.170   0.171 0.090        331491   0.351    0.160   0.160 0.100
326160   0.770    0.105   0.105 0.218        331492   0.223    0.278   0.278 0.032
326191   0.497    0.110   0.110 0.202        331511   0.251    0.121   0.121 0.165
326192   0.351    0.396   0.396 0.015        332115   0.417    0.091   0.091 0.288
326199   0.574    0.108   0.108 0.207        332211   0.493    0.104   0.104 0.222




                                        61
              Data           Model                         Data           Model
NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s            NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s
332212   0.299    0.107   0.107 0.211        333512   0.262    0.363   0.363 0.018
332213   0.219    0.104   0.105 0.221        333513   0.269    0.247   0.247 0.042
332214   0.417    0.106   0.107 0.213        333514   0.340    0.111   0.111 0.198
332312   0.385    0.234   0.234 0.046        333515   0.410    0.104   0.104 0.225
332321   0.335    0.136   0.136 0.136        333516   0.271    0.230   0.230 0.048
332323   0.407    0.196   0.196 0.066        333611   0.229    0.331   0.331 0.021
332410   0.383    0.258   0.258 0.038        333612   0.331    0.100   0.100 0.242
332420   0.326    0.259   0.259 0.038        333613   0.386    0.090   0.090 0.296
332431   0.322    0.149   0.149 0.114        333618   0.273    0.101   0.101 0.238
332439   0.301    0.124   0.124 0.159        333911   0.334    0.128   0.128 0.151
332510   0.385    0.097   0.097 0.256        333912   0.327    0.130   0.130 0.147
332611   0.360    0.089   0.089 0.308        333913   0.332    0.119   0.119 0.170
332618   0.323    0.122   0.122 0.162        333921   0.338    0.384   0.384 0.016
332722   0.281    0.092   0.092 0.283        333922   0.338    0.183   0.183 0.078
332911   0.362    0.100   0.100 0.241        333923   0.338    0.122   0.122 0.163
332912   0.320    0.180   0.180 0.080        333924   0.349    0.114   0.114 0.188
332919   0.380    0.101   0.101 0.238        333991   0.293    0.092   0.092 0.287
332991   0.542    0.100   0.100 0.242        333992   0.333    0.133   0.133 0.142
332992   0.369    0.383   0.383 0.016        333993   0.319    0.203   0.203 0.060
332994   0.423    0.306   0.306 0.025        333994   0.360    0.143   0.143 0.123
332995   0.502    0.580   0.580 0.010        333995   0.261    0.173   0.173 0.088
332997   0.464    0.121   0.121 0.165        333996   0.332    0.114   0.114 0.187
332998   0.369    0.193   0.193 0.068        333997   0.418    0.121   0.121 0.164
332999   0.314    0.112   0.112 0.195        333999   0.305    0.158   0.158 0.102
333111   0.079    0.269   0.269 0.035        334111   0.341    0.161   0.161 0.099
333120   0.312    0.244   0.244 0.043        334112   0.347    0.103   0.103 0.226
333131   0.375    0.216   0.216 0.054        334119   0.341    0.094   0.094 0.271
333132   0.366    0.220   0.220 0.052        334210   0.308    0.097   0.097 0.254
333210   0.308    0.504   0.504 0.010        334220   0.298    0.103   0.103 0.227
333220   0.306    0.141   0.142 0.126        334290   0.343    0.109   0.109 0.206
333291   0.335    0.179   0.179 0.081        334310   0.311    0.105   0.105 0.219
333292   0.368    0.208   0.208 0.057        334411   0.343    0.141   0.141 0.126
333293   0.181    0.117   0.117 0.177        334412   0.316    0.088   0.088 0.320
333294   0.292    0.189   0.189 0.071        334413   0.339    0.092   0.092 0.285
333295   0.324    0.158   0.158 0.102        334414   0.287    0.089   0.089 0.309
333298   0.296    0.211   0.211 0.056        334415   0.311    0.091   0.091 0.290
333311   0.327    0.144   0.144 0.121        334416   0.322    0.086   0.086 0.344
333313   0.274    0.095   0.096 0.261        334417   0.309    0.091   0.091 0.294
333314   0.398    0.100   0.100 0.240        334418   0.344    0.100   0.100 0.238
333315   0.281    0.123   0.123 0.160        334419   0.336    0.094   0.094 0.271
333319   0.329    0.233   0.233 0.047        334510   0.330    0.104   0.104 0.224
333412   0.329    0.088   0.088 0.319        334511   0.350    0.147   0.147 0.118
333414   0.368    0.207   0.207 0.058        334512   0.340    0.103   0.103 0.228
333415   0.342    0.162   0.162 0.098        334513   0.393    0.113   0.113 0.191
333511   0.311    0.142   0.142 0.125        334514   0.461    0.212   0.212 0.055




                                        62
              Data           Model
NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s
334515   0.371    0.098   0.098 0.250                      Data           Model
334516   0.376    0.108   0.108 0.209        NAICS    Spread HH        HH    s
334517   0.333    0.127   0.127 0.153        336419   0.138    0.169   0.169 0.092
334518   0.568    0.189   0.189 0.072        336510   0.340    0.393   0.393 0.015
334519   0.407    0.129   0.129 0.149        336611   0.061    0.765   0.765 0.010
334612   0.438    0.122   0.122 0.163        336612   0.302    0.532   0.532 0.010
334613   0.677    0.094   0.095 0.267        336991   0.174    0.116   0.116 0.182
335110   0.230    0.095   0.095 0.265        336992   0.350    1.000   1.000 0.010
335121   0.357    0.104   0.104 0.223        337110   0.338    0.156   0.156 0.104
335129   0.360    0.107   0.107 0.213        337121   0.380    0.091   0.091 0.291
335211   0.359    0.130   0.130 0.147        337124   0.427    0.093   0.093 0.277
335212   0.331    0.161   0.161 0.100        337127   0.424    0.110   0.110 0.200
335221   0.384    0.113   0.113 0.191        337129   0.175    0.134   0.134 0.140
335222   0.331    0.152   0.152 0.110        337211   0.386    0.252   0.252 0.040
335224   0.328    0.175   0.175 0.086        337214   0.414    0.094   0.094 0.272
335228   0.356    0.279   0.279 0.032        337215   0.465    0.122   0.122 0.162
335311   0.329    0.159   0.159 0.102        337910   0.380    0.201   0.201 0.062
335312   0.336    0.125   0.125 0.157        337920   0.482    0.107   0.107 0.211
335313   0.307    0.114   0.114 0.188        339112   0.453    0.100   0.100 0.242
335314   0.359    0.094   0.094 0.272        339113   0.352    0.115   0.115 0.185
335911   0.356    0.097   0.097 0.255        339114   0.331    0.090   0.090 0.299
335912   0.308    0.097   0.097 0.252        339115   0.395    0.087   0.087 0.330
335921   0.591    0.148   0.148 0.115        339911   0.706    0.097   0.097 0.252
335929   0.322    0.098   0.098 0.249        339912   0.447    0.108   0.108 0.207
335931   0.311    0.088   0.088 0.315        339913   0.139    0.144   0.144 0.121
335991   0.371    0.098   0.098 0.251        339914   0.702    0.101   0.101 0.234
335999   0.314    0.106   0.106 0.215        339920   0.339    0.162   0.162 0.098
336111   0.075    0.105   0.105 0.218        339931   0.663    0.103   0.103 0.230
336120   0.151    0.651   0.652 0.010        339932   0.508    0.110   0.110 0.201
336211   0.106    0.253   0.253 0.040        339941   0.453    0.088   0.089 0.312
336212   0.432    1.000   1.000 0.010        339942   0.280    0.114   0.114 0.187
336214   0.178    0.372   0.372 0.017        339943   0.551    0.088   0.088 0.320
33631X   0.266    0.171   0.171 0.089        339944   0.335    0.097   0.097 0.255
336321   0.323    0.111   0.112 0.196        339950   0.456    0.084   0.084 0.400
336322   0.301    0.088   0.088 0.314        339991   0.292    0.088   0.088 0.321
336330   0.112    0.109   0.109 0.206        339992   0.350    0.127   0.127 0.153
336340   0.180    0.114   0.114 0.189        339993   0.350    0.092   0.092 0.282
336350   0.157    0.096   0.096 0.257        339994   0.311    0.093   0.093 0.277
336360   0.312    0.091   0.091 0.291        339999   0.447    0.121   0.121 0.166
336391   0.333    0.087   0.087 0.327        910000   0.057    0.282   0.282 0.031
336399   0.248    0.133   0.133 0.142        920000   0.120    0.140   0.140 0.129
336411   0.301    0.569   0.569 0.010        980000   0.000    0.100   0.100 0.239
336412   0.312    0.733   0.733 0.010        990000   0.207    0.185   0.185 0.076
336413   0.281    0.269   0.269 0.035
336415   0.330    0.611   0.611 0.010




                                        63
Figure A.1: Import Response to a Mean-preserving Uncertainty Spread




                                64
Figure A.2: Total Annual Imports




              65
