                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES

                                        Chang-Tai Hsieh
                                     Esteban Rossi-Hansberg

                                       Working Paper 25968
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25968


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We thank Feng Lin, Harry Li, and Jihoon Sung for extraordinary research assistance. We also
thank Rodrigo Adao, Audre Bagnall, Dan Adelman, Pete Klenow, Raghuram Rajan, Richard
Rogerson, and Chad Syverson for helpful discussions. The data from the US Census has been
reviewed by the U.S. Census Bureau to ensure no confidential information is disclosed. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25968.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Chang-Tai Hsieh and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Industrial Revolution in Services
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
NBER Working Paper No. 25968
June 2019
JEL No. E23,E24,L11,L22,L25,R11,R12

                                          ABSTRACT

The rise in national industry concentration in the US between 1977 and 2013 is driven by a new
industrial revolution in three broad non-traded sectors: services, retail, and wholesale. Sectors
where national concentration is rising have increased their share of employment, and the
expansion is entirely driven by the number of local markets served by firms. Firm employment
per market has either increased slightly at the MSA level, or decreased substantially at the county
or establishment levels. In industries with increasing concentration, the expansion into more
markets is more pronounced for the top 10%firms, but is present for the bottom 90% as well.
These trends have not been accompanied by economy-wide concentration. Top U.S. firms are
increasingly specialized in sectors with rising industry concentration, but their aggregate
employment share has remained roughly stable. We argue that these facts are consistent with the
availability of a new set of fixed-cost technologies that enable adopters to produce at lower
marginal costs in all markets. We present a simple model of firm size and market entry to
describe the menu of new technologies and trace its implications.


Chang-Tai Hsieh
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu

Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
Princeton University
Department of Economics
289 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and CEPR
and also NBER
erossi@princeton.edu
2                          HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG


1.     Introduction

Modern production relies on scale: The ability to use a technology to produce
the same product or service innumerable times. In manufacturing industries,
the steam-engine, electricity, and Ford's assembly line, together with a number
of other inventions, allowed firms to scale production in a single location. For
many goods, the cost advantages of the larger scale overwhelmed the cost of
transporting the goods to their final consumers. This ability to scale production
in a single plant was, however, of little use outside of manufacturing. Producing
many cups of coffee, retail or health services in the same location is of no value,
since it is impractical to take them to their final consumers. Modern scale pro-
duction in these sectors had to wait for a different technology, one that allowed
firms to replicate the same production process in multiple locations close to
consumers.
     In this paper we argue that new ICT-based technologies have finally made
it possible for firms outside of manufacturing to scale production over a large
number of locations. The resulting expansion led to an increase in the national
market share of top firms in many industries; a central fact about the US econ-
omy in the last three or four decades documented by Autor et al. (2017). This
paper argues that this fact, among several others we document, is the result
of a new industrial revolution that has taken place in many non-traded service
sectors.
     Consider Gawande (2012)'s account of how the Cheesecake Factory brought
"chain production to complicated sit-down meals." The Cheesecake Factory
has invested in technologies that determine optimal staffing and food purchases
for each restaurant and each day. The company also has a well-oiled process
via which they introduce new items on their menu. This process starts in a
centralized "kitchen" in Calabasas, CA ­ their R&D facility so to speak ­ where
Cheesecake's top cooks cull ideas for new dishes and "figure out how to make
each recipe reproducible, appealing, and affordable." The cooks in the R&D
                      THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                        3


facility then teach the new recipes to the kitchen managers of each restaurant
at a bi-annual meeting in California. The kitchen managers then follow a finely
honed procedure to teach the new recipes to the cooks in each restaurant. The
roll out time, from the time the kitchen managers arrive at Cheesecake's cen-
tral kitchen in California to when the new dishes are put on the menu in each
restaurant, is 7 weeks.
      The standardization of production over a large number of establishments
that has taken place in sit-down restaurant meals due to companies such as the
Cheesecake Factory has taken place in many non-traded sectors. Take hospitals
as another example. Four decades ago, about 85% of hospitals were single
establishment non-profits. Today, more than 60% of hospitals are owned by for-
profit chains or are part of a large network of hospitals owned by an academic
institution (such as the University of Chicago Hospitals).1 As an example of the
former, consider the Steward Health Care Group. This company was created by
the Cerberus private equity fund in 2010 when it purchased 6 Catholic hospitals
in Boston. In Gawande (2012)'s account, Cerberus' goal was to create the
"Southwest Airlines of healthcare" by figuring out and codifying best practices
and implementing these practices over a large scale. Gawande (2012) describes
the scene in Steward's remote intensive care unit (ICU) in a Boston suburb that
monitors the ICUs in all of Steward's hospitals:

        "Banks of computer screens carried a live feed of cardiac-monitor
        readings, radiology-imaging scans, and laboratory results from ICU
        patients throughout Steward`s hospitals. Software monitored the
        stream and produced yellow and red alerts when it detected patterns
        that raised concerns. Doctors and nurses manned consoles where
        they could toggle on high-definition video cameras that allowed
        them to zoom into any ICU room and talk directly to the staff on the
        scene or to the patients themselves."

Technologies such as the remote ICU has enabled Steward to provide consistent
care in all the ICUs in its hospitals. By 2019, Steward had expanded from its 6
  1
   The employment-weighted share of multi-establishment hospitals in the Longitudinal
Business Database increased from 15% in 1977 to 62% in 2013.
4                               HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



original hospitals in Boston to 36 hospitals located in 9 states and Malta.2
        We argue that the rise in industry concentration is due to companies similar
to the Cheesecake Factory and Steward Healthcare that have adopted technolo-
gies that enable them to standardize and scale up the delivery of non-traded
services. In this sense, what has happened in non-traded services is akin to the
industrial revolution unleashed by Henry Ford more than a hundred years ago
when Ford introduced mass production to a car industry dominated by inde-
pendent artisans. We use micro-data from the Longitudinal Business Database
from 1977 to 2013 to document the following facts. First, we show that the
phenomena of rising concentration documented by Autor et al. (2017) is only
seen in three broad sectors ­ services, wholesale, and retail. As Autor et al. (2017)
suggest, top firms have become more efficient over time, but our evidence indi-
cates that this is only true for top firms in these three sectors. In manufacturing,
for example, concentration has fallen.
        Second, rising concentration in these sectors is entirely driven by an increase
the number of local markets served by the top firms. Within a typical mar-
ket served by a top firm in sectors with increasing concentration, we find that
employment of top firms is either constant or falling. Specifically, we find that
average employment per establishment of top firms falls in sectors with rising
concentration. The same is true for employment of top firms in each county
they serve.3
        Third, we find that total employment rises substantially in industries with
rising concentration. This is true even when we look at total employment of
the smaller firms in these industries. This evidence is consistent with our view
that increasing concentration is driven by new ICT-enabled technologies that
ultimately raise aggregate industry TFP. It is not consistent with the view that
    2
     Steward's hospitals are in Massachusetts, New York, Ohio, Florida, Arkansas, Louisiana,
Texas, Arizona, and New Mexico. Steward also has two hospitals in Malta.
   3
     In a related finding Rossi-Hansberg et al. (2018) show, using the National Establishment
Time Series (NETS) data-set, that although sales and employment concentration have increased
in most sectors, local concentration has fallen significantly, particularly in Services, Retail and
Wholesale.
                      THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                              5


concentration is due to declining competition or entry barriers, as suggested by
Gutierrez and Philippon (2017) and Furman and Orszag (2018), as these forces
will result in a decline in industry employment.
      Fourth, we show that the top firms in the economy as a whole have become
increasingly specialized in narrow set of sectors, and these are precisely the
non-traded sectors that have undergone an industrial revolution. At the same
time, top firms have exited many sectors. The net effect is that there is essen-
tially no change in concentration by the top firms in the economy as a whole.
The "super-star" firms of today's economy are larger in their chosen sectors and
have unleashed productivity growth in these sectors, but they are not any larger
as a share of the aggregate economy.
      In order to make precise the type of technological change that we hypoth-
esize is behind all these secular changes, we first propose a simple theory of
firm size and market entry.4 Using the theory, we show that a key ingredient
of the industrial revolution in services that we document is a new fixed cost
technology that lowers the marginal cost in all markets served by the firm. The
adoption decision of firms involves a trade-off between a proportional reduc-
tion in variable costs and an increase in the fixed cost of the firm. With a large
enough fixed cost, only the most efficient firms find it profitable to adopt the
new technology, which leads to more concentration in the industry. If firms
can decide the extent to which they want to implement the new technologi-
cal advances, more productive firms will adopt the new technology more fully,
also leading to concentration in the industry. Firms that adopt the fixed cost
technology serve new markets because the new technology makes it profitable
to serve local markets that were previously not viable. Rising input prices due
to the expansion of firms that adopt the new technology forces multi-product
firms to leave other sectors where the new technology has not occurred, or
where their relative productivity is low, so the net effect on total employment

  4
   Our theory is reminiscent of Gaubert (2018), but it allows firms to serve multiple local
markets, as Ramondo (2014) does in an international context.
6                            HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



of top firms is ambiguous.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our empirical
findings organized in five Facts. Section 3 presents the theory and derives the
implications of the availability of a menu of new technologies offering combina-
tions of fixed and variable costs. Section 4 discusses the previous literature from
the perspective of our empirical findings and their conceptual interpretation
and provides some initial computations of the contribution of the industrial
revolution in services to aggregate TFP growth. Section 5 concludes.



2.     Facts
We use micro-data from the U.S. Census Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
The LBD is based on administrative employment records of every nonfarm pri-
vate establishment in the U.S. economy. The advantages of the LBD are its
broad coverage and quality. The establishment-level variables we use are em-
ployment, county, industry (4-digit SIC or 6-digit NAICS), and the ID of the firm
that owns the establishment. We restrict to sample to observations from 1977
to 2013 and drop establishments in the public, educational, and mining sectors.
We classify each 4-digit SIC and 6-digit NAICS industry into 450 consistently
defined industries from 1977 to 2013. Hereafter, when we refer to an industry
we mean these 450 industries. We also group counties into metropolitan areas
(MSAs) defined consistently over time. We use the firm ID to aggregate employ-
ment of establishments to a firm in an industry or in the aggregate economy.
     Table 1 shows total employment, number of establishments, and number of
firms in the first and last years of our sample. We highlights five facts from the
LBD data.

Fact 1. Increase in Industry Concentration

     Our first fact, shown in Table 2, is the increase in concentration in the av-
erage industry. Table 2 presents the employment share of top 10% firms in an
                         THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                                7


                             Table 1: LBD Summary Statistics


                           Employment           Establishments         Firms

                 1977            63.2                  4.1               3.4

                 2013           111.9                  6.5               4.9

       Note: Employment, establishments, and firms are in millions.



                     Table 2: Employment Share of Top 10% Firms


             1977            1987            1997            2007           2013

             67.0%          67.4%           69.2%            71.6%         72.4%

       Note: Geometric average of employment share of top 10% firms in 450 industries,
       weighted by industry employment share.




average industry from 1977 to 2013.5 The employment share of the top 10%
firms in an average industry increased from 68% in 1977 to 73% in 2013, with
most of the increase occurring since the late 1980s. Table 2 echoes Autor et al.
(2017)'s finding that the share of the top 4, 20, and 40 firms has increased in the
average sector over a similar time period.6
      Table 3 shows the change in the log employment share of the top 10% firms
from 1977 to 2013 for each broad industry. The increase in average concentra-
tion is primarily driven by three sectors: wholesale, services, and retail, where
the average employment share of the top 10% firms increased by about .15 log
points between 1977 and 2013. In contrast, concentration in manufacturing fell
over this time period.

  5
      We chose 10% because the smallest number of firms in an industry in our sample is 10.
  6
      Autor et al. (2017) use the micro-data from the Economic Censuses.
8                             HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



                       Table 3:  Top Firm Share, 1977-2013


              All Industries                                         .093
               Wholesale                                             .168
               Services                                               .149
               Retail                                                .131
               Agriculture                                            .096
               Construction                                           .071
               Finance                                                .034
               Utilities and Transportation                           .012
               Manufacturing                                         -.028
     Note: Average  log employment share from 1977-2013 of top 10% firms in 4-digit
     industries within each large sector, weighted by average employment share of each
     industry.



Fact 2. Heterogeneity in Increase in Industry Concentration

    Table 4 shows the distribution of the change in the employment share from
1977 to 2013 across our 450 industries. The first row shows the overall dis-
tribution. The 90-10 gap in the change in the top 10% share is about .35 log
points. The second row shows the dispersion within broad sectors. Given the
heterogeneity in the mean change in broad sectors shown in Table 3, it is not
surprising that the residual dispersion is smaller than the overall dispersion.
However, the residual dispersion is still sizable. The 90-10 gap in the change
in residual industry concentration is almost .28 log points.

Fact 3. Industry Employment and Establishment per Firm Rise with Concen-
tration

    Table 5 shows total employment of the industry as a share of aggregate em-
ployment for industries where concentration fell (column 1) vs. industries where
concentration increased (column 2). The first thing to see is that industries
where concentration fell after 1977 accounted for 30% of aggregate employment
                     THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                              9


           Table 4: Distribution of  Share of Top Firms, 1977-2013


                                      10%      25%      50%     75%      90%

         Overall                     -.057     .008     .078    .182     .290

         Within 1-Digit Sector       -.031     .022     .078    .164     .253

    Note: Distribution of  log employment share of top 10% firms in 450 industries
    from 1977 to 2013.



         Table 5: Employment Share of Industries by  Concentration


                       Concentration < 0           Concentration > 0

             1977             30.2%                       69.8%

             2013             15.4%                       84.6%

    Note: Employment share of industries where employment share of top 10% firms fell
    between 1977 and 2013 (column 1) or increased between 1977 and 2013 (column 2).



in 1977. This reinforces the point that increased concentration by top firms
is not universal across industries. More importantly, the second row shows
that sectors with more top firm concentration are the ones where total industry
employment (as a share of aggregate employment) has also grown. The employ-
ment share of industries with increased top firm concentration grew from 70%
in 1977 to 85% in 2013.
   Figure 1 plots the non-parametric relationship between the change in the
employment share of the industry against the change in the share of the top
firms in the industry (both from 1977 to 2013). There is a clear and robust rela-
tionship between industry growth and growth of the top firms in the industry.
Table 6 shows the coefficient from an OLS regression of the relationship shown
in Figure 1. The elasticity of the change in industry employment to the change
10                                HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



in industry concentration is a precisely estimated 3. The second row in Table 6
regresses the change in log of total employment of the bottom 90% of firms in
the industry on the change in the employment share of the top 10% firms. The
elasticity is smaller but still positive and significantly different from zero. This
says that the growth in industry employment with increased concentration is
broad based. Firms throughout the size distribution increase employment in
sectors with increasing concentration, not only the top 10% firms in the indus-
try, although by definition the increase is larger among the top firms.7

                Figure 1:  Industry Employment vs.  Share of Top Firms




          Note: Figure shows point estimate and 99% confidence interval of non-parametric
          regression of  log employment share of the industry (relative to aggregate
          economy) on  log employment share of top 10% firms in the industry (relative to
          industry employment), both from 1977-2013.



         Figure 2 plots the non-parametric relationship between the change in the log
     7
    The elasticity of the change in total employment of the bottom 90% of firms to the change
in top firm concentration is negative (-.78; s.e.=0.42) in the non-manufacturing sample. The
elasticity of total employment in the industry to the change in top firm concentration is
therefore correspondingly smaller (1.12; s.e.=0.41) in the non-manufacturing industries.
                        THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                               11


         Table 6: Regression of  Industry Employment on  Concentration


                 log Employment Industry                               3.059
                                                                      (0.315)

                 log Employment Bottom 90%                             0.876
                                                                      (0.309)

        Note:  Industry employment and concentration from 1977 to 2013. Concentration
        is log employment share of top 10% firms in industry.




number of establishments per firm (for all firms in the industry) and the change
in the log employment share of the top 10% of firms in the industry. The OLS
coefficient of this relationship is a precisely estimated 0.745 (shown in the first
row in Table 7).8 The second row in Table 7 shows the elasticity of the number of
establishments per firm for the bottom 90% of firms in the industry. The point
estimate is smaller, but is positive and precisely estimated. Hence, all firms in
industries with increasing concentration have more establishments, although
the increase in the number of establishments per firms is more pronounced for
top 10% firms.9


Fact 4. Industry Concentration is due to Extensive Margin Growth


       We next show that the growth in industry concentration is mostly due to
extensive margin growth by the top firms. The change in the employment share
of the top firms in an industry can be decomposed into the contribution of
growth on the extensive and intensive margins. For example, if we define a
   8
     The elasticity of the change number of establishments per firm to the change in top firm
concentration is identical (.745; s.e.=.137) in the non-manufacturing industries.
   9
     Consistent with our findings, Cao et al. (2019) use data from the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages between 1990 and 2015 to document an increase in the average
number of establishments per firm. They do not relate the change to measures of industry
concentration but show that the increase is more pronounced for larger firms and in the service
sector.
12                                HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



               Figure 2:  Establishments/Firm vs  Share of Top Firms




        Note: Figure shows point estimate and 99% confidence interval of non-parametric
        regression of  log # Establishments/Firm of top 10% firms in the industry relative to
        all firms in the industry on  log employment share of top 10% firms in the industry,
        both from 1977 to 2013.



market as an MSA, the decomposition is:

                                                                     Ltop
                            Ltop        #M SAtop                   #M SAtop
                        log      =  log          +  log               L
                                                                                                (1)
                             L           #M SA                      #M SA
                                                                          .

       The first term in equation 1 is the contribution from growth in the number
of MSAs of the top firms and the second term is the contribution from changes
in employment per MSA of the top firms (both relative to all firms in the in-
dustry).10 The former we call extensive margin growth and the latter intensive
margin growth. Table 8 shows the results of the variance decomposition for
the relative number of cities vs employment per city (row 1), relative number
  10
    #M SAtop is defined as the sum of the number of MSAs in which the top 10% firms are
present. This definition implies that particular MSAs will be counted multiple times if several
top 10% firms operate in them. #M SA is calculated similarly.
                        THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                              13


          Table 7: Regression of  Establishment/Firm on  Concentration


                 log Establishment/Firm Industry                      0.745
                                                                     (0.083)

                 log Establishment/Firm Bottom 90                     0.105
                                                                     (0.040)

        Note:  Industry employment and concentration from 1977 to 2013. Concentration
        is log employment share of top 10% firms in industry.




of counties vs. employment per county (row 2), and relative number of estab-
lishments vs. employment per establishment (row 3). The first row shows that
93% of the growth in concentration comes from growth in the number of cities
served by top firms, and only 7% comes from increased employment per city.
The next two rows show that average employment per county and per establish-
ment of top firms falls. So necessarily more than 100% of concentration growth
has to come from the increase in the number of counties and establishments
served by the top firms.11
       Figure 3 plots the non-parametric relationship between our three measures
of extensive vs. intensive margin growth of top firms. The top panel shows the
point estimate of a non-parametric regression of our three measures of exten-
sive margin growth (# of MSAs, counties or establishments) of the top firms vs.
overall growth in the employment share of the top firms. The slopes of all curves
are positive, indicating that in industries where top firms have expanded the
most, they have done so by expanding geographically into more establishments,
counties, and MSAs. The slope increases as we adopt narrower definitions of
a market. It is the smallest for MSAs and the largest for establishments. The

  11
    The share of the variation of the change in top firm concentration due to the extensive
margin is identical when we consider only the non-manufacturing industries. The share due to
extensive margin growth in the non-manufacturing industries are 0.877 (MSAs), 1.112 (counties)
and 1.355 (establishments).
14                             HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



     Table 8:  Concentration Due to Extensive vs. Intensive Margin Growth


                                         Extensive                 Intensive

               MSAs                        0.932                     0.068
                                          (0.074)                   (0.074)

               Counties                    1.161                    -0.161
                                          (0.083)                   (0.083)

               Establishments              1.435                    -0.435
                                          (0.097)                   (0.097)

      Note: Column 1 shows point estimates and standard errors of a regression of  log
      # of MSAs/Counties/Establishments of top 10% firms relative to all firms from 1977-
      2013 on  log employment share of top 10% firms from 1977-2013. Column 2 shows
      the same for a regression of  log employment per MSAs/County/Establishment
      of top 10% firms relative to all firms from 1977 to 2013 on the same independent
      variable.




variation in the change in concentration across industries is basically entirely
driven by variation across industries in the expansion of top firms into new
markets.
     The bottom panel in Figure 3 shows the non-parametric regression of in-
tensive margin growth (employment per MSA, county and per establishment of
the top firms). The figure shows that employment per establishment declines
by more in industries where top firm concentration has increased by more. The
same is true for employment per county, although the magnitude of the decline
with respect to the change in industry concentration is smaller. It is only when
we look at employment per MSA that we see more intensive margin growth for
the top firms.
     Table 9 probes for evidence on the relative size of the markets where the top
firms in an industry have entered. Specifically, we measure the size of the local
market as total employment (in all industries) in the county or MSA where a
given firm in the industry operates an establishment. We then regress  log size
                      THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                              15


           Table 9: Regression of  Market Size on  Concentration


      log Total Employment in County of Top Firms/All Firms                   -.274
                                                                              (.103)

      log Total Employment in MSA of Top Firms/All Firms                      -.205
                                                                              (.061)

     Note: Market size is total employment (in all industries) in the counties or MSAs
     where top firms operate in the industry relative to total employment in counties
     where all firms in the industry operate. Concentration is employment share of top
     10% firms in industry.  log market size and concentration from 1977 to 2013.



of the local market of an average top firm relative to all firms in the industry on
 log employment share of the top firm in the industry. Table 9 shows that the
elasticity of the change in the relative size of the market of top firms with respect
to the change in the market share of top firms is negative and precisely esti-
mated. So top firms on average expand by entering into smaller local markets.
Of course, the expansion patterns of specific industries might look different. For
example, Holmes (2011) shows that Walmart grew by expanding into new local
markets that are typically close to its headquarters and larger than its existing
markets.

Fact 5. No Change in Concentration in Aggregate Economy

   All our facts up to now have been about the top firms in an industry. Our last
fact is about the top firms in the aggregate economy. The difference between
the two is that top firms in the aggregate economy are in multiple industries.
Table 10 shows the employment share of the top 0.1%, 0.01% and 0.001% of
firms in the aggregate economy. Although the employment share of top firms
in an average industry has increased substantially, the employment share of the
top firms in the aggregate economy has not. Gutierrez and Philippon (2019)
report a similar fact from data on publicly traded firms in Compustat. In our
16                            HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



          Figure 3: Extensive vs. Intensive Margin Growth of Top Firms
                                Extensive Margin Growth




                                Intensive Margin Growth




     Note: Top panel shows non-parametric regression of  log # of MSAs, Counties or
     Establishments of top 10% firms relative to all firms on  log employment share of
     top 10% firms, both from 1977-2013. Thin solid line is 45o line. Bottom panel shows
     non-parametric regression of  log employment per MSA, County or Establishment
     of top 10% firms relative to all firms on  log employment share of top 10% firms,
     both from 1977-2013.
                     THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                              17


       Table 10: Employment Share of Top Firms in Aggregate Economy


                                  1977           2013          Difference

            Top 0.1%             39.3%          40.8%               1.5%

            Top 0.01%            21.1%          22.2%               1.1%

            Top 0.001%            8.0%           8.4%               0.4%

    Note: Table shows the employment share of top 0.1%, 0.01%, and 0.001% firm in the
    overall economy.



                Table 11: # Industries/Firm: Top Firms/All Firms


                                             1977            2013

                     Top 0.1%                 7.1             4.6

                     Top 0.01%               21.4             9.4

                     Top 0.001%              35.0            17.2

    Note: Table shows # industries per firm of average top firm (in overall economy)
    relative to the average firm.




LBD data, the employment share of the top .001% firms increased from 8% in
1977 to only 8.4% in 2013. Over the same period, the employment share of the
top 10% firms in an industry increased by 5.4% (Table 2).
   Table 11 reconciles the stable top firm share in Table 10 with increasing con-
centration at the industry level. The table shows the average number of in-
dustries per firm among the top firms relative to the number of industries per
firm of all firms in the economy. Top firms produce in more industries than the
average firm, but less so in 2013 compared to 1977. The number of industries of
a top 0.001% firm (relative to the average firm) fell from 35 in 1977 to 17 in 2013.
18                             HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



               Table 12: Employment/Industry: Top Firms/All Firms


                                               1977            2013

                       Top 0.1%                55.7            88.7

                       Top 0.01%               98.8            237.0

                       Top 0.001%             229.5            488.1

      Note: Table shows employment per industry of average top firm (in overall economy)
      relative to the average firm.




The corresponding number for a top 0.01% firm is 21 industries in 1977 and 9
industries in 2013.
     Table 11 shows that top firms are more specialized. Table 12 shows that top
firms are also larger in the industries they have chosen to specialize in. The
table shows average employment per industry of a top firm relative to average
employment per industry of all firms. Employment per industry of a top 0.001%
firm in 1977 was 230 times larger than that of the average firm. By 2013, the size
gap had more than doubled to 488.
     Finally, Table 13 shows that the industries that top firms have chosen to
specialize in are primarily ones with growing concentration. Specifically, the
table shows the employment of top firms in industries with above-median con-
centration growth as a share of total employment of the top firm. For example,
36% of employment of the top .001% firms in the overall economy in 1977 were
in industries with growing concentration. By 2013, almost half of employment
of the top .001% firms were in such industries. In summary, top firms are now
more specialized, are larger in the chosen industries, and these are precisely the
industries that have experienced concentration growth.
                       THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                           19


           Table 13: Share of Industries with  Concentration > Median
                           in Employment of Top Firms


                                              1977           2013

                       Top 0.1%               43.2           58.8

                       Top 0.01%              42.7           57.0

                       Top 0.001%             35.6           48.5

       Note: Table shows employment of top firms in industries with above median
       concentration growth between 1977 and 2013 as a share of the top firm's total
       employment.



3.      A simple model of firm size and market entry
Our aim in this section is to propose a simple theory of firm production de-
cisions that is rich enough to speak to the facts in the previous section. The
main purpose of the theory is to define precisely a form of technological change
and trace its implications. This new technology is, we believe, a good abstract
description of the innovations that have driven the large secular changes we
have documented in the U.S. economy between 1977 and 2013.


3.1.     The model

Start by considering a firm i that produces a good j . The firm uses plants to
produce in different locations n, out of a continuum of locations with mass N .
The price of good j in location n is given by pjn . Assume that the only way
to serve market n is to put a plant there. The ability of firms to trade simply
determines the size of these markets and therefore the distribution of markets
defined below. A firm pays a fixed cost Fj (in units of the numeraire) to pro-
duce good j and another fixed cost fn (in units of the numeraire, but with a
magnitude indexed to the local wage) to set up an establishment in market n.
20                                 HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



The firm's productivity Aij applies to its establishments in all locations. Labor
is the only factor of production, so a firm that hires Lijn units of labor produces
Yijn = Aij Lijn units of output with local revenues given by Rijn = pjn Aij Lijn .
     We assume that the productivity of potential entrants in the economy is
given by  with full support on (0, ) .
     Firm i's profits from the production of good j are given by


                 ij = max                  [pjn Aij Lijn - wn (Lijn + fn )] dn - Fj ,
                       Nij ,Lijn     Nij


where Nij is the set of markets in which firm i enters with product j .
     Now suppose that demand is CES and firms compete monopolistically, then
            -1
pjn = En Yijn , where  > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across varieties within
an industry and En is a function of local expenditure determined in equilibrium.
Then, profits from good j are given by

                                                             1
            ij = max                  En (Aij Lijn )1-  - wn (Lijn + fn ) dn - Fj .
                   Nij ,Lijn   Nij


Conditional on serving market n, profit maximizing employment in the local
market is given by:
                                                                              
                                                            1
                                                -1       1-   En
                                Lijn =       Aij                                 .
                                                           wn

The firm will serve market n if local profits are positive, namely,

                                                     1
                                                  1-                                        
                            1                                                1
           En            1-   En                                    -1    1-   En
                 Aij                                     -       Aij                            fn
           wn              wn                                               wn

or productivity is above a threshold  defined by

                                                                                      1
                                                                                      - 1
                                                  En   f n
                        Aij   , fn ,                                          
                                                                                                     (2)
                                              +   wn  ~ En
                                                      
                                                   -                     wn
                     THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                        21


where
                                        ( - 1)-1
                                      ~
                                                 .
                                           
Hence, the firm is more likely to enter a location where the market entry cost is
lower, wages are smaller and total expenditures are larger.
   Now consider the decision of the firm to enter industry j . The firm will enter
if ij > 0 or
                                                     
                                           -1   En
                                   wn ~ Aij             - wn fn dn  Fj ,
                  n s.t. Aij >jn                wn

where n  (, fn , En /wn ) is defined in (2). Since the local entry cost fn is only
a function of location, the threshold  is as well.
   Suppose that the mass of markets with characteristic  < n is given by
 (n ) with density  (n ) . This distribution  (·) is determined by parameters,
the set of available markets, and the distribution of En /wn which is determined
in equilibrium.   If all markets are identical and there is free mobility across
markets, then the distribution of En /wn would be degenerate and therefor the
distribution  (·) would be degenerate as well. If markets are different in terms
of amenities, productivity, housing and other factors, or a variety of other fric-
tions, the distribution of En /wn across markets would not be degenerate, even
with free mobility, apart from cases with extreme assumptions on the distri-
bution of the rents of local factors. Limited or frictional mobility would also
yield a non-degenerate distribution of En /wn . Here, we stop short of specifying
a fundamental model of the distribution  (·) to gain generality and simplify the
exposition.
   Figure 4 depicts the markets in which the firm will be active given a distri-
bution  (·) and, to simplify the illustration, a constant fn and  that we omit
in the notation. Then, the only relevant local characteristic is the ratio En /wn ,
where a higher ratio means that the market is more profitable. Suppose  (·)
is increasing in  and therefore decreasing in En /wn . That is, more desirable
markets are more scarce. Firms will choose to operate in all markets for which
Ait >  (En /wn ), namely En /wn  -1 (Ait ) since  (·) is decreasing in En /wn .
22                             HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



                     Figure 4: Determination of Active Markers




     We want to determine the total profits of a firm in industry j . Using (2),
profits in market j can be written as

                                        -1
                                 Aij
                      w n fn                 -1    0 for Aij  ij .
                                 ij

     The mass of markets where a firm with productivity Aij enters is  (Aij ),
which is the mass of Nij . Furthermore, if the fixed costs of opening a plant wn fn
are constant at f , the profits of a firm that enters are given by

                                            Aij          -1
                                                  Aij
             Aij , Fj , f, ,      =f                          - 1  (d) - Fj .
                 +   -                  0         

Denote by A (Fj , f, ,  ) the productivity level such that


                           (A (, Fj , f, ,  ) , Fj , f, ,  ) = 0.
                     THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                               23




Since  is increasing in Aij , there is a unique such value. Therefore, active firms
are such that Aij  A Fj , f, ,  .
                         +


3.1.1.   A parametric example

Suppose that the density of markets with characteristic  is  () = a /f for
some a >  - 1. This distribution implies that there are many markets where it
is hard to enter. More so the higher a.  > 0 is related to the availability of good
markets to enter and is determined in general equilibrium by the level of wages
and expenditures. Then

                                        Aij               -1
                                                   Aij
          Aij , Fj , f, ,    = f                               - 1  () d - Fj
             +   -                  0              
                                            Aij                         Aij
                                                     -1 1+a-
                             =                    Aij        d -              a d - Fj
                                        0                           0
                               ~A1+
                             = a ij
                                    a
                                      - Fj


where
                                          -1
                             a
                             ~=                        .
                                   (2 + a -  ) (1 + a)
Note that we defined the level of the distribution  (·) as /f . Other definitions
lead to a value of the constant a
                                ~ that depends on f. In the example, A Fj , f, a, , 
                                                                                    +    -
is decreasing in  since having more profitable markets to enter implies a lower
entry productivity threshold.


3.2.     A new technology

Now suppose a new technology becomes available. The technology increases
the fixed costs of producing a given good in exchange for a reduction in the
variable cost (and leaves the fixed cost of creating plants fn constant). Namely,
24                                      HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



adopting the new technology results in an increase in fixed costs to h Fj and an
increase in productivity to hAij , for h > 1 and  > 0.
     Firms will adopt the technology if


                               (hAij , h Fj , f, ,  )   (Aij , Fj , f, ,  )


     This condition can be rewritten as the sum of the profits of the firm in new
markets plus the increased profits in old markets being grater or equal than the
increase in the firm-product fixed cost relative to local fixed costs, namely,
                                                    -1
                                                                              
                           hAij
                                         hAij
                                                         - 1  (d)
                                          
                                                                 
                          Aij                                    
                                                                 
                                                                   (h - 1) Fj .
                                                                 
                                      Value of new markets
                                             -1
                                                                                                            (3)
                              Aij
                                     Aij
                                                                           f
                                                     -1          
                +                                 h     - 1  (d) 
                          0                                      
                                    Increased value of old markets


     How do the benefits of adopting the new technology, the LHS of condition
(3), change with firm productivity? Deriving the LHS of condition (3) with re-
spect to Aij yields,


                   hAij                         -1                           Aij                 -1
LHS                                      h                -2                                1            -2
    =                     ( - 1)                       Aij  (d)      -             ( - 1)             Aij  (d)
Aij            0                                                         0                  
                                        hAij             -1
                      -2                           h
          = ( - 1) Aij                                         (d)
                                       Aij         
              >0, Larger value of new markets for top firms
                                             Aij          -1
                        -2                         1
             +( - 1) Aij                                       h-1 - 1  (d) > 0
                                         0         
                          >0, Larger value of existing markets for top firms




since, by Leibniz rule, the derivative of Ait in the limit of the integral is equal to
zero. Hence, the gains from adopting the new technology increase with a firm's
                      THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                                 25


productivity, while the costs (the RHS of condition 3) are fixed. This implies that
there exists a threshold H (Fj , f, , , h,  ) such that if Aij  H (Fj , f, , , h,  )
then firm i adopts the new technology. The function H Fj , f, , , h,                     is in-
                                                                         +           +
creasing in Fj and  , as simple inspection of (3) indicates.
   Some firms will decide not to adopt the new technology as long as


                         A (h Fj , f, ,  ) /h > A (Fj , f, ,  ) ,


since the potential entrant productivity distribution  has full support in (0, ).
This is not always the case. In our example with  () = a /f , it requires  >
1 + a, since
                                                               1
                                                    Fj        1+a
                              A (Fj , f, ,  ) =
                                                    a
                                                    ~
and so                                                   1

                   
                                           
                                              -1   Fj   1+a
               A (h Fj , f, ,  ) /h = h   1+a                  > A (Fj , f, ,  ) ,
                                                   a
                                                   ~
if  > 1 + a, since h > 1. Namely, some firms do not adopt if the elasticity of fixed
cost to h is larger than one plus the elasticity of the density of tougher markets
(higher 1 + ). More generally, we need the increase in fixed costs in the new
technology to be large enough. The arguments above have proven the following
proposition:

Proposition 1 Given the distribution , fixed costs Fj and f , and elasticity of
substitution , there exists a threshold H (Fj , f, , , h,  ) > 0 such that if Aij 
H (Fj , f, , , h,  ) then firm i adopts the new technology. Thus, in equilibrium the
highest productivity firms use the new technology (h) and the lowest productivity
ones (if active) use the old technology. Firms that adopt the new technology are
larger in employment and revenues, enter more markets, and make more profits.

   The model above is consistent with a number of the facts outlined in the
previous section. In particular, it is consistent with Fact 1, since it leads to top
firms adopting the new technology. It is also consistent with Fact 2 if the new
26                          HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



technology is not available in all sectors, and partially with Fact 3, since adopt-
ing firms expand the number of establishments per firm. However, because
there is only one technology level h, in the model above firms only have a binary
decision: adopt or not. Fact 3 shows us that in industries where concentration
has increased, which we interpret as industries where a new technology h is
available, the employment of the bottom 90% of firms also increased. It seems
that in these industries, firms can choose to adopt the new technology with
different degrees of intensity. We introduce this margin in our model next.




3.2.1.   A menu of new technologies

Consider the case where firms can choose among a continuum of technologies
indexed by h  1. If they choose h = 1, they maintain the old technology, while
if the choose h > 1, they choose a technology with the characteristics described
above. As before, firm fixed costs are given by h Fj for  > 0.
     Proposition 1 shows that, given a single h, high productivity firms will adopt
while others might not. Here we show that the gains from adopting a new tech-
nology h are not only increasing in firm productivity, but that the increase with
firm productivity grows with h. That is, the cross-derivative of the LHS of con-
dition (3) is positive. Since the RHS of condition (3) does not depend on h,
we conclude that more productive firms choose technologies with higher h.
Namely, if we denote by  (A) the technology adopted by firms with productivity
A,  (A)   (A ) for A  A .
     The cross-derivative of the LHS of (3) is given by

                                                       hAij              -1
      2 LHS                                                         1
            = ( - 1)  (hAij ) + ( - 1)2 Aij
                                           -2                  -2
                                                              h                (d) > 0.
     Aij h                                         0                



     Note also that the RHS of equation (3), (h - 1)Fj /f , is increasing in h for
                       THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                       27


 > 0 and the slope grows with  for h > 1. Namely,

                                    (h -1)Fj
                                       f               Fj
                                               = h-1      > 0,
                                     h                 f

and
                  (h -1)Fj
                     f                                     Fj
                             =      h-1 + h-1 log h           > 0 for h > 1.
                  h                                        f

Furthermore, as   0, h - 1  0, and the derivatives above converge to zero.
Hence, since the LHS of (3) is strictly positive for h > 1, there exists a threshold 0
such that if  < 0 , low productivity firms also adopt a new technology, although
with weakly lower h. In our example this threshold is such that 0 = 1 + a, as
proven above. Hence we have proven the following proposition:

Proposition 2 If a firm with productivity A chooses a technology h =  (A) , then
firms in the same sector with technology A  A choose technology  (A )   (A) .
That is,  (·) is a weakly increasing function. Furthermore, there exists a threshold
0 such that if  < 0 ,  (A) > 1 for all A.

   The results above allows us to match the fact, described as part of Fact 3
above, that smaller firms in industries that have experienced concentration also
expand their employment and number of establishments serving local markets.
We now present these results in detail for the case when we keep the distribution
of local markets constant.



3.3.   Equilibrium implications for a fixed distribution of local
       markets

   Absent general equilibrium effects that determine the distribution , firms
that adopt a better technology h, which are the more productive firms, enter
more locations. This is simply implied by  (hAij ) increasing in hAij . Further-
28                         HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



more, when the new technology is available, the difference between the number
of markets of productive and unproductive firms increases. Namely,

               ( (A) A)                                                 (A)
                                  =  (A) [ (A) A + 1] >  (A) =
                A         (A)=1                                        A

since  (A) > 0 by Proposition 2.
     Note also that absent general equilibrium effects, firms that adopt a bet-
ter technology have larger establishments, e.g. Lijn is increasing in Aij . Note
that, even though the new markets where the firm enters are less profitable, the
increase in productivity due to the new technology implies that the marginal
market has constant employment size. Employment size is given by

                                                                   
                                        -1      1             En
                       Lijn = (hAij )        1-                               (4)
                                                              wn
                                                     -1
                                             hAij
                            = ( - 1) f                    .
                                              n

Hence the marginal employment size, when hAij = n is ( - 1) f, which does


not depend on h. This is illustrated in Figure 5. Since firms with better tech-
nology enter more markets and have more employees per establishment, their
employment share necessarily increases when h > 1.
     Finally, note that in industries where the new technology is very good (
is low) there will be more concentration since top firms will adopt a larger h.
In those industries, less productive firms will also adopt a better technology,
although with a lower h (see Proposition 2). Hence, in a multi-industry economy
with elasticities of substitution across industries grater than one, employment
of the whole industry will increase, including employment of the bottom firms.
     The arguments above establish the following result for a single industry in
partial equilibrium:
Proposition 3 Given the distribution of markets , the new menu of technologies
results in more concentration of employment in more productive firms. Firms,
                      THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                   29


        Figure 5: The Effect of h > 1 on Employment and Market Entry




and more productive firms in particular, enter more markets and are larger in
each of them. The effects are more pronounced for small values of  , with no
effect if  is very large (since there is no adoption).

   Hence, our model can match Facts 1 to 4 if we identify a market n in the
theory as a city (MSA) in the data. In that case, national concentration in the
industry rises because top firms enter more markets with a larger scale. As
Table 8 shows, this is the case for MSA's but not for counties or establishments.
Matching Fact 4 for these narrower geographic units, requires us to tweak the
effects of the new technology further. We do so in the next section.


3.4.   A technology that reduces local fixed costs too

The model above implies that the advent of the new technology brings increases
in an adopter firm's average employment in a market. This prediction is consis-
tent with the evidence if we interpret a market as a city (MSA). However, it is
30                           HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



counterfactual if we interpret a market as a county or a single establishment. To
generate declines in the average employment size of adopters we need to allow
the new technology to reduce local fixed costs as well.
     Suppose that the new menu of technologies is as before but, in addition, lo-
cal fixed costs are now given by f h- . The exponent  > 0 determines the extent
to which fixed costs decline with the new technology. The exponent should
depend on the definition of a market. For a large geographic area we might
think that the cost did not change much beyond the overall firm fixed costs,
and so  = 0. For a smaller area, like a county or a single establishment,  > 0,
due to the ease in replicating standardized establishments (as exemplified by
companies like Starbucks).
     Note from the first line in equation (4) that, given En /wn , the fixed cost does
not affect establishment sizes directly. It does, however, determine entry into
marginal markets and the size of the smallest establishment of the firm, which is
given by ( - 1) f h- . For firms that choose h > 1, this implies that the smallest
establishment size of the firm falls. Hence, with the new technology, average
establishment sizes of existing firms fall for  large enough. This is illustrated in
Figure 6.
     Finally it is useful to realize that if  and  are high enough, average firm size
necessarily falls, since firms will choose a small h and so the establishments in
the best markets will only increase marginally in size, while (for  large) the firm
will add many new markets with smaller establishments. This is consistent with
Fact 4 in the previous section, if we interpret a market as a county or the area
served by a single establishment. We summarize these results in the following
proposition.


Proposition 4 Given the distribution of markets , if the new technology also
reduces fixed cost to f h- , the minimum employment size of the firm's establish-
ments falls, and average establishment size falls if  and  are large enough.
                         THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                        31


  Figure 6: The Effect of h > 1 on Employment and Market Entry when  > 0




3.5.    Multi-product firms and general equilibrium


Consider a firm that owns a collection of Ji technologies in a variety of indus-
tries j with productivity Aij . Each variety requires the firm to pay a fixed cost
Fj . When the firm obtains access to the new technology in each sector (with
potentially different parameters j and j in each sector), it will make a set of
upgrading decision j (Aij ). In some of its industries the firm might decide to
set j (Aij ) = 1 (e.g. if j is very high or its productivity is too low), or exit.
  Denote total industry employment by Lj , and economy wide employment,
                          ¯ = J Lj ,. Then the labor market clearing condi-
which we assume fixed, by L                 j =1

tion is given by

          J                       A                           -1
                                                   j (A) A                       ¯
                                      ( - 1) f                     j (d)  (dA) = L,   (5)
         j =1   A(Fj ,f,, )   0                       
32                                        HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



where
                           Aij                                  -1
                                                j (Aij ) Aij
                                     ( - 1) f                        j (d) = Lij
                       0                            

denotes firm's i employment in industry j,

                                     A                          -1
                                                    j (A) A
                                         ( - 1) f                    j (d)  (dA) = Lj
              A(Fj ,f,, )        0                     

denotes total employment in industry j , and

                Ji         Aij                                  -1             Ji
                                                j (Aij ) Aij
                                     ( - 1) f                        j (d) =          Lij
                j =1   0                                                       j =1


denotes total firm employment. Note that we have recognized above that the
distribution j varies by industry since it depends on expenditure in the indus-
try, Ejn .
       Overall, as long as (j , j ) is such that when the new technology is available
some firms adopt, j (Aij ) > 1, in some industries, those firms will hire more
employees for a given distribution of locations j , as described in Proposition
3. Hence, in equilibrium, the distribution j has to shift out to satisfy the labor
market equilibrium condition, as apparent from condition (5). The shift hap-
pens through an increase in the level of wages, which in the specific example of
j used above is represented by . Hence,  decreases which selects some firms
out of particular industries. As discussed above, A (Fj , f, j , ,  ), is decreasing
in  if it denotes the availability of good markets, as in the example.12
       The implication is that if the bottom firms in the industry do not adopt,
namely j > 0 , then some firms will exit. If, on the contrary, everyone adopts,
  12
    This argument assumes that the distribution j is invariant to the new technology apart
from its level . This will be the case with free mobility (or heterogenous preferences) and
constant proportional differences in amenities or productivity. Constant factor shares and
constant differences in local factor availability will preserve the distribution under free mobility
as well. As stated before, we stop short of developing the fully parameterized fundamental
model that gives rise to the distribution j to gain generality and avoid some distracting
notational details. A model with autarkic markets where workers cannot move at all would not
be consistent with this assumption.
                    THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                     33


then all outcomes are possible and depend on the total employment expan-
sion of industries, which in turn depends on the elasticity of substitution in
consumption between industry aggregates. In what follows we assume that the
bottom firms do not adopt (or adopt only marginally), namely, j > 0 .
   As long as agents have CES preferences with elasticity of substitution in con-
sumption grater than one across industry aggregates, this implications translate
into overall industry employment. Hence, firms gain employment in industries
where they are productive and the new technology is good (e.g. low j ), and
lose employment or exit industries in which they are not as productive and the
technology change is also large (low  ). The latter implication obtains since
the top firm in that industry then upgrade more significantly. In industries
with high  , nothing happens directly since there is no adoption. The general
equilibrium effect makes employment and establishments smaller, makes firms
exit local markets, and makes some firms exit the industry.
   In sum, the advent of the new technology implies that firms specialize by
leaving some markets and investing in others. The total employment size of the
firm grows because of the new investments in its main industries, but declines
due to tougher competition in its marginal industries and the decline in Ji .
The overall implication on employment size is ambiguous. We summarize the
findings in the following proposition:

Proposition 5 The availability of the new technology makes firms specialize, in-
vest, and grow their employment in industries where they are most productive,
and reduce employment or exit industries where they are less productive (if j >
0 ). The overall effect on firm employment is ambiguous.

   Consider a distribution of new technologies j across sectors J . Assume
that in a group of sectors j is large enough so that as described in Proposition
3 firms do not adopt the new technology given the distribution j . Suppose
also, that in other sectors,  is low enough such that some firms adopt. Be-
cause the marginal cost of these firms declines (wn /(hAij )), the price pijn =
34                          HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



(/ ( + 1)) (wn /(hAij )) declines as well since with CES preferences and monop-
olistic competition markups are constant. Hence, the industry ideal CES price
index, Pjn , in those industries falls relative to the price index of industries with
higher j where firms choose a smaller j (Aij ). The result is that consumption
expands in industries with low j and contracts in industries with high j . Note
that if the elasticity of substitution in consumption across sectors is grater than
one, this implies that output and employment shares in industries with low j
expand relative to industries with high j , as evident from equation (5) and the
fact that j is a decreasing function of expenditure in the industry, Ejn . We
summarize the result in the following proposition:


Proposition 6 If the technological innovation j is sufficiently heterogeneous across
industries so that j (·) is not identical for all j  J , and the elasticity of substi-
tution of consumption across industries is grater than one, industries with low j
increase their employment share, while those with high j contract.


     The results above show that in general equilibrium, our model is consistent
with all the facts outlined in the previous section. We do not show that the
employment of top firms does not grow, but the presence of effects in oppo-
site directions implies that the total effect on firm size should be smaller than
the effect on overall industrial concentration. Namely, firms get larger in their
main sectors, but specialize and drop more marginal ones. The last proposition
also illustrates the key parameter leading to the heterogeneity across industries
discussed in Fact 2, namely, j .



4.     Implications

Our interpretation of the secular changes the U.S. economy has experienced
for the last four decades is that they amount to a new industrialization pro-
cess. One that allows firms to expand geographically and deliver its goods and
                    THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                       35


services to costumers locally. We have argued that this evolution was the re-
sult of an underlying technological change that led to reductions in variable
costs (and establishment-level fixed costs) in exchange for larger firm-level fixed
costs. Section 3 presented a basic model of firm entry across markets to argue
that this form of new technological possibilities can explain the array of industry
and firm level facts we, and the previous literature, have documented.
   Previous work has identified elements of the technological changes we un-
derscore here. Sutton (1991) argues for the presence of new sunk cost tech-
nologies and describes their effect on market concentration, although he does
not emphasize the increasing geographic scope of firms, nor their resulting spe-
cialization. Holmes (2011) focuses on a single firm (Walmart) and studies its
geographic expansion and the resulting efficiency gains from investing in its
distribution network and inventory system. These technological changes are
certainly an example of the general evolution we have in mind. Hortac
                                                                    ¸ su and
Syverson (2015) also provide a consistent description of the evolution of con-
centration, scale, and geographic expansion of the retail industry. In a recent
paper, Ganapati (2018) studies the wholesale industry and argues also that the
patterns of industry concentration and expansion of the warehouses and inter-
national input use of the top firms, are consistent with the use of technologies
with higher fixed and lower marginal costs.
   It is perhaps hard to set apart a number of concurrent technological changes,
all of which are naturally intertwined. Information and communication tech-
nology (ICT) started in the 60's with the systematic use of corporate databases,
then continued with the invention and expansion of personal computers, elec-
tronic communication technologies and the internet, and the invention and
subsequent explosion in the use of smartphones (Hobijn and Jovanovic, 2001).
A number of papers have studied the way in which ICT has changed the or-
ganization of production (Caroli and Van Reenen, 2001), the decentralization of
decision making (Bresnahan et al., 2002), the span of control of managers (Rajan
and Wulf, 2006; Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg, 2006), and the distribution of
36                          HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



firm sizes (Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg, 2004). More recently, Aghion et al.
(2019b) study the growth implications of the ability of firms to manage more
establishment due to improvements in ICT.
     The form of technological change we emphasize here was certainly enabled
by ICT, at least partly, which explains its timing. The examples of fixed-cost
based technologies described in the introduction and the literature all have
a component that was facilitated either by better data collection and analysis
or by better communication and diffusion of information. It is undoubtedly
the case that new business processes that reduce the cost of managing many
different establishments requires easy communication, as well as cheap data
gathering and processing. Managing many hospitals and exploiting the syner-
gies between them would be impractical without the heavy use of ICT-based
systems. Thus, ICT is an essential part of the industrialization of services. It
is the general purpose technology, as defined by Rosenberg and Trajtenberg
(2004), that has enabled the geographic expansion of firms (particularly in retail,
services, and wholesale) by allowing them to replicate and control establish-
ments dispersed across space.
     Another phenomenon closely related to the new industrial revolution in ser-
vices is the rise in intangible capital. As Haskel and Westlake (2017) document,
intangible investments became increasingly important during the period of our
analysis. As they argue, intangible investments in marketing, technology, infor-
mation, or training, all facilitate scale and replication and as such amount to
the use of new technologies with higher fixed (or sunk) costs. Hence, the rapid
expansion of intangibles is a consequence of the type of technological change
we uncover.
     Finally, there is a large recent literature that has interpreted the increase
in industry concentration as an indication of the augmented market power of
top firms, perhaps facilitated by entry barriers or regulatory capture. This view
has been supported by evidence that points to increasing profits and markups
(Gutierrez and Philippon, 2017; De Loecker et al., 2018) and a decrease in mar-
                         THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                                   37


ket dynamism (Decker et al., 2017). Together with a number of other papers in
the literature (Hopenhayn et al., 2018; Syverson, 2019; Edmond et al., 2019), we
argue that the industrialization of services that we document is technological,
not institutional. Nevertheless, although we chose to model this process in
a world with CES preferences and, therefore, fixed markups, in a model with
variable markups these same technological changes could generate increases
in markups. We chose not to focus on this dimension of the industrial revolu-
tion of services partly because the magnitude of the overall trend in markups
is still controversial (see Traina, 2018, or Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2018) and
partly because the geographic expansion of top firms leads to declines in local
concentration (Rossi-Hansberg et al., 2018) that could enhance competition.
       We end this section with a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the impli-
cation of the technological revolution in the service sector for aggregate TFP
growth. With CES preferences across industries with elasticity of substitution ,
aggregate TFP is given by

                                                                1
                                             N                  -1

                                T F Pt =           T F Pjt -1        ,
                                             i=1


where T F Pjt is aggregate TFP of industry j in year t. In our model, aggregate TFP
in an industry is determined by the set of firms active in each market. Hence,
the entry of new top firms in a city increases industry TFP in the city, and by
extension, aggregate industry TFP in the country as a whole.13
       We proceed in three steps. First, the share of the change in aggregate TFP
due to TFP growth of industry j is given by

                                   T F Pjt+1 -1 - T F Pjt -1
                                                             .
                                    T F Pt+1 -1 - T F Pt -1
  13
     The aggregate measure of TFP in an industry is defined as T F Pjt = Yjt /Ljt = Rjt /(Pjt Ljt ).
In the data, Ljt and Rjt can be easily measured, but measuring Pjt is complicated since
it requires the prices per unit of quality of goods and services sold in each market, plus a
methodology to aggregate them across locations. These complications are particularly salient
for the service industries, where quality adjusted prices are notoriously hard to measure.
38                          HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG


                                                                             -1
                                                                   T F Pjt
Since the employment share of an industry is given by Ljt =        T F Pt
                                                                                  , the con-
tribution of TFP growth in an industry to aggregate TFP growth can be written
as
                                   Ljt+1 · g
                                           ~t - Ljt
                                                    ,
                                       g~t - 1
      ~t  ( - 1)  log T F Pt . Note that we only need to know g
where g                                                       ~ and the employ-
ment shares of the industry for this calculation ­ we do not need to know the
change in industry TFP. Intuitively, the change in the employment share of an
industry captures the effect of the change in industry TFP relative to aggregate
TFP.
     Second, we need to parse out the contribution of the technological changes
we described to industry employment. We have shown that the incidence of
the industrial revolution shows up in the market share of the top firms in the
industry. We can then calculate the share of aggregate TFP growth due to the
industrial revolution by the contribution of TFP growth in industries where top
firm concentration has increased:

                                        Ljt+1 · g
                                                ~t - Ljt
                                                         .                               (6)
                              j  T op>0
                                            g~t - 1

So given an estimate of g
                        ~t , we can calculate the contribution of the revolution
we document on aggregate TFP growth with only data on industry employment
and top firm shares.
     The third step is to calculate g
                                    ~. One option is to take the BLS' official num-
bers of aggregate TFP growth. However, the industries where the employment
share of top firms have grown, such as sit-down restaurants and hospitals, are
precisely the sectors where measurement of quality is very difficult. Instead of
using the BLS' numbers for aggregate TFP, we adopt the following approach.
The growth rate of aggregate TFP is given by

                                          N
                           log T F Pt =          jt  log T F Pjt                         (7)
                                          j =1
                          THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                             39


          Table 14: Aggregate Growth due to "Service Revolution," 1977-2013


                                                      =2             =3        =4

                Aggregate TFP Growth Rate             3.7%           2.4%      1.9%

                Due to "Service Revolution"            90%            88%      87%

        Note: The first row shows the weighted average of industry TFP from 1977 to 2013
        imputed from the growth rate of the employment share of the industry relative
        to the employment share in manufacturing and BLS' estimate of TFP growth in
        manufacturing. The second row uses equation 6 to impute the share of the service
        sector revolution in aggregate TFP growth from the change in employment shares of
        sectors where top firm concentration increased between 1977 and 2013.




where jt is the Sato-Vartia weighted average of the employment shares of the
industry in year t and t + 1.14 Suppose there is an industry j (say manufacturing)
for which we have a reliable number for industry TFP growth. Then the growth
rate of TFP for another industry k is given by

                                      1                Lkt
                      log T F Pkt =       log                   +  log T F Pjt              (8)
                                      -1               Ljt

So we make an assumption about the value of  to calculate the growth rate of
industry TFP from equation 8. Then we use equation 7 to calculate the growth
rate of aggregate TFP. After we do this, we then use equation 6 to calculate the
contribution of the technological revolution to aggregate TFP growth.15
       Table 14 shows the results from this calculation using the growth rate of
manufacturing TFP from 1977 to 2013 from the BLS as the benchmark (1% per
year). Using this number and  = 2, we get that aggregate TFP grew by 3.7% per

                                                       Ljt+1 -Ljt
  14                                               log Ljt+1 -log Ljt
       The Sato-Vartia weight is defined as jt    N       Lkt+1 -Lkt       .
                                                  k=1 log Lkt+1 -log Lkt
  15
    This methodology assumes homothetic CES preferences and, therefore, does not consider
potential changes in employment shares as the level of income changes. Such effects, that
would arise if consumers have non-homothetic preferences as in Buera and Kaboski (2012),
would yield different results.
40                          HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



        Table 15: Aggregate Growth due to "Service Revolution" by Period


                                              1977-1987    1987-1997     1997-2013

 Aggregate TFP Growth Rate (Official)            0.5%          0.6%         1.9%

 Aggregate TFP Growth Rate (Imputed)             2.9%          1.8%         2.7%

 Due to "Service Revolution"                     76%           86%           83%

 Note: Row 1 shows the growth rate of aggregate TFP from 1977-1987, 1987-1997, and
 1997-2013 as reported by the BLS. Row 2 shows aggregate TFP imputed from the change
 in employment share of the sector, the BLS' official numbers of growth rate of TFP in
 manufacturing, and assuming  = 3. The third row shows the share of the service sector
 revolution in aggregate TFP growth calculated from equation 6.




year from 1977 to 2013. The imputed growth rate of aggregate TFP falls as we
consider larger values of . With  = 4 the imputed growth rate of aggregate TFP
is 1.9%. All these numbers are substantially larger than the BLS' official number
for aggregate TFP growth from 1977 to 2013, which is 0.8%. The second row
in Table 14 shows the share of aggregate TFP growth due to the "service sector
revolution" computed from equation 6. The share of growth due to the "service
revolution" is remarkably stable around 88% for all three values of .
     Table 15 shows the same calculation for three time periods: 1977-1987, 1987-
1997, and 1997-2013. Here we assume  = 3 and that the BLS' official estimates
of TFP growth for manufacturing are accurate. The first row shows the BLS'
numbers for aggregate TFP growth in each period. The second row shows our
imputed TFP growth rate. The gap between the official BLS' numbers and our
imputed numbers are the largest for 1977-1987, and smallest for 1997-2013. The
contribution of "service revolution" is also the smallest in the 1977-1987 period.
     What accounts for the difference between our estimates of aggregate TFP
imputed from employment data and the official numbers? In the service sector,
the BLS measures the price of real output as the price of a well-defined service in
                           THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                                 41


   Table 16: Missing Growth due to Entry of New Establishments, 1977-2013


                                                       MSA                 County

                  Non-Manufacturing                    0.8%                 0.8%

                  All Sectors                          0.7%                 0.6%

        Note: The first row shows missing growth in the non-manufacturing sectors from
        1977 to 2013. The second row shows missing growth in all sectors from 1977 to 2013.
        Calculations assume the elasticity of substitution between varieties in an industry is
        3.




the same establishment. However, we have shown that the growth of top firms
in the service sectors is entirely driven by entry of top firms into new markets.
As argued by Aghion et al. (2019a), quality growth due to firm entry into new
markets is not measured by the BLS.
       Table 16 follows Aghion et al. (2019a) and measures the growth not captured
by the BLS due to entry of new establishments. We differ from Aghion et al.
(2019a) in that we measure missing growth in each locality, and then aggregate
missing growth across all the localities. Specifically, for the set of industries
present in a given location at the beginning and ending years ("incumbent in-
dustries"), we measure "missing growth" in each industry and location with
Aghion et al. (2019a)'s formula. Specifically, for the incumbent industries in
a city, "missing growth" due to firm entry can be measured as the weighted
average of the product of 1/( - 1) and the change in the log employment share
of incumbent establishments in each industry, where  is the elasticity of sub-
stitution between varieties in an industry and the weights are the Sato-Vartia
weights of the industry in the city. 16
       Second, in each location, primarily smaller cities, there is also entry of brand
new service industries. For each new industry in a location, we calculate miss-

  16
       We assume the elasticity of substitution between varieties  is 3.
42                           HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



ing growth due to new industries as the product of 1/( - 1) and the sum over
all the new industries of the log of the inverse of 1 minus the employment share
of the new industry in that city, where  is the elasticity of substitution across
industries.17 Total missing growth in the given location is the sum of missing
growth due to entry into incumbent industries and entry into new industries.
Finally, we aggregate missing growth in each city using the employment share
of each city in the final year.
       The results are shown in Table 16 using two definitions of cities: MSAs and
counties. As can be seen, there is more missing growth in the non-manufacturing
sectors. Missing growth in non-manufacturing averages 0.8% per year from
1977 to 2013. Missing growth in all sectors, including manufacturing, is lower
at .6% to .7% per year from 1977 to 2013. The difference is, obviously, missing
growth in manufacturing, which is essentially zero. Thus, "missing growth"
due to local market entry, can account for about half of the difference between
the BLS estimates of aggregate TFP growth and our results in Table 14. The
remaining difference measures the aggregate effect of the service revolution on
the productivity of incumbent establishments and new establishments within
these local markets, particularly those of top firms.



5.       Conclusion
We show that new technologies have enabled firms that adopt them to scale
production over a large number of establishments dispersed across space. Firms
that adopt this technology grow by increasing the number of local markets that
they serve, but on average are smaller in the markets that they do serve. Unlike
Henry Ford's revolution in manufacturing more than a hundred years ago when
manufacturing firms grew by concentrating production in a given location, the
new industrial revolution in non-traded sectors takes the form of horizontal ex-
pansion across more locations. At the same time, multi-product firms are forced
  17
       We assume  = 2.
                    THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                      43


to exit industries where their productivity is low or where the new technology
has had no effect. Empirically we see that top firms in the overall economy are
more focused and have larger market shares in their chosen sectors, but their
size as a share of employment in the overall economy has not changed.
   The result of this new industrial revolution affecting many non-traded sec-
tors is an increase in concentration and employment in these sectors. We see
that employment increases even for the bottom 90% of firms in an industry with
increasing concentration, suggesting that the new industrial revolution in these
sectors is broad based, but obviously has a larger effect on the top 10% of firms.
   We leaves three important questions for further work. First, it is important
to say more precisely what this new technology is. The timing of these trends
suggests that general purpose innovations in information and communication
technologies have probably facilitated these fixed-cost based sectoral innova-
tions. We also give some hints in our narrative in the introduction about the
Cheesecake Factory and the Steward Health Care Group, but that only scratches
the surface. We believe that a blend of quantitative and narrative accounts of
this new industrial revolution, in the style of Chandler (1993)'s seminal work on
the history of the industrial revolution in U.S. manufacturing, would be very
useful. We hope that others (or perhaps we will) take up this challenge in the
future.
   Second, our story potentially has implications for the distribution of income
and the distribution of employment of workers of different skills across loca-
tions. On the latter, the fixed cost technology is likely to be skilled worker in-
tensive and top firms may choose to locate these services in larger and skill
intensive cities. On the other hand, the expansion of top firms into smaller local
markets improves the quality of local services, which may make these locations
more attractive.
   Third, we provided a back of the envelope calculation of the implication of
increased concentration on aggregate TFP for the economy as a whole. It is pos-
sible to do something similar for intangible investment using the assumptions
of the model we laid out. But it should be clear that these calculations are only
the beginning, and our hope is that more reliable numbers will be forthcoming
in the future.




                                       44
                      THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                        45


References
Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Timo Boppart, Peter Klenow, and Huiyu Li,
  "Missing Growth from Creative Destruction," Working Paper, 2019.

  ,   ,   ,   , and   , "A Theory of Falling Growth and Rising Rents," Working Paper,
  2019.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen,
  "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms," NBER Working Papers
  No. 23396, 2017.

Bresnahan, Timothy F., Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin M. Hitt, "Information Technology,
  Workplace Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (1), 339376.

Buera, Francisco J. and Joseph P. Kaboski, "The Rise of the Service Economy," American
  Economic Review, May 2012, 102 (6), 2540­69.

Cao, Dan, Henry R. Hyatt, Toshihiko Mukoyama, and Erick Sager, "Firm Growth
  Through New Establishments," Working Paper, 2019.

Caroli, Eve and John Van Reenen, "Skill-Biased Organizational Change? Evidence from
  A Panel of British and French Establishments," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2001, 116 (4), 14491492.

Chandler, Alfred D., Jr., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American
  Business, Harvard University Press, 1993.

Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, "Declining
  Dynamism, Allocative Efficiency, and the Productivity Slowdown," American
  Economic Review, 2017, 107 (5), 322­326.

Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu, "How Costly Are Markups?,"
  Working Paper, 2019.

Furman, Jason and Peter Orszag, "Slower Productivity and Higher Inequality: Are They
  Related?," Working Paper Series WP18-4, 2018.
46                           HSIEH AND ROSSI-HANSBERG



Ganapati, Sharat, "The Modern Wholesaler: Global Sourcing, Domestic Distribution,
  and Scale Economies," Working Paper, 2018.

Garicano, Luis and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Inequality and the Organization of
  Knowledge," American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (2), 197­202.

     and   , "Organization and Inequality in a Knowledge Economy," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (4), 1383­1435.

Gaubert, Cecile, "Firm Sorting and Agglomeration," American Economic Review,
  November 2018, 108 (11), 3117­53.

Gawande, Atul, "Big Med," New Yorker, 2012.

Gutierrez, German and Thomas Philippon, "Declining Competition and Investment in
  the U.S.," NBER Working Paper No. 23583, 2017.

     and   , "Fading Stars," NBER Working Paper No. 25529, 2019.

Haskel, Jonathan and Stian Westlake, Capitalism without Capital: The Rise of the
  Intangible Economy, Princeton University Press, 2017.

Hobijn, Bart and Boyan Jovanovic, "The Information-Technology Revolution and the
  Stock Market: Evidence," American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (5), 1203­1220.

Holmes, Thomas J., "The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density,"
  Econometrica, 2011, 79 (1), 253­302.

Hopenhayn, Hugo, Julian Neira, and Rish Singhania, "From Population Growth to Firm
  Demographics: Implications for Concentration, Entrepreneurship and the Labor
  Share," NBER Working Papers No. 25382, 2018.

Hortac
     ¸ su, Ali and Chad Syverson, "The Ongoing Evolution of US Retail: A Format Tug-
  of-War," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2015, 29 (4), 89­112.

Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, "Accounting for Factorless Income," NBER
  Working Papers No. 24404, 2018.
                      THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN SERVICES                        47


Loecker, Jan De, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger, "The Rise of Market Power and the
  Macroeconomic Implications," Working Paper, 2018.

Rajan, Raghuram and Julie Wulf, "The Flattening Firm: Evidence from Panel Data on the
  Changing Nature of Corporate Hierarchies," The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  2006, 88 (4), 759­773.

Ramondo, Natalia, "A quantitative approach to multinational production," Journal of
  International Economics, 2014, 93 (1), 108 ­ 122.

Rosenberg, Nathan and Manuel Trajtenberg, "A General-Purpose Technology at Work:
  The Corliss Steam Engine in the Late-Nineteenth-Century United States," The
  Journal of Economic History, 2004, 64 (1), 61­99.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter, "Diverging
  Trends in National and Local Concentration," NBER Working Papers No. 25418, 2018.

Sutton, John, Sunk Costs and Market Structure: Price Competition, Advertising, and the
  Evolution of Concentration, MIT Press, 1991.

Syverson, Chad, "Macroeconomics and Market Power: Facts, Potential Explanations
  and Open Questions," 2019.

Traina, James, "Is Aggregate Market Power Increasing?      Production Trends Using
  Financial Statements," New Working Paper Series No. 17, 2018.
