                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          ARE REFEREES AND EDITORS IN ECONOMICS GENDER NEUTRAL?

                                           David Card
                                       Stefano DellaVigna
                                          Patricia Funk
                                         Nagore Iriberri

                                      Working Paper 25967
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25967


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We thank the editors and staff of the Journal of the European Economics Association, the
Quarterly Journal of Economics, the Review of Economics and Statistics, and the Review of
Economic Studies for their invaluable assistance and support. We also thank Dan Hamermesh,
Lawrence Katz, Andrei Shleifer, Lise Versterlund, and Heidi Williams for helpful comments, and
Manu Garcia for sharing code. We are also grateful to Luisa Cefala, Margaret Chen, Alden
Cheng, Manu Garcia, Johannes Hermle, Giovanni Kraushaar, Christopher Lim, Andrew Tai, and
a team of undergraduate research assistants for their extraordinary help. Nagore Iriberri
acknowledges financial support from grants ECO2015-66027-P MINECO/FEDER and IT869-13.
Patricia Funk acknowledges financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant
178887). The analysis plan is posted on the AEA registry under AEARCTR-0003048. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by David Card, Stefano DellaVigna, Patricia Funk, and Nagore Iriberri. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Referees and Editors in Economics Gender Neutral?
David Card, Stefano DellaVigna, Patricia Funk, and Nagore Iriberri
NBER Working Paper No. 25967
June 2019
JEL No. J16

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the role of gender in the evaluation of economic research using submissions to four
leading journals. We find that referee gender has no effect on the relative assessment of female-
versus male-authored papers, suggesting that any differential biases of male referees are
negligible. To determine whether referees as a whole impose different standards for female
authors, we compare citations for female and male-authored papers, holding constant referee
evaluations and other characteristics. We find that female-authored papers receive about 25%
more citations than observably similar male-authored papers. Editors largely follow the referees,
resulting in a 6 percentage point lower probability of a revise and resubmit verdict for female-
authored papers relative to a citation-maximizing benchmark. In their desk rejection decisions,
editors treat female authors more favorably, though they still impose a higher bar than would be
implied by citation-maximization. We find no differences in the informativeness of female versus
male referees, or in the weight that editors place on the recommendations of female versus male
referees. We also find no differences in editorial delays for female versus male-authored papers.


David Card                                        Patricia Funk
Department of Economics                           Università della Svizzera Italiana
549 Evans Hall, #3880                             Via Giuseppe Buffi 13
University of California, Berkeley                6904 Lugano
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           Switzerland
and NBER                                          patricia.funk@usi.ch
card@econ.berkeley.edu
                                                  Nagore Iriberri
Stefano DellaVigna                                University of the Basque Country
University of California, Berkeley                Bilbao
Department of Economics                           Spain
549 Evans Hall #3880                              nagore.iriberri@gmail.com
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3048
1     Introduction
Women are under-represented in the top ranks of many professions, including corporate manage-
ment (Bertrand and Hallock, 2001), law (Azmat and Ferrer, 2017), and academia (e.g., Ceci et
al., 2014). While numerous explanations have been offered for this gap, including differences in
competitiveness (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011; Reuben et al., 2015) and in the allocation of time
between work and family (Goldin, 2014), an abiding concern is that stereotype biases (Reuben et
al., 2014; Bordalo et al., forthcoming; Bohren et al., forthcoming) or other forms of discrimination
lead decision makers to undervalue the contributions of women. This concern is particularly salient
in economics, where the vast majority of gatekeepers ­ senior faculty, journal editors, and referees
­ are male (Ginther and Kahn, 2004; Bayer and Rouse, 2016; Lundberg, 2017).
    Existing evidence on gender biases in the evaluation of economic research is mixed. Blank (1991)
randomly assigned submissions at the American Economic Review to referees, with or without
masking the author's name and affiliation. She found a large but imprecisely estimated positive
effect of blinding on the acceptance rate of female-authored papers. Broder (1993) analyzed reviews
of National Science Foundation proposals, finding that female reviewers give lower average ratings
to female-authored proposals. Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2012) find no significant gap in the
relative evaluations of male- versus female-authored papers by male and female referees at an
anonymous economics journal. Chari and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2017) similarly find no disparity in
the acceptance rates of female- and male-authored papers for NBER conferences. Hengel (2018),
however, finds that female authors face a higher bar in the review process. Focusing on the general
climate in economics, Wu (Forthcoming) shows that online discussions of female economists often
contain negative personal comments. Nevertheless, Donald and Hamermesh (2006) conclude that
members of the American Economics Association exhibit a positive preference for female candidates
for the Association's executive board.
    In this paper we analyze the role of gender in the evaluation process, using anonymized data
on nearly 30,000 submissions to four leading economics journals: the Journal of the European Eco-
nomics Association, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, the Review of Economics and Statistics,
and the Review of Economic Studies. We combine paper characteristics ­ including the gender
and previous publication record of the authors ­ with information on the gender of the referees
assigned to the paper, their summary recommendations, the editor's decision, and the ultimate
citations received by the paper, regardless of whether it was accepted or not.1 We use these data
to analyze gender differences in how papers are assigned to referees, how they are reviewed, and
how editors use referee inputs to reach a revise and resubmit (R&R) verdict.2 We also examine the
effects of author gender on desk-rejection decisions and editorial delays. Our analysis follows the
   1
     We do not have access to any textual information in the referee report, the editorial letter, or the paper itself.
Our access agreement required us to extract the data from each journal's archive using a stand-alone program that
created a file with limited information on each paper, and no identifying information on authors or referees.
   2
     Since the vast majority of editors in our 2003-2013 sample period were male, it is not possible to examine the
impact of editor gender. The evidence in Bransch and Kvasnick (2017) suggests that having female editors does not
increase the share of female-authored papers published in top journals.



                                                          1
analysis plan AEARCTR-0003048, which we drafted prior to the completion of our data collection
to address concerns over data mining (see Christensen and Miguel, 2018).
       We complement our submissions data with information from a survey of 141 economists, allow-
ing us to compare our findings with the expectations of practitioners, as in DellaVigna and Pope
(2018). We also elicit beliefs about gender differences in the link between citations and quality to
aid in the interpretation of our findings.
       We begin in Section 2 with an overview of our submissions database. This builds on the 4-journal
sample collected by Card and DellaVigna (forthcoming), hereafter CDV, adding information on the
gender of authors and referees and the publication record of individual co-authors.3 We obtained
the names of authors and referees from each journal prior to our data extraction, then used a
combination of first-name coding and internet search to assign genders. We validate our approach
using a sample of published papers in the same journals, showing that we can assign gender to the
authors of 97% of these papers with misclassification rates of less than 1 percent.
       We find that two-thirds of the submissions in our database were written by all-male teams of
authors, 8% by all-female teams, and 19% by mixed-gender teams. We distinguish mixed-gender
teams by whether the most-published ("senior") co-author is female (3% of all submissions) or not
(16%), yielding four gender-mix categories for authors.
       In Section 3 we analyze the matching process by which papers are assigned to referees. As in
earlier studies (e.g., Dolado et al., 2012; Lundberg, 2017; Chari and Goldsmith-Pinkham, 2017),
we find that the share of female authors varies widely across fields, with roughly proportional
variation in the share of female referees. Even controlling for field and other factors, however,
editors are 7 percentage points (50%) more likely to assign a female-authored paper to a female
referee, suggesting that they are sensitive to gender-related issues in the review process.
       In Section 4, we conduct a simple audit-style comparison of the summary evaluations submitted
by female and male referees. Our most general models include paper fixed effects, allowing us to
quantify differences in assessments of the same paper by referees of each gender. Consistent with
the findings of Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2012) we find that the relative evaluations of female and
male-authored papers by male and female referees are very similar.
       Although these findings rule out any relative bias in males' assessments of female-authored
papers, they do not allow us to determine whether male and female authors face the same standards
for publishing their work. To make further progress we need to make between-paper comparisons,
accounting for differences in the quality of female- and male-authored papers. While there is no
perfect measure of quality, we observe citations, which are correlated with quality and are highly
relevant to publishers and editors. We therefore use citations as a noisy measure of quality, taking
account of potential sources of divergence between the two.
       We frame our analysis using the simple model developed in CDV. In this model, referee prefer-
ences for papers by different author groups can be inferred from the relationship between citations,
   3
     CDV only collected the publication record of the co-author with the most previous publications. We also gathered
more granular information on waiting times in the review process, information on the gender composition of the sub-
field of the paper, and information on the complexity of the abstract.


                                                         2
referee recommendations, and author characteristics. If referees are unbiased judges, papers by male
and female authors that receive similar referee evaluations will receive similar citations. Likewise,
editors' preferences for papers by different author groups can be inferred by comparing the relative
effects of author characteristics and referee recommendations on citations and R&R probabilities.
If editors select papers to maximize expected citations, the relative weights accorded to the referee
recommendations and author characteristics in the R&R decision model will be proportional to
their relative weights in the citation model.
       There are two important caveats. First, if published papers receive more citations, conditional
on quality, there is a potential "publication bias" in the relationship between paper characteristics
and realized citations. As in CDV, we address this by including in the citation models an indicator
for R&R status and a control function that corrects for endogeneity in the editor's decision.
       Second, there are potential gender biases in citations. Indeed, our survey respondents believe
that females receive about 6% fewer citations than males, holding constant the quality of their
papers. If males receive more citations, a finding of equal citations for male- and female-authored
papers with similar referee recommendations implies that referees are setting a higher bar for female-
authored papers. Assuming that female authors receive fewer citations conditional on quality, we
obtain a bound on the gender gap in the referee recommendations.
       We find that female-authored papers receive 22 log points (s.e.=0.05) more citations than male-
authored papers, controlling for the referee evaluations. Our estimate of this gender gap is robust
to alternative measures of citations and to a variety of alternative specifications. The magnitude
of the gap does depend on whether we control for the prior publications of authors, since females
have fewer prior publications and prior publications strongly predict citations. It also falls slightly
(to 17 log points, with s.e.=0.05) if we add controls for the institutional affiliation of authors.4
       For mixed-gender papers with a senior male co-author we find no difference in citations relative
to those authored by all-male teams, consistent with our survey respondents' expectations that
such papers are treated about the same as male-authored papers. For mixed-gender papers with a
senior female co-author, however, we find a 6 log point (s.e.=0.07) citation premium. We cannot
reject that this premium is one-half as large as the premium for papers written by all-female teams,
again consistent with our survey respondents' expectations about how such papers are treated.
       In Section 5 we study the R&R decisions of editors, given the referee recommendations and the
characteristics of authors and their papers. On average editors tend to follow the referees' recom-
mendations, putting essentially no weight on author gender in their R&R decisions. This means
that they are over-rejecting female-authored papers relative to a citation-maximizing benchmark.
       We then use our modeling framework to compute how the R&R rate would change if editors were
to reset the gender effects in their decision model to maximize expected citations. We estimate that
the R&R rate for female-authored NDR papers would increase from 12.3% to 18.5%, with no change
for mixed-gender papers. Assuming that about 30% of the papers written by a female economist
   4
    We use as our benchmark specification the one without institutional prominence since it was the one pre-specified
in the analysis plan, but we consider a large number of alternative specifications in our robustness tables.



                                                         3
have female co-authors and 70% have at least one male co-author (the shares in our sample),
her average R&R rate would rise from 14.3% to 15.9%. We also perform a similar calculation,
assuming that editors reset both the gender-related and publication-related decision weights to
maximize expected citations. Under this scenario, the R&R rate for papers by female economists
would rise from 14.3% to 16.0%, driven by a higher R&R rate for mixed-gender papers.
       There are two main explanations for our finding that female-authored papers receive more
citations, conditional on the referee evaluations. The first is that referees hold female authors to a
higher bar, perhaps because of stereotype biases. The second is that female-authored papers have
characteristics that lead to higher citations but are not as highly rewarded in the review process.
For example, female authors may tend to write more empirically-oriented papers, or concentrate on
certain topics within broad field categories that referees undervalue relative to expected citations.5
       To provide some evidence on this second explanation, we conduct an in-depth analysis of 1,719
papers published in the four journals in our sample between 2008 and 2015 (approximately the
same period that accepted papers in our main sample would be published). In this sample we
find a citation premium of 12 log points (s.e.=0.13) for female-authored papers and 24 log points
(s.e.=0.13) for mixed-gender papers with senior female authors, controlling for the same covariates
as in our main analysis, apart from the referee evaluations. These premiums are much less precisely
estimated than those from our main sample (which is nearly ten times larger), affirming the ad-
vantages of our main approach. Nonetheless, they replicate the key patterns, and are qualitatively
consistent with the findings of Hengel (2019) for a different sample of published papers.
       We then add controls for features of the published papers that are unavailable in our main
sample. First, we include detailed 2-digit JEL field controls.6 These controls nearly double the R2
in the citation regression, but barely affect the gender coefficients. Second, we include a series of
controls to capture the theoretical versus empirical content of a paper based on word counts (words
such as "proposition" and "standard error") and on qualitative ratings. We find that papers with
more formal modeling receive fewer citations, even controlling for field, and that female-authored
papers tend to have higher empirical content and less formal modeling. Thus, controlling for
measures of content leads to somewhat smaller citation premiums, 9 log points (s.e.=0.13) for
female-authored papers versus a baseline of 12 log points, and 13 log points (s.e.=0.15) for mixed-
gender papers with senior female authors versus a baseline of 24 points. This provides suggestive
evidence that paper characteristics play some role in explaining the gender gap in citations, though
given the imprecision of the estimated premiums we cannot reach a definitive conclusion.
       Returning to our main sample of submissions, we examine the desk-rejection process, which
provides information on editors' preferences free from any referee inputs. Across all submissions
   5
      A third explanation, that this gap reflects a tendency for female authors to submit papers that have been
circulating longer, is unlikely given that we find similar findings using the SSCI citations, which accrue only to
published papers.
    6
      For confidentiality reasons, the field controls in our main database are limited to 13 broad groups. Thus, papers
with code J 16 (economics of gender) are grouped with those in J 31 (wage level and structure), though our main
analysis does include a control for the fraction of female authors in each 2-digit JEL code, and another for "gender-
related" subfields.



                                                          4
(refereed or not), female-authored papers receive 24 log points more citations than male-authored
papers, conditional on other controls. An editor who sets a bar for desk rejection based on expected
citations should therefore give positive weight to female authorship. Consistent with this prediction,
we find that editors desk reject fewer female-authored papers, holding constant other characteristics.
The gap, however, is smaller than predicted by a citation-maximizing benchmark.
   We then address two further issues in the editorial process: Are some referees more reliable in
judging quality (as revealed by citations)? Do editors pay more attention to more reliable referees?
CDV find that the recommendations of more and less prolific referees are equally predictive of future
citations, yet editors tend to place more weight on recommendations from referees with more prior
publications. In the case of gender, we find that male and female referees are equally informative,
and that editors place equal weight on their recommendations in reaching an R&R decision. Thus,
editors appear to be gender-neutral in their use of referee inputs.
   Finally, in Section 6 we study gender-related differences in the speed of the review process. We
find no gender differences in the time that referees take to return a recommendation, or in the
time that editors take to reach a decision, or in the total length of time between submission and
acceptance for published papers. We conclude that female and male authors experience similar
editorial delays, in contrast to Hengel (2018) who studies gender differences in the time from
submission to acceptance at one journal.
   In light of these results, in our concluding section we offer a partial reconciliation of the myriad
findings in the literature. Some of these differences appear due, at least in part, to the different
strategies used to identify potential gender discrimination. One strategy, used by Broder (1993) and
Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2012), is an audit-style comparison of the recommendations provided by
different reviewers of male- and female-authored papers. These studies, like us, find no evidence of
differential biases against female-authored papers by male referees. This suggests that the animus
documented by Wu (2018) against female economists in online discussion boards (which is widely
attributed to male commentators) is absent in the review process.
   A second strategy is to compare outcomes for male- and female-authored papers without explicit
quality controls, e.g, the analysis of NBER submissions by Chari and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2017).
Like these authors, we find that female- and male-authored papers have similar R&R rates when we
do not control for prior author publications. A third strategy is to compare outcomes conditional on
quality controls. We are aware of only one prior analysis using this design ­ Donald and Hamermesh
(2006) ­ which comes to the opposite conclusion as us, albeit in a different setting (the election of
AEA officers). Finally, a fourth strategy is to compare outcomes when author identity (including
gender) is blinded. The only such study we are aware of, by Blank (1991), finds a relatively large but
imprecisely estimated effect of blinding on the acceptance rate of female-authored papers. Blank's
findings are consistent with ours, but her sample lacked the power to precisely estimate gender
differences. We return to the implications of our findings in the conclusions.




                                                  5
2        Data Extraction, Gender Coding, and Summary Statistics
2.1       Data Extraction
Our data are derived from information stored in the Editorial Express (EE) system used by each
of the four journals. For confidentiality reasons we wrote a program that could be run by journal
staff to create an anonymized data base, combining information in the EE system with gender
information from pre-coded lists of author and referee names (see below). We are grateful to the
four journals for agreeing to provide data access.7
        Our database builds on the submissions extract created by CDV in mid-2015. Google Scholar
(GS) has created new barriers to accessing its data base in the past few years. We therefore elected
to match our new data base back to the CDV data set and use the citations originally collected by
CDV.8 We include all submissions from the first year each journal started using the EE system up
to 2013 (as in CDV), leaving at least 1.5 years for citations to be realized.
        Gender Coding. Prior to running our extraction program we obtained a list of the names of
all authors and referees from each journal for the relevant years. We then developed a protocol for
assigning gender to the names on these lists. The protocol, laid out in Online Appendix Figure 1,
relies on a combination of (1) public lists of given names including the fractions of people in the
US and Germany with that name who are male; (2) lists of female economists' names; (3) a list of
common Chinese given names; (4) internet search by a team of research assistants. We developed
the protocol using a test data set of the names of 48,000 authors of articles published between 1990
and mid-2017 in a set of 63 economics journals (Online Appendix Table 1).
        Our protocol begins by assigning "unknown gender" to common Chinese first names, since these
names can be used by both males and females, and there are often multiple economists with the
same Chinese name. This exclusion affects less than 1% of names. We then classify an author as
female if both the US and German lists report that less than 1% of people with that first name
are male, or if the full name is present in one of the lists of female economists. Likewise, we classify
an author as male if one of the US or German names lists shows that over 99% of people with
that name are male and the other shows at least 50% are male.9 Finally, a team of undergraduate
research assistants looked up all names that remained unassigned.10 Overall we are able to assign
gender to about 97% of names in our test data set. As explained in Section 5.2, an audit of the
    7
      The data agreement with the journals has two conditions: (i) no analysis should present separate results by
journals, and (ii) unlike the CDV data set, this supplemented data set will not be posted, even upon publication.
    8
      Since CDV did not retain paper identifiers, we used a fuzzy match algorithm based on all the identifying variables
stored in the CDV data base. This yields perfect matches for all non-desk rejected papers, but many-to-many matches
for some desk-rejected papers. For papers with multiple matches, we calculate our primary measure of citations as a
simple average of asinh(citations) across all possible matches, though our results are virtually identical if we retain
all possible matches and weight by the inverse number of matches for a given paper.
    9
      These cutoffs were derived using the Econlit test data set. Since only 20% of economists are female, we have to
set higher cutoffs for assigning female gender than male to (roughly) equate the misclassification rates.
   10
      If the assistant initially assigned to the name could not find a match, it was passed on to a second assistant. We
had two separate assistants code a subsample of names that could not be assigned by the first-name procedure. The
coders disagreed only 1% of the time; in 11% of cases neither coder was able to find a name match; and in 14% of
cases only one of two coders found enough evidence to determine a gender.



                                                           6
genders assigned by our procedure for authors of 1,719 published articles in the four journals of our
main database yields an error rate of under 1% (Online Appendix Table 11).
    Analysis Plan. We posted an analysis plan on the AEA site under number AEARCTR-
0003048 prior to the completion of our data collection. In our analysis, we follow the steps outlined
in the plan, with the addition of a few robustness checks which we had not envisioned.
    Survey. To help interpret our findings, we conducted a survey of editors and economists, asking
about their perception of gender differences in the publication process. The survey, approved under
Berkeley IRB 2018-04-10955, was sent to three groups: (i) editors and co-editors at the 4 journals
in our sample; (ii) a stratified random sample of 200 economists (100 male and 100 female) with
at least 4 publications in our top-35 journal set from 2013 to 2017; (iii) all assistant professors of
economics in the top 20 US schools and top 5 European schools with PhDs in 2015-17. The views of
editors and co-editors are obviously relevant given their role in the publication process. The other
two groups were selected to represent the views of economists with considerable recent publication
experience, and of promising researchers at the start of their careers.11 Our response rates were
reasonably high, ranging from 35% to 50% depending on the group.
    Table I summarizes the responses to questions focusing on (i) how papers by mixed-gender
teams are treated in the review process; (ii) whether female-authored papers are more likely to be
assigned to female referees; (iii) how male and female referees evaluate male- and female-authored
papers; (iv) the likelihood that the editor gives an R&R to male- versus female-authored papers;
(v) the extent to which citations vary with author gender, holding constant the quality of a paper;
(vi) the informativeness of male and female referees; and (vii) the degree to which editors follow
the recommendations of male and female referees.
    We use these answers in three ways. First, following our analysis plan, we use the beliefs about
mixed-gender teams to motivate our classification into "senior female" and "senior male" teams.
Second, we use beliefs about the potential differences in citations for male-authored and female-
authored papers to help interpret the gaps in citations in our analysis. Third, we use the answers
as "priors" to benchmark our findings, as in DellaVigna and Pope (2018).

2.2    Summary Statistics
Table II presents summary statistics for the 15,147 submitted papers in our database that were not
desk-rejected (NDR) and were assigned to at least two referees. We present summary statistics for
the full set of 29,890 submissions in Online Appendix Table 2.12
    We classify papers into five groups based on the author-gender mix: (i) all-male teams (67% of
NDR papers); (ii) all-female teams (7%); (iii) mixed gender teams with a senior female co-author,
i.e., the co-author with most prior publications is female (4%); (iv) other mixed gender teams
(17%); and (v) gender undetermined, i.e., at least one co-author with unassigned gender (4%).
  11
     Within each group, we did not keep track of individual respondents. Within the second and third group, however,
we referred male and female respondents to different URL's to keep track of gender.
  12
     Among the non-desk-rejected papers, we exclude papers that were assigned to only one referee, since this process
(which is especially common at the Review of Economic Studies ) appears to be a form of desk-rejection.


                                                         7
Note that mixed gender teams in which none of the authors has any prior publications are assigned
to the "other mixed gender" category, leading to a higher average publication record for the mixed
gender teams with a senior female author than for any of the other groups (see below).
       The top row of the table shows our benchmark measure of citations, the inverse hyperbolic sine
(asinh) of GS citations, collected in mid 2015.13 Citations are highest for mixed-gender papers
(columns 3 and 4), followed by all-male papers (column 1), with all-female papers (column 2) at
the bottom. We plot the cumulative distributions of asinh(citations) by author-gender group in
Online Appendix Figure 2a, and of residualized citations after adjusting for our key control variables
(including prior author publications) in Online Appendix Figure 2b. The adjustment reverses the
ranking, with higher residualized citations at most quantiles for female-authored papers.
       Next we show the probability of an R&R verdict. Consistent with their relative citations, NDR
papers by mixed-gender teams have the highest probability of an R&R, followed by all-male papers,
with papers by female authors at the bottom. The editorial outcomes for all submissions (including
desk rejections), summarized in Figure I Panel A, show a parallel pattern, with the lowest rates of
desk rejection and highest unconditional rates of R&R for mixed-gender teams.
       We measure the productivity of authors by the number of publications in 35 high-impact journals
over the 5 years prior to submission (see Online Appendix Table 1 for the list of journals). On
average across all authors in our submissions data, about 50% of males and 65% of females have no
prior publications (see Figure I Panel C). We assign previous publications to each paper using the
publication record of the most prolific co-author. As shown in Table II, authors of mixed gender
papers have the highest numbers of prior publications. This is particularly true for mixed gender
teams with a senior female co-author, though part of the gap is mechanical given how we assign
papers for which none of the authors has any prior publications.
       The number of coauthors is a key characteristic of papers that is highly correlated with author
gender, since the likelihood of an all-female team of 2+ authors is relatively low in a field where
only 20% of authors are female. Indeed, the rate of single authorship is over twice as high among
all-female papers (72%) than all-male papers (36%) in the NDR sample.14
       Another important characteristic of papers is field. We classify submissions into 13 broad
groups based on their JEL code(s) and include separate codes for papers with no JEL codes, and
for those that fall outside the main groups.15 Author gender is correlated with field: female authors
are more prevalent in the empirical micro fields like labor and development, and less prevalent in
  13
      We use the asinh transformation to accommodate zero citations. Bellemare and Wichman (forthcoming) de-
rive the elasticity of y with respect to x for a specification like asinh(y ) = x + u. For a continuous x this is
(x/y ) y 2 + 1  x for y  2. To address concerns about 0 citations, we present Poisson and Tobit models below,
as well as models using ln(1 + y ) as the dependent variable.
   14
      Interestingly, the fraction of single-authors who are female is very close to the fraction of authors of 2-author
papers who are female, suggesting that females are no more likely to work alone. There is, however, some evidence
of assortative matching of co-authors by gender. For example, among 2-authored papers the fraction written by two
females is 4.1%, higher than the 2.5% rate expected under random matching.
   15
      We classify a paper with J JEL codes as being assigned with weight 1/J to each of the listed fields. Some 11% of
papers in our database do not have JEL information at submission and are thus coded as having missing field; most
of these observations are due to two of the journals not collecting JEL information over 2 years.



                                                          8
econometrics, finance, macro, and micro theory. Reassuringly, the share of female authors in
different fields in our database is highly correlated with the share among papers in the EconLit
database we use to validate our gender assignment process (Online Appendix Figure 3a), as is the
share of female referees assigned to papers in a field (Online Appendix Figure 3b).
         Since our data access agreement precluded the extraction of detailed JEL codes, we developed
two measures of the gender-related content of different subfields. The first is the share of female
authors of papers with each 2-digit JEL code published in the past 5 years in our EconLit sample of
journals. The second is a simple indicator for JEL codes associated with gender-related topics, which
we take to be D1 (Household Behavior and Family Economics), J1 (Demographic Economics), K36
(Family and Personal Law), and K38 (Human Rights Law and Gender Law). As Table II shows,
all-female teams and mixed-gender teams with a senior female co-author are more likely have JEL
codes in "high female share" fields, and to include JEL codes indicating a gender-related topic.
         Next we turn to the referee recommendations and characteristics of the referees. The summary
recommendations in EE fall into 7 categories, ranging from "Definitely Reject" to "Accept".16
Figure I Panel B shows the distributions of summary recommendations by author gender. Most
papers receive a "Reject" or "Definitely Reject" recommendation. Again, mixed gender teams are
more likely receive a better review, while all-female author teams are less likely.
         Finally, turning to the referees, on average about 15% are female. As is the case for authors,
female referees tend to have fewer publications than male referees (Figure I Panel D).


3         Assignment of Referees
We begin our analysis by studying the matching process used by editors to assign NDR papers to
referees. This tells us how editors treat different types of mixed gender teams, and provides some
potential evidence on editors' concerns about gender-related issues in the review process.
         As shown by the first set of vertical bars in Figure II, papers by all-female authors are assigned
to female referees at nearly twice the rate (26 percent) as papers by all-male authors (14 percent).
Mixed-gender author teams fall in between, with a higher rate for those with a senior female
co-author (21 percent) than for the other mixed-gender papers (18 percent).
         These simple comparisons do not account for other relevant paper characteristics, such as the
field of the paper. We thus estimate linear probability models for the event that a paper is assigned
to a female referee with our full set of controls, including journal-by-submission-year effects, the
number of authors, the number of publications of the most prolific co-author, indicators for broad
field, the share of female authors in the 2-digit JEL code(s) of a paper, and an indicator for gender-
related subfields. We also control for the publication record of the referees assigned to each paper.
We plot the residualized differences by author gender using the second set of bars in Figure II.17
    16
    There are actually 8 categories, but "Conditionally Accept" and "Accept" are so rare we group them in one.
    17
    Online Appendix Table 3 reports the corresponding coefficients. We also examine, for comparison, the probability
of being assigned to a referee with 3 or more recent publications. Controlling for other variables, female-authored
papers are significantly less likely to be assigned to such referees, but the effect is small, a 5 percent reduction.



                                                         9
Compared to all-male authored papers, female-authored papers are 7 percentage points (s.e.=1 ppt)
more likely to be assigned to a female referee, mixed-gender papers with a senior female co-author
are 5 percentage points more likely, and other mixed-gender papers are only 3 percentage points
more likely. The differences between the two mixed-gender groups motivate our choice to analyze
these groups separately, along the lines described in our analysis plan.18
         One explanation for this gender-matching is that editors are concerned about reviewer biases.
Indeed, the editors in our survey think that male reviewers are less likely to give a positive evaluation
of female-authored papers than female reviewers (17.5% probability versus 20.7%). They are also
more likely to expect gender-matching in the assignment of female authored papers than other
groups in our survey. Another possible explanation (for which we have no evidence) is that female
authors are more likely to cite other female authors ­ perhaps because they are working in an area
dominated by female authors ­ and editors tend to select referees from a paper's bibliography. It is
also however possible that the gender difference is due to subfield differences in the share of female
authors and referees which our field controls do not capture.


4         Referee Recommendations
4.1        Simple `Audit' Comparison
The next question is whether referee gender actually affects the evaluations of papers. We use
two main measures of referee support. The first summarizes the seven referee recommendations
into an index based on the predicted asinh(GS citations) associated with each category, using the
coefficients from the main citation model in CDV (Table 2, Column 4). A second, simpler measure
is the share of recommendations that are positive ­ that is, "Revise and Resubmit" or better.
         Figure III Panels A and B compare the mean assessments by referee gender and author gender
mix for papers assigned to at least one referee of each gender, with confidence intervals constructed
by clustering at the paper level. We weight paper/referee observations by the inverse number of
referees for a paper so that each paper receives equal weight. On average, female and male referees
give very similar evaluations, tracking each other closely across author groups. There is no evidence
of a relative assessment gap between male and female referees that depends on author gender.19
         Table III presents a series of models at the referee-paper level, weighing by the inverse number
of referees for the paper. With no additional controls (Columns 1 and 5), papers by all-female
authors receive significantly lower evaluations, as do those by author teams with undetermined
gender. When we add controls for field, number of authors, and previous publications (columns 2
and 6), however, we find no differences in how the referees assess all-female or mixed gender papers
with a senior female author relative to all-male papers (the omitted group).
    18
     In our analysis plan we wrote "We intend to use this pattern of assignment to infer how editors classify mixed-
gender papers. Suppose for example that the rate of assigning a female referee is different for mixed gender papers
with a senior author who is female [...] than for mixed gender papers with a senior author who is male. This would
suggest that it is important to analyze the two mixed-gender author groups separately."
  19
     We find a similar pattern if we use the full set of submissions up to 2017 (Online Appendix Figure 4a-b).



                                                        10
       To test for any differential assessment of male- versus female-authored papers, we include pa-
per fixed effects in columns 3 and 7, identifying the within-paper difference in assessments between
male and female referees. By interacting referee gender with the author gender mix we identify
the differences-in-differences in the evaluation of female versus male referees for papers by a par-
ticular author gender group, relative to all-male papers. In Columns 4 and 8 we add additional
controls--interaction between referee gender and author publication, referee gender and field of the
paper, and author gender mix interacted with referee publications--to ensure that the estimates
are not biased by the fact that, say, female referees have fewer publications and referees with fewer
publications are more likely to recommend an R&R for a particular author gender team.
       Using any of these specifications, we find no large or statistically significant interactions between
referee gender and author gender mix. Thus, there is no evidence of any relative bias by referees of
one gender for or against papers by authors of the other gender.20 This differs from the predictions
of our survey respondents, who expected that female referees would be a bit more positive toward
female-authored papers. In fact, if anything female referees (controlling for referee publications)
are somewhat less likely to recommend positively on papers of all genders.
       Our results are consistent, however, with findings in Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2012) who com-
pare the effects of having a female referee for female-authored papers at an anonymous journal with
double-blind refereeing, comparing submissions in 2000-08 (when internet searches could presum-
ably reveal the author identities) to those in 1986-94 (when authors were more likely anonymous
to the referee). Our estimated interaction effect between all-female authors and female referees in
Column 8 (-0.007, s.e.= 0.031) compares to their "triple interaction" estimate of -0.01 (s.e.=0.08).

4.2       Model for Recommendations and Citations
Although the results in Table III rule out any large or statistically significant relative bias among
male versus female referees, they do not necessarily imply that referees set the same standards for
female and male authors. It is possible that referees of both genders are biased for, or against,
female-authored papers. To make further progress we need to make comparisons across papers by
different gender groups, taking into account differences in quality.
       We proceed by using realized citations as an indicator of quality. Building on the simple
model in CDV, we assume that each paper has true quality q which is only partially observed by
editors and referees. At the R&R decision stage, the editor observes the gender composition of
the author team, F , a set of other characteristics of the paper and author(s) x1 , and the referee
recommendations R. For expositional purposes we assume that F and R are 1-dimensional, though
in our analysis both are multi-dimensional. We assume that expected quality is a simple linear
function of x  (x1 , F, R):
                                      E [q |x] = 0 + 1 x1 + F F + R R.                                           (1)

In addition, we assume that the prediction error q  q - E [q |x] is normally distributed with mean
  20
     Online Appendix Table 4 shows that these results do not appear to differ for more "senior" female referees (that
is, referees with 3+ publications), versus the other female referees.


                                                         11
0 and standard deviation q .21 Equation (1) allows for the possibility that the referees set higher
or lower thresholds for assigning their recommendations based on the characteristics of the paper
or its authors. If, for example, referees tend to give more negative evaluations to female-authored
papers conditional on the factors included in x1 , then F > 0.
       The second component of the model is the decision process of editors. We assume that the
editor observes a noisy signal s of the error component q , with s = q +  , where   N (0, 2 ).

Conditional on s and x, the editor's expectation of the paper's quality is:

                                    E [q |s, x] = 0 + 1 x1 + F F + R R + v,                                             (2)

             2 /( 2 +  2 ). With this forecast in hand, the editor then decides whether to reject
where v  s × q   q    
the paper or invite a resubmission. For simplicity we assume that the editor makes a revise and
resubmit decision (RR = 1) if E [q |s, x] is above some threshold:

                       RR = 1  0 + 1 x1 + F F + R R + v > 0 + 1 x1 + F F,                                               (3)

where 1 and F incorporate editorial tastes for papers with different characteristics. In particular,
if F > 0 the editor imposes a higher standard for female-authored papers.
       Under our assumptions v is normally distributed, and the R&R decision is a probit model:

                                           0 - 0 + (1 - 1 )x1 + (F - F )F + R R
                  P [RR = 1|s, x] =                                                                                     (4)
                                                            v
                                        = [0 + 1 x1 + F F + R R]

where 0 = (0 - 0 )/v , 1 = (1 - 1 )/v , F = (F - F )/v , and R = R /v .
       The third and final component of the model describes the determination of citations. We
assume that cumulative citations c (measured some time after the determination of RR status)
reflect a combination of quality and other factors summarized by  : c = q +  . One important
factor included in  is the time from submission to the measurement of citations: we assume that
this is incorporated in x1 . In addition, citations can depend on the gender of the author team, on
the editor's R&R decision (which will determine whether the paper is published in the particular
journal or not) and other random factors captured in an error component  :

                                       = 0 + 1 x1 + F xF + RR RR +  .                                                   (5)

Combining equations (5) and (1) leads to a simple model for citations:

                                c = 0 + 1 x1 + F F + R R + RR RR +                                                      (6)
  21
     A more complete model would start from an assumption about the formation of referee recommendations, con-
ditional on (x1 , F ), and derive the posterior distribution of quality conditional on (x1 , F, R). We note that if referees
submit their posterior estimates of quality given paper characteristics and their own reading of the paper ­ so
R = E [q |x1 , F, read] ­ then we would expect 0 = 1 = F = 0 and R = 1.



                                                            12
where 0 = 0 + 0 , 1 = 1 + 1 ,F = F + F , R = R , RR = RR , and  = q +  .
   A concern for estimation of the  coefficients in equation (6) is that when editors have private
information, RR status will be correlated with . In this case a simple OLS regression of citations on
the variables (x1 , F, R) and RR status can lead to biases. To address this, we assume that different
editors have different quality thresholds for reaching an R&R decision (i.e., different values of 0 )
but that the particular editor assigned to a paper has no direct effect on citations. This allows
us to use the "leave out" R&R rate for the editor assigned to a paper as an instrumental variable
for the editor's decision. Rather than estimating equation (6) by IV, we adopt a control function
approach and include the generalized residual r from a probit model for the editor's decision that
includes x and the instrumental variable. Specifically, we estimate the augmented citation model:

                        c = 0 + 1 x1 + F F + R R + RR RR + r r +  .                              (7)

As shown by Wooldridge (2015), the inclusion of r absorbs the endogenous component of the R&R
decision, yielding consistent estimates of RR and the other coefficients of interest.
   By comparing the effects of author gender on citations and the R&R decision, we can make an
inference about the relative threshold that editors impose on female authors. As a starting point,
suppose that F = 0, so the gap between citations and paper quality is unaffected by author gender.
In this case the coefficients of R and F in the citation model are R = R and F = F , while the
corresponding coefficients in the R&R probit model are F = (F - F )/v , and R = R /v . If
editors impose the same bar for male and female authors (i.e., F = 0) we would expect to find

                                                      cite-max
                             F = F /v = (F /R ) × R = F                                          (8)

in the R&R model. In the absence of editorial preferences for or against female authors, and any
gender bias in citations, the effects of the referee recommendations and the female indicator will
be proportional in the models for citations and the editor's decision. The expected coefficient in
the R&R probit under these assumptions is the same as the one that would emerge if editors
selected papers based on the highest expected citations. We therefore refer to equation (8) as the
"citation-maximizing" benchmark for the coefficient of F in the R&R probit.
   In contrast, if editors impose a higher bar on female authors (i.e., F > 0), then we would
expect a systematic deviation from proportionality, with

                                                   cite-max
                                  F = (F - F )/v < F        ,

i.e., a more negative effect of author gender on R&R rates. Conversely, if they impose a lower bar
                                            cite-max
on female authors, then we would expect F > F        .
   Suppose now that F < 0, so female authors get fewer citations than males, controlling for
quality. In this case, the coefficient of F in the citation model is F = F + F < F . If editors
impose the same quality bar for male and female authors we would expect a coefficient for female



                                                 13
authors in the R&R model that is more positive than under the citation-maximizing benchmark:
           cite-max
F = F /v > F        . Thus, if F < 0, the citation-maximizing benchmark is a lower bound on
the expected coefficient for female-authored papers in the R&R model. In this case, a finding that
the estimated coefficient in the R&R model is below the citation-maximizing benchmark can be
interpreted as strong evidence that editors are not evaluating papers according to expected quality.

       Gender Bias in Citations. To get a sense for the magnitude of any potential gender gap in
citations, we asked our survey respondents to quantify their beliefs about the gap: "Now consider
two different papers in the same field of comparable quality, one written by female authors, the other
written by male authors. Do you think the female-authored paper will get more, about the same, or
fewer citations? If you answered more or fewer, how large do you think the citation difference will
be in log points? For example, if you think that female-authored papers will have X log points (X
percent) higher citations (conditional on quality), write X. If you think that female-authored papers
will have X log points (X percent) fewer citations (conditional on quality), write -X."
       While this question is admittedly a difficult one to answer, we found agreement on two points.
First, the modal response across all groups is that there is no differential citation bias. Second, to
the extent that there is a difference, respondents expect that female authors receive fewer citations
than male authors (see Table I and Online Appendix Figure 5). The mean elicited citation bias
is -6.5 log points: -3.5 to -4.7 log points among male respondents; -10.2 to -11.1 log points among
female respondents; and -3.8 log points among editors.

4.3      Citations Conditional on Referee Evaluations
With this background, we consider the evidence on citations, starting with graphical evidence. In
Figure IV Panel A, we plot average asinh(citations) for each recommendation category, separately
by author gender mix. We residualize citations with respect to all the controls, including the prior
publications of authors.22 At nearly each referee recommendation, female-authored papers have
higher citations than male-authored papers, with a 20 log point average difference. This suggests
that papers by all-female authors are held to a higher bar by the referees. This pattern is the same
for male and female referees (Figure IV Panel B), consistent with the findings in Table III.
       To aggregate across the recommendations of the different reviewers, we turn to the regression-
based models in columns 1-4 of Table IV.23 We summarize the referee opinions by the fractions of
recommendations in each of the 7 categories allowed in Editorial Express. CDV document that this
simple procedure provides a relatively accurate representation of the effect of the recommendations
on both citations and the editor's R&R decision. To account for the facts that citations accumu-
late gradually over time, and that average citations likely differ for papers submitted to different
journals, we include journal × submission-year effects in all our models.
       In a specification that controls only for the referee recommendations and journal-year fixed
  22
     Online Appendix Figure 6d shows the same graph with confidence interval. Online Appendix Figure 6a shows
the evidence for the raw citation variable, with no controls.
  23
     The specifications in this table follow exactly the format laid out in the analysis plan.



                                                     14
effects (Column 1), female-authored papers receive 7 log points (s.e.=0.05) fewer citations than
male-authored papers and mixed-gender papers receive 26-37 log points more citations. Once we
add controls for prior publications, the number of co-authors, broad fields, and our two measures
of gender-related fields (Column 2), however, the estimated citation premium for all-female teams
rises to 24 log points (s.e.=0.06), while the premiums for mixed-gender teams fall and are insignif-
icantly different from 0. These results show the importance of controlling for paper and author
characteristics in making inferences about gender-related citation gaps.
   We stress the interpretation of the results in Column 2. This specification controls for all
observables, but not for referee recommendations. Thus, the 24 log point citation premium for all-
female papers implies that, among all (non-desk-rejected) submissions, the papers with all-female
authors appear to have higher quality, conditional on other observables.
   How do these results change once we control for the referee recommendations in Column 3? All-
female papers still have a significant citation premium of 22 log points, and mixed-gender papers
continue to have small and statistically insignificant premiums relative to all-male papers.
   As mentioned above, a confounding issue is that, to the extent that published papers get more
citations, the effect of the referee reviews on citations could be biased. In column 4 we therefore
add an indicator for a paper's R&R status and a control function to deal with the endogeneity of
R&R status. Specifically, the control function is the estimated generalized residual from the probit
model for the editor's R&R decision shown in column 7 of Table IV (and discussed below) that
includes the leave out mean R&R rate of the editor who handles each NDR paper as an instrumental
variable for R&R status.
   This specification, which we take as our benchmark citation model, yields very similar estimates
to the ones in the simpler model in column 3. In particular, the estimated citation premium for
female-authored papers remains at 22 log points (s.e.=0.05). We interpret this gap as implying that
a paper by an all-female team on average needs to have 25 percent (exp(0.22) - 1 = 0.25) higher
citations (relative to a similar paper by an all-male team) to receive comparable recommendations.
This gap is equivalent to the difference in citations between a paper that receives two "Weak R&R"
recommendations and one that receives one "Weak R&R" and one "R&R" recommendation.
   To the extent that female-authored papers tend to receive fewer citations than male-authored
papers, the quality gap is even larger. Taking our estimate from the survey of a 6 log point gender
bias in citations, female-authored papers would have to be of 28 log points (32%) higher quality
than male-authored papers to receive the same referee assessment.
   Turning to mixed-gender teams, we find a relatively precise 0 citation gap for mixed-gender
papers in which the senior author is male, consistent with the survey responses that indicate that
such papers are considered similar to male-authored papers. For mixed-gender papers with a senior
female author, the citation gap is 6 log point (s.e.=0.07). We cannot reject the hypothesis that
these papers are treated "half-way" between female-authored and male-authored papers, the modal
answer given by our survey respondents about how such papers are treated in the review process.




                                                15
4.4   Robustness and Heterogeneity
Robustness. Three possible concerns with the estimated citation premiums for female-authored
papers in our benchmark model are that (i) they may reflect the effect of some unobservable
variable that is correlated with gender, (ii) they may depend on the functional form used for
measuring citations, or (iii) they may be due to a peculiar subset of the data. We thus consider
a broad spectrum of robustness checks, summarized in Table V. For each specification (shown in
a separate row), Columns 1-3 display the coefficients on the three author-gender variables from
our citation regression, including the full set of controls as in Column 4 of Table IV. We discuss
below the associated coefficients for the R&R decision, reported in Columns 4-6. For several of the
robustness specifications, we report additional information in online appendix tables.
   As far as unobserved factors, adding controls in Table IV significantly increased the estimated
citation premium for all-female papers. If other unobservables tend to have the same correlations
with female authorship and citations (as formalized in Altonji, Elder, and Taber, 2005), their
omission would tend to downward-bias the estimate of the all-female citation premium. To provide
more detail, Online Appendix Table 5 displays citation models with subsets of controls (including
in all cases the referee recommendations and year-journal fixed effects). When we add only field
controls, the results are similar to the specification with no controls. Adding the author publication
variables shifts the coefficient on the all-female papers to 0.14 log points (s.e.=0.05), indicating that
author publications are the key controls. Further adding controls for the number of authors raises
the premium for all-female papers to 0.22, our benchmark specification.
   Another possibility is that our controls for the publication record--the maximum number of
publications in the 5 years prior to submission across the coauthors--are too crude. When we
add controls for the average number of publications among the coauthors, for publications in
top-5 journals (as opposed to 35 high-quality journals), and for publications 6-10 years prior to
submission, the citation premium for all-female papers is unaffected. When we further add measures
of the quality of the institution of the co-authors (reported also in row 1 of Table V), the citation
premium for all-female authors falls to 0.17, while the premium for mixed-gender teams with a
senior female coauthor falls to 0.04. On average, female authors are located at slightly more
prestigious institutions, and papers by authors at higher-ranked institutions get more citations, so
the addition of these controls lowers the estimated female author premiums by 2-4 log points.
   A third possibility is that our field controls are not sufficiently detailed, and that females tend
to write papers in particular sub-fields which tend to get more citations. Contrary to this line of
reasoning, however, Table IV shows that both the average share of female authors in a sub-field and
the share of sub-fields in gender-related areas have small, insignificant effects on citations. Still,
to further address this, in the specification reported in row 2 of Table V (also reported in Online
Appendix Table 5) we introduce interaction terms that allow the effect of the field variables to differ
by year, and the effect of the gender-sub-field variables to differ by field. These additional controls
slightly increase the female-author premium to 0.19 log points (s.e.=0.05). Taken as a whole, there
is little evidence of an upward bias due to sub-field differences.


                                                   16
       Next, in Online Appendix Table 6 we focus on alternative specifications of the citation model:
(i) ln(1 + citations); (ii) a Poisson count model; (iii) the percentile of citations within the cohort of
submissions to the same journal in the same year; (iv) an indicator for papers in the top x percent
of citations, where x corresponds to the R&R rate in that journal-year cell (summarized in row 3 of
Table V); (v) an indicator for "superstar" papers in the top 2 percent of citations for the journal-
year cell; (vi) a Tobit specification for asinh(citations), top-coding citations at 100. While one
cannot directly compare the estimated citation premiums in these various models, we can compare
their magnitudes to those of the referee recommendations. In our baseline model, the coefficient for
an all-female authored paper is 12% as big as the coefficient for an R&R referee recommendation
(0.22/1.89=0.12). In the probit model for being in the top x percent of citations, that ratio is
similarly 12% and it rises to 22% in the probit model for being in the top 2% of citations, suggesting
that female-authored papers have an even higher relative likelihood of achieving "superstar" status.
       We then address two additional concerns about our citation measure: the role of papers with
zero citations; and our use of Google Scholar rather than Social Science Citations Index (SSCI)
citations. About 19% of all NDR papers in our data base have zero GS citations; it is possible
that some of these papers may be recorded as zero citations due to, say, a special character in
the author name or a typo in the title.24 We deal with this in two ways: re-estimating the model
excluding papers with 0 citations; and by explicitly modeling the left censoring of citations at zero
using a Tobit model (see columns 7 and 8 of Online Appendix Table 6). In both cases, the relative
coefficient of all-female papers is 12% as big as the coefficient for an R&R referee recommendation,
as in our benchmark specification.
       Finally, we re-estimate the model using SSCI citations, which only include citations to published
papers from other published papers. We limit the sample to submissions in the years 2006-2008 and
fit a left-censored tobit model, given that, even among 2006-2008 submissions 60.8% have zero SSCI
cites. This specification yields a 0.32 citation premium for all-female papers (s.e.=0.15), 16% as
large as the estimated effect of an R&R recommendation.25 Thus, our finding of a sizable positive
citation premium for female-authored papers is robust to how we measure citations.
       Heterogeneity. Table V also reports a variety of estimates fit to different subgroups. We
estimate a larger female-author effect for papers from the earlier years (2003-2009, in row 6) than
in the later years (2010-2013, in row 7). Citations to older papers are presumably less affected by
factors such as conference presentations and prior circulation of working papers, so the finding of a
larger female premium for older papers suggests that male authors may have short term advantages
that if anything lead us to under-estimate the premium for all-female author teams.
       Next, we estimate our baseline model separately for papers with 1 author, 2 authors, and 3+
authors (with the full results in Online Appendix Table 7). We estimate a citation premium for
female authors of 17 log point with a single author (row 9) and 34 points with 2 authors (row 10).
  24
     We investigate the possible correlation between author gender and missing citations using a subset of published
papers in Section 5.2, and find no evidence of such a correlation.
  25
     See column 10 of Online Appendix Table 6. For reference we also re-estimate our preferred model for
asinh(GS citations) using a Tobit model for the 2006-2008 period, yielding similar estimates.



                                                        17
For papers with 3+ authors we cannot reliably estimate the impact of an all-female team, given
the rarity of such papers, but we estimate a 23 log point premium (s.e.=0.09) for mixed-gender
papers with a senior female co-author (row 11).
    In rows 12-13 we estimate our model separately for papers with fewer (0-3) versus more (4+)
prior author publications. We find a positive citation premium for all-female author teams in both
sub-samples, but the result is particularly large (49 log points, s.e.=0.10) for papers written by
prolific teams. Unlike in Bohren et al. (forthcoming), we do not find a reversal of the pattern of
gender differences for more highly experienced female authors.
    Next, in rows 14-16 we estimate the model for sub-fields with above- or below-median shares of
female economists. The citation gap for all-female papers is actually larger in fields with a higher
share of female economists (like labor economics) than in fields with a lower share (like theory),
though the difference is not statistically significant (t=1.4). This pattern is not supportive of the
idea that the female-author premium arises from discrimination against female authors that is more
prevalent in fields with fewer female authors.
    Finally, we consider sub-samples based on referee characteristics. The female-authorship gap is
larger for papers with 1 or 2 referees (row 17) than for papers with 3 or more referees (row 18),
though the difference is at best only marginally significant (t=1.7). Interestingly, the gap is smaller
for papers sent to only male referees (row 19) than for papers with at least one female referee (row
20) (though again the difference is not significant, t=1.3). Consistent with earlier findings we see
no evidence that male and female referees are differentially biased against female authors.


5     Editorial Decisions
So far, we have focused on how referees treat teams of authors with different gender compositions.
But referees' opinions are only part of the editorial process: editors make the ultimate decision of
whether to reject a paper or invite a revision. Moreover, editors make an initial screening decision
on whether to desk-reject a paper or send it to referees. In this section we study the effects of
author gender on editors decisions, again following our pre-analysis plan.

5.1   R&R decision
As we saw above, female-authored papers tend to get more citations at each level of the referee's
recommendation (Figure IV Panel A). In contrast, the R&R rates are very similar for female- and
male-authored papers, conditional on the referee's opinion (Figure IV Panel C). This suggests that
editors do not undo the relatively negative referee assessments of female-authored papers.
    In Columns 5-7 of Table IV we fit a series of probit models for the R&R decision using the
same variables as in our citation models. Our baseline specification in column 7 controls for the
recommendations, the full set of controls, and the leave-out mean R&R rate of the editor assigned
to the paper, included as an instrumental variable for the control function.
    A comparison of the estimates in our baseline R&R model (column 7) and our baseline citation


                                                  18
model (column 4) shows that the referee recommendation variables enter nearly proportionally, as
would be expected if editors take the measures of referee support as an index of paper quality, and
citations depend on the same index. Specifically, a plot of the R&R model coefficients for the 7
referee recommendation variables (the 6 reported in the table plus a 0 for the omitted category)
against the citation model coefficients is approximately linear with a slope of 2.5. If editors are
trying to maximize expected log citations, then all the variables in the R&R model should have
coefficients that are 2.5 times larger than their coefficients in the model for citations.
   Given that papers by all-female teams receive 0.22 log points more citations (Column 4), under
a proportional decision model we would expect a coefficient of 0.55 = 0.22 × 2.5 in the R&R
probit model, as specified by equation (8). A coefficient of this size would offset the bias in the
referee recommendations and ensure that female-authored papers are evaluated in accord with
their "quality", as revealed by citations. The actual coefficient on the all-female papers in the
R&R decision in column 7, however, is 0.01 (s.e.= 0.06). Thus, as suggested by the graphical
comparisons in Figure IV, editors do not undo the referee's apparent biases. The coefficient is
precisely estimated, such that we can confidently reject the hypothesis of a value of 0.55 under the
citation maximizing benchmark.
   Note that equation (8) is derived under the assumption of equal citations for male and female
papers of equal quality. Since most economists in our survey believe that female-authored papers
receive if anything fewer citations for their work, equation (8) is actually a lower-bound.
   It is useful to draw a parallel to the case of the author publication variables, considered by CDV.
Similar to the case of all-female authorship, having a well-published coauthor has a much smaller
effect on the editor's R&R decision than would be expected under citation-maximizing behavior. For
example, papers by authors with 6+ publications have an R&R probit weight of 0.41 (Column 7),
compared to a predicted weight of 2.48 = 0.99 × 2.5. That is, author publications are underweighted
by a factor of about 5; we cannot reject that all-female authorship is similarly underweighted by
a factor of 5. A key difference, however, is in the interpretation. Authors with more publications
could plausibly receive more citations for given quality of their work, reflecting more extensive
networks and other factors. In the case of author gender, however, it seems implausible, at least to
our survey responders, that female authors receive more citations than males for given quality.
   Implications. How large is the impact of the non-proportionality of author gender in our
citation and R&R models? The baseline R&R rate for all-female papers is 12.2 percent in the
sample of NDR papers, shown in the first bar of Figure V. We now simulate counterfactual R&R
rates under two citation-maximizing counterfactuals.
   In the first counterfactual, the editor corrects the deviation from citation maximization with
respect to the author gender variables, but not with respect to the measures of author publications
or other variables such as field. This is the relevant counterfactual if the editor believes that these
other characteristics potentially affect citations, conditional on paper quality -- for example, if
citations to highly published authors are inflated. It is also the relevant counterfactual if, alterna-
tively, there is no systematic bias in citations relative to quality, but editors set a higher bar for


                                                  19
papers by authors with more publications as part of their editorial policy.
   To compute the counterfactual, we start from the predicted R&R probability for the model in
Column 7 of Table IV, (x ), which matches the R&R rate of 12.2% in the subsample of female-
authored papers.26 For all-female papers we then add the correction factor ^ =  cite-max - F =
                                                                                           F
0.22  2.5 - 0.01 = 0.54 and compute (x + F ^). We add similar correction factors for the two
sets of mixed gender papers. Since the resultant counterfactual R&R rates would lead to a change
in the overall number of R&Rs, we adjust the journal×submission year effects in the R&R probit
models to match the actual R&R rate (for NDR papers) in each journal-year cell.
   As the second set of bars in Figure V shows, the R&R rate for all-female papers would rise
from 12.2% to 18.5% ­ a 50% increase. The counterfactual would have little effect instead for
mixed-author papers. Overall, the R&R for an average female economist who submits a paper to
the journals in our sample, taking into account that some of her papers will be in the mixed-gender
category and some in the all-female category, would increase from 14.3% to 15.9%, an 11% increase.
This effect is large enough to potentially matter in career advancement and pay decisions.
   In the second counterfactual, captured by the third set of bars in Figure V, we assume that
the editor aims to maximize citations not just with respect to the author gender mix, but also
with respect to the author publication variables. The R&R rate for all-female papers would remain
roughly constant: these papers get a boost in R&R rates because of their gender, but they also
suffer a relative reduction because female authors tend to have fewer prior publications, and the
increased rate of R&R for highly published authors necessitates a raising of the overall bar for
R&R status. Mixed-gender papers would benefit from the author publication correction, such that
overall the R&R rate for papers by female economists would rise from 14.3% to 16.0%.
   Robustness and Heterogeneity. In Online Appendix Tables 5 and 7-8 and in Table V we
consider the robustness and heterogeneity of the R&R probit results, along the same dimensions
considered for the citation models. Across virtually all specifications we replicate the key finding
that editors fail to significantly upweight female-authored papers, despite the fact that female-
authored papers get more citations. To illustrate this, in columns 7 and 8 of Table V we compare
the actual R&R rate for female-authored papers in the particular sample or specification, and
the counterfactual R&R rate if editors weighted female authorship in accord with its effect on
citations. Across all specifications, the counterfactual would increase the R&R rate for female-
authored papers, though the increase is larger in some cases (e.g., papers by author teams with at
least 3+ prior publications) and smaller in others (e.g., papers by a single author).

5.2    An Analysis of Published Papers
So far, we have shown that all-female papers get more citations than all-male papers, conditional
on the referee assessment, and that editors do not correct for this apparent bias in the referee
  26
     In a slight abuse of notation we add the leave-out mean R&R rate of the editor assigned to the paper as a
component of the vector x. We also note that a probit model does not necessarily predict the sample mean for a
subgroup with an included dummy: in our case however, the deviation is negligible.



                                                     20
assessments. There are two leading explanations for these results. The first is that referees and
editors impose a higher bar on papers by female authors, perhaps because of stereotyping biases
that lead them to downweight the quality of work by female authors. The second is that female-
authored papers have characteristics that lead to higher citations but are not as highly rewarded in
the review process. Examples could include working in particular sub-fields, or writing empirical,
as opposed to theoretical, papers within a field. Given that we cannot adequately measure these
characteristics in our main sample, it is difficult to separate out the two explanations.
   To provide some evidence on the second explanation, we collected a secondary sample of all
the published articles in the four journals of our sample for the years 2008-15. These 1,719 papers
broadly correspond to the accepted papers in our sample, assuming a 2-year delay between submis-
sions and publication. Although we have no information on the referee assessments of these papers,
we are able to measure the gender and prior publications of each author (assuming the papers were
submitted 2 years prior to publication). We also collected Google Scholar citations as of March
2019 for each papers, using the same procedures as for the main sample.
   A key advantage of this sample is that we can measure a variety of features of each paper that
are unavailable in our main sample, including detailed JEL codes. We are also able to study the
measurement errors in citation counts arising from problems in our scraping procedure (associated
with special characters in author's names and titles) and to estimate the misclassification rates of
author gender. The key disadvantage is that it is about one tenth the size of our main sample, and
it does not allow us to disentangle the role of referees and editors.
   In Table VI, we first estimate our citation model (excluding referee evaluations) on the sample of
accepted papers from our main EE database. We then repeat the same specification using published
papers (column 2). The two samples are not identical (1,713 accepted papers versus 1,719 published
paper) and have different citation measures (GS citations as of mid-2015 versus March 2019), but
they have similar characteristics (Appendix Table 9). The estimated coefficients in the two samples
are also similar. For the accepted papers in our main sample, the estimated female-author effect
is 0.24 log points (s.e.=0.13), virtually identical to the estimate obtained in our overall sample
when we exclude the referee variables (see column 2 of Table IV), though less precisely estimated.
In the sample of published papers the female author citation premium is somewhat smaller at 12
log points (s.e.=0.11), but qualitatively similar. We also find a 24 log points (s.e.=0.13) citation
premium for mixed-gender papers with a senior female coauthor in the published paper sample.
These estimates replicate the key qualitative patterns in our main findings, and are qualitatively
consistent with the findings of Hengel (2019) for a different sample of published papers.
   We then add additional controls for paper features that are unavailable in the main sample.
First, in Column 3 we include very detailed 2-digit JEL field controls (e.g., for J28), to assess the
potential role of sub-field differences beyond our broad field controls. These controls nearly double
the R2 in the citation regression, but barely affect the gender coefficients. This concurs with the
evidence above suggesting that sub-field differences are unlikely to explain the findings.
   Next, we include two sets of measures of theoretical, as opposed to empirical, content. These are


                                                  21
important additions because the JEL codes do not, by design, measure this dimension. To construct
a first set of measures, we search the text of each published paper for words indicating theoretical
content (such as "theorem" and "proposition"), empirical content (such as "standard error" and
"table"), structural estimation (such as "structural" and "simulation"), or experimental component
(such as "RCT" and "laboratory"). In Column 4, we add the asinh of the count of words in each
of these four categories. The presence of theoretical material has a substantial negative predictive
power on citations, and conversely for the presence of empirical results. Introducing these controls
reduces the estimated author gender premia, reflecting the fact that papers by female authors and
by mixed gender teams tend to have more empirical content content.
   The second set of measures are derived from a set of variables coded by a team of research
assistants (who were not informed of our interest in gender-related differences). As shown in
Column 5, these measures also show a negative citation effect for theoretical content and a positive
effect for empirical content, and lead to somewhat smaller author gender premia. Adding both
sets of variables (Column 6) leads to a citation premium of 9 log points (s.e.=0.13) for all-female
authors, and 13 log points (s.e.=0.15) for mixed-gender papers with senior female authors.
   In Column 7, we estimate a Lasso regression (using 10-fold cross validation), motivated by the
fact that the specification on Column 6 has hundreds of sub-field controls and a dozen controls for
other characteristics. The results are quite similar to the ones in Column 6, alleviating concerns
about potential over-fitting of the latter model.
   Papers by different author gender teams could also differ in the patterns of accrual of citations.
While we cannot conduct such analysis with Google Scholar citations, in Online Appendix Table 10
we provide evidence using SSCI citation measures (which provide a full list of the citing articles).
Specifically, we estimate models for the asinh of SSCI citations accumulated 0-1 years after pub-
lication, 2-3 years after publication, and 4-5 years after publication. We find no obvious pattern,
with similar author-gender premia at 0-1 years out and at 4-5 years out, and smaller effects 2-3
years out. We also estimate models that separate out citations by the impact factor of the citing
journals. We find slightly smaller gender premia using citations from high-impact factor journals,
very small premia for citations at low-impact-factor journals, and relatively large premia associated
with citations from journals with no known impact factor. While these results show no obvious
pattern, we emphasize that the estimated gender premia are relatively imprecise.
   Overall, the results on empirical versus theoretical content provide suggestive evidence that
different characteristics of papers play some role in the observed citation premium, but would
probably not explain all the citation premium in our main sample. Nevertheless, this conclusion is
tentative, given the difficulty of making inferences from just published papers.
   Measurement Error. We hand-checked the citation counts and author gender for all papers
in this sample. In terms of citations, we find that our automated scraper gave the correct citation
count for 96% of papers (see Online Appendix Table 11). In 31 cases (1.8% of the sample) the title
of the published article as recorded by Econlit had special characters, which led the scraper to find
zero citations. Similarly, in 27 cases (1.6%) the author name(s) contained special characters (e.g.,


                                                    22
Jordi Gal´
         i), leading our automated scraping procedure to find 0 citations. The opposite type of
error-- finding too many citations--occurs in only 7 cases. Finally, with respect to gender coding,
we found only 5 cases of incorrect coding of the author gender mix (0.3% of the sample), with a
dozen additional cases in which we were able to assign gender to "undetermined-gender" cases.
   The possibly consequential errors are the ones in which a paper is incorrectly recorded with 0
citations. If hypothetically, this error was less common for female economists, it could bias upward
the measured citations of all-female papers in the main sample, potentially accounting for our key
result. We see no reason ex ante why this error would correlate with author gender, given that it
depends on special characters in the paper title or last name. Nonetheless, we provide two pieces of
evidence. First, in Table V row 4 we run the main specification excluding papers with 0 citations
and find similar results. Second, we measure whether the occurrence of papers with 0 citations
differs by author gender, compared to the case of positive, but low, citations (defined as papers in
the 35-55th percentile of citations in a journal-year). As Online Appendix Figure 7 shows, there is
no obvious pattern by gender group and, to the extent that there is one, the all-female group has
slightly more papers with zero citations, which would bias the citation measure downward.

5.3   Desk-Rejection
One interpretation of our results so far is that editors defer to the referees with respect to their
R&R decisions. To provide evidence on editorial preferences with no input from referees, we turn to
the desk-rejection decisions. Using the full sample of 29,890 submissions, we compare predictors of
citations with predictors of the decision to not desk reject (NDR) in Table VII. At the submission
stage, female-authored papers have 24 log points higher citations than submissions by all-male
authors, holding constant other paper and author characteristics (Column 1). This mirrors the
citation result in the R&R regression in Table IV.
   As Column 2 shows, in the NDR decision editors do take into account the author gender and are
more likely to not desk-reject papers by female authors, holding all else constant. This specification,
though, does not tell us whether this is the optimal weight, given that we do not observe a variable
like the referee recommendations.
   For this, we build on a result in CDV: if the editors are putting the optimal weight on a variable
X , that variable X should not predict citations once one controls for (a function of) the probability
of desk-rejection. Thus, we re-estimate a citation specification including a cubic polynomial in
P (N DR) (from Column 2). We cannot include all the control variables, otherwise there will
be essentially no identification left in the P (N DR) cubic, but we do include at least the author
publication variable since CDV show that it is a strong predictor of citations, even controlling for
the P (N DR) polynomial. In Column 3 we include just this variable, while in Column 4 we also
include journal-year fixed effects and controls for the female share in the sub-field of the paper.
We estimate a smaller, but still sizable, all-female-author effect of 0.17 (s.e.=0.05) in Column 3
and 0.15 (s.e.=0.04) in Column 4, compared to 0.24 in Column 1. Thus, the desk-reject decision
reduces the difference in citations by about a third, implying that the editors are only partially


                                                  23
responding to the quality difference between female-authored papers and male-authored papers.

5.4   Weight Placed on Referee Recommendations
We now consider how editors use the information provided by male versus female referees. CDV
find that the recommendations of more- and less-published referees are equally informative about
the quality of papers (as measured by future citations). Yet, editors tend to place more weight on
the recommendations of more published referees. Is there a similar difference by gender?
    Figure VI Panel A shows the informativeness of referees (i.e. the relationship between referee
recommendations and citations), by referee gender and prior publication record. (Referees with 3
or more recent publications are classified as "prominent"). The crucial element is the slope of these
lines. Male and female referees do not seem to differ in their informativeness and, consistent with
results from CDV, more and less prominent referees do not differ in their informativeness either.
Figure VI Panel B shows the relative weight given by editors to recommendations from referees
who differ in prominence and gender. Consistent with the results in CDV, more prominent referees
are valued more, but gender does not seem to have much of an effect.
    To estimate these patterns with controls, we consider a nonlinear model:

                     Nref erees,i
        Outcomei =                  (0 F emaleij + (1 + 1 F emaleij )Rij )/Nref erees,i ) + Xi + i
                        j =1


where Outcomei denotes paper i 's outcome (asinh(citations) or receiving an R&R decision),
F emaleij is an indicator for the gender of referee j of paper i, Nref erees,i is the number of referees
who evaluate paper i, and Rij denotes an index of recommendations Rij = Def Reject Def Rejectij +
· · · + Accept Acceptij , with the same coefficients c for each recommendation type, regardless of the
gender of the referee (or of the author team). Such a specification adjusts the index Rij for both
a gender-specific intercept and slope. If for example, female referees are more positive, we would
expect a negative value for 0 in the citation regression. If the recommendations of female referees
are more informative, then we expect 1 > 1 in the citation regression.
    Table VIII shows the results. Columns 1-3 have informativeness as measured by citations, while
Columns 4-6 report models of the editor's R&R decision. Consistent with CDV, more prominent
referees do not provide more informed recommendations (compared to less prominent referees), but
nevertheless, the editors do value them more. Turning to gender, female and male referees do not
differ in their informativeness, and editors do not put different value on them either. This gender
result is consistent with the expectations of the survey respondents.


6     Delays and Other Outcomes
We now turn to the speed of decision-making. If there are gender differences in the editorial process,
they may appear in the form of decision delays.


                                                      24
       In Columns 1-2 of Table IX we consider referee-paper observations and estimate the number
of days from paper submission to the report completion for reviewers who return a report. With
controls for paper and author characteristics (Column 1), the response time of referees is not affected
by the gender composition of the authors. In Column 2, we add paper fixed effects, fully controlling
for possible differences in papers assigned to male or female referees, which may affect the time to
report completion. We find that female referees are neither faster nor slower than male referees, a
precise null effect. Further, there is no interaction with the gender composition of the authors.
       To integrate the referee delays with the editor delays, in Columns 3-4 we consider decision times
at the paper level, with the full set of controls as well as editor fixed effects. We detect no difference
based on the author gender mix on the number of days from paper submission to the arrival of the
last report (Column 3), or on the full decision time including editor delays (Column 4).
       For the papers with an initial R&R that are ultimately accepted, we consider the impact of the
author gender mix on the number of rounds of submissions (Column 5) and on the total time from
submission to acceptance (Column 6), as well as the time that the authors take to submit the first
revision and the number of days from the resubmission until the final acceptance (Online Appendix
Table 12). Across all these specifications, we find no difference by the author gender mix.27 Thus,
unlike in the analysis of Hengel (2018), referee and editorial delays appear to be gender-neutral, a
pattern also visible in Online Appendix Figures 8a-c.
       We consider two further outcomes. In Online Appendix Table 13 we consider the propensity of
referees to accept a referee invitation. Each observation is a referee request for papers that were not
desk-rejected. Once we include controls (Column 2), we estimate no difference in the probability of
accepting a referee invitation for all-female-authored papers. With paper fixed effects (Columns 3),
we examine if female referee are more likely to provide public goods by agreeing to referee, but we
find no such difference. Finally, we find no relative difference depending on whether the reviewer
gender matches the author gender (Columns 3 and 4).
       Finally, motivated by Hengel (2018)'s analysis, we examine in Online Appendix Table 14 the
complexity level of the abstracts. An important caveat is that we only observe the abstract of the
most recent version of the paper, and thus we cannot examine, as in Hengel (2018), the change in
complexity from the submission to the published version of the paper; also, Hengel (2018) presents
a more in-depth analysis of abstract complexity. We simply compare the Gunning Fog (Columns
1 and 3) and Coleman-Liau (Columns 2 and 4) measures of complexity for papers with different
author gender teams. We do so separately for the papers that were desk rejected or rejected
(Columns 1-2), and the papers that received an R&R decision (Columns 3-4). We find no impact
of the author gender mix on the readability of the abstract in either sample.
  27
    We find very similar results if we do not control for the referee recommendation variables. The finding that
there is no difference in rounds of revision by author gender also provides suggestive evidence against an alternative
interpretation of the citation premium for all-female papers--that male and female papers may be the same quality
at the time they are read by referees, but female teams are more responsive to reports and thus their papers may
eventually be better. This would presumably be reflected in shorter revisions.




                                                         25
7    Discussion and Conclusion
Are the referees and editors in economics gender neutral? The answer is both "Yes" and "No".
    If we focus on comparisons highlighted in previous research, we obtain relatively precise zero
differences between gender groups. Considering referee recommendations, we replicate the findings
of Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2012) that there are no difference in how referees of different genders
assess papers by female and male authors. Considering delays in publication, as Hengel (2018)
does, we find no differences by author gender. Turning to editorial decisions, which have not been
previously studied, we find that editors are gender-blind in the sense that they treat female- and
male-authored papers the same, conditional on the referee recommendations. Further, editors give
about the same weight to recommendations of male and female referees, which is appropriate given
that the two groups are equally informative.
    Yet, the editorial process does not appear to be gender-neutral once we take into account
underlying differences in paper quality, as revealed by future citations. Female-authored papers get
25 percent more citations than male-authored papers, controlling for other paper features including
field and the authors' previous publication record. This estimate is relatively precisely estimated
(t > 4) and is robust to a number of alternative specification choices. Given that any bias in
citations as a measure of quality is likely to work against female authors, we interpret this finding
as evidence that female researchers are held to a higher bar by referees (both male and female).
Since editors do not adjust their thresholds for this higher bar, they effectively reject too many
female-authored papers relative to a citation-maximizing benchmark.
    What accounts for these patterns? We consider two main explanations. The first is that
referees hold female authors to a higher bar, perhaps because of stereotype biases. The second is
that female-authored papers have characteristics that lead to higher citations but are not as highly
rewarded in the review process, such as being in particular sub-fields or having empirical content.
    We turn to a set of published papers, broadly corresponding to the accepted papers in our sam-
ple, to further investigate this second explanation. The evidence suggests that sub-field differences
are unlikely to play a role, but that differences in empirical content could play some role in the
gender citation premium, though they would be unlikely to explain the full citation premium in
our main sample. Nevertheless, this conclusion is tentative, given the difficulty of making infer-
ences from just published papers. Future research with even more detailed information on paper
characteristics for submitted papers will help further separate out these explanations.
    Where does that leave us in terms of implications? Our finding that female authors are held to
a higher standard is concerning. We estimate that as a result the R&R rate for female-authored
papers is about 6 percentage points lower than the rate consistent with a gender-neutral citation-
maximizing rule. This gap suggests an important hurdle, aside from the assignment of credit in
coauthored work stressed by Sarsons (2018), for junior female economists, as well as a continuing
obstacle to career progression for more senior female researchers.
    One potential remedy to help female economists ­ using more female referees ­ is unlikely
to help, given that female referees hold female-authored papers to the same higher bar as male

                                                 26
referees. Recruiting more female referees may only have the unintended consequence of requiring
more public good provision by female economists (Babcock et al., 2017).
   It appears to us that a simpler path is to increase the awareness of the higher bar for female-
authored papers. The referees and editors can then take it into account in their recommendations
and decisions. This would address the bias, whether its source is gender discrimination or un-
dervalued paper characteristics. In contrast, a policy of double-blind evaluation, setting aside
implementation difficulties, would address only the first source of bias.
   It would be great to revisit our analysis in 3 to 5 years to test whether the gender difference
has been corrected. Perhaps, as for NBA referee bias (Price and Wolfers, 2010), publicizing the
findings may be enough to correct the pattern (Pope, Price and Wolfers, 2018).
   This is just an example of the importance of data transparency in the editorial process, as CDV
also stress. Indeed, we are grateful to the four journals in economics which agreed to such data
access, something with very few parallels outside economics. The ability to systematically keep
track of, and analyze, referee and editorial choices should make it relatively straightforward in the
future to check for progress on any form of gender bias, especially if journals were to keep track of
the gender of authors and referees in the editorial system. More generally, data transparency and
access will help make the editorial process fairer and more efficient.




                                                 27
    References
Abrevaya, Jason and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2012. "Charity and Favoritism in the Field: Are Female
 Economists Nicer (To Each Other)?." Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1): 202-207.

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. "Selection on Observed and
  Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools." Journal of Political
  Economy, 113(1), 151-184.

Azmat, Ghazala, and Rosa Ferrer. "Gender gaps in performance: Evidence from young lawyers."
  Journal of Political Economy 125.5 (2017): 1306-1355.

Babcock, Linda, Maria Recalde, Lise Vesterlund, and Laurie Weingart. 2017. "Gender Differences
  in Accepting and Receiving Requests for Tasks with Low Promotability," American Economic
  Review, 107(3): 714-747.

Bayer, Amanda, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2016. "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New
  Attack on an Old Problem." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4): 221-42.

Bellemare, Marc F., and Casey J. Wichman. Forthcoming. "Elasticities and the Inverse Hyperbolic
  Sine Transformation," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Kevin F. Hallock. 2001. "The gender gap in top corporate jobs." Industrial
  and Labor Relations Review 55.1: 3-21.

Blank, R.M., 1991. "The effects of double-blind versus single-blind reviewing: Experimental evi-
  dence from the American Economic Review". The American Economic Review, 1041-1067.

Bohren, J. Aislinn, Alex Imas, and Michael Rosenberg. Forthcoming. "The Dynamics of Discrimi-
  nation: Theory and Evidence," American Economic Review.

Bordalo, P., Katherine Coffman, and Nicola Genaioli. Forthcoming. "Beliefs about gender". Amer-
  ican Economic Review.

Bransch, F., and M. Kvasnicka, 2017, "Male Gatekeepers Gender Bias in the Publishing Process?".
  IZA DP No. 11089.

Broder, I.E., 1993. "Review of NSF economics proposals: Gender and institutional patterns" The
  American Economic Review, 83(4), 964-970.

Card, David and Stefano DellaVigna. Forthcoming. "What do Editors Maximize? Evidence from
  Four Economics Journals." Review of Economics and Statistics.

Ceci, Stephen J., Donna K. Ginther, Shulamit Kahn, and Wendy M. Williams. 2014. "Women in
  Academic Science: A Changing Landscape." Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 15(3):
  75-141.

Chari, Anusha and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham. 2017. "Gender Representation in Economics Across
  Topics and Time: Evidence from the NBER Summer Institute." NBER Working Paper No.
  23953.

Christensen, Garret S., and Edward Miguel. 2018. "Transparency, Reproducibility, and the Credi-
  bility of Economics Research." Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 56, 920-980.


                                               28
DellaVigna Stefano and Devin Pope. 2018. "What Motivates Effort? Evidence and Expert Fore-
  casts." Review of Economic Studies, 85, 1029­1069.

Dolado, Juan J., Florentino Felgueroso, and Miguel Almunia. "Are men and women-economists
 evenly distributed across research fields? Some new empirical evidence." SERIEs 3.3 (2012):
 367-393.

Donald, Stephen, G., and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2006. "What is Discrimination? Gender in the
 American Economic Association, 1935-2004." American Economic Review, 96 (4): 1283-1292.

Ginther, Donna, K., and Shulamit Kahn. 2004. "Women in Economics: Moving Up or Falling Off
  the Academic Career Ladder?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18 (3): 193-214.

Goldin, Claudia. "A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter." American Economic Review 104.4
 (2014): 1091-1119.

Hengel, Erin. 2018. "Publishing while Female. Are Women Held to Higher Standards? Evidence
  from Peer Review," Working paper.

Hengel, Erin. 2019. "Gender Differences in Citations at Top Economics Journals," Working paper.

Lundberg, Shelly. "Report: Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession
  (CSWEP)." American Economic Review 107.5 (2017): 759-76.

Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2011. "Gender and competition." Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics, 3.1: 601-630.

Pope, Devin, Joseph Price, and Justin Wolfers. 2018. "Awareness Reduces Racial Bias", Manage-
  ment Science, 64(11): 4967-5460.

Price, Joseph and Justin Wolfers. 2010. "Racial Discrimination Among NBA Referees," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 125(4):1859-1887.

Reuben, Ernesto, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2014. "How stereotypes impair women's
  careers in science." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences : 201314788.

Reuben, Ernesto, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2015. "Taste for competition and the gender
  gap among young business professionals." No. w21695. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Sarsons, Heather. 2018. "Gender Differences in Recognition for Group Work." Working Paper.

Wu, Alice. Forthcoming. "Gender Stereotyping in Academia: Evidence from Economics Job Market
 Rumors Forum." Review of Economics and Statistics.




                                              29
Panel A. Distribution of Editorial Decisions                                             Panel B. Distribution of Ref. Recommendations




Panel C. Distribution of Author Publications                                             Panel D. Distribution of Referee Publications




                                                                              Figure I
                                                                     Summary Statistics by Gender
          Notes. This figure displays a few key summary statistics by gender. Panel A plots the distribution of the editor's decision and Panel B shows the distribution of referee
recommendations. Panel C plots the distribution of author publications in 35 high-impact journals in the 5 years leading up to submission, for the papers in our dataset. Panel D
reports the distribution of publications among referees by gender.




                                                                                       30
                                              Figure II.
                   Referee Assignment: Referee Gender as Function of Author Gender
        Notes. Observations are at the referee-paper level. In the regression-adjusted bars, we adjust using the results in Online
Appendix Table 3, column 3.




                                                               31
Panel A. Index of Referee Recommendations




Panel B. Share of Positive Referee Recommendations




                                                 Figure III
                          Referee Evaluation by Author Gender and Referee Gender
          Notes. Panel A displays the mean recommendation given by referees based on gender. The index of referee
recommendations is constructed using the coefficients in the cites model in Card and DellaVigna (forthcoming). From Definitely
Reject to Accept, the values are 0, 0.67, 1.01, 1.47, 1.92, 2.27, 2.33. The bands show 2 standard error intervals, clustered at the
paper level. Includes only 4,341 papers with both male and female referees. Panel B shows the share of positive
recommendations, defined as RR-Accept. In both panels, female referees are weighted at the paper level by Nmale / Nfemale.



                                                                32
                  Panel A. Referee Recommendations and Citations




Panel B. Referee Recommendations and Citations, by Author Gender and Referee Gender




                                        33
                                  Panel C. Referee Recommendations and R&R Rate




                                              Figure IV
               Differences in (Residualized) Citations and R&R Rate, by Author Gender
           Notes. Panels A and B show the weighted residuals of asinh (citations) for a paper receiving a given recommendation,
while Panel C shows the residuals of pr(R&R) for a paper receiving a given recommendation. In both models, residuals are
calculated by regression onto author publications, the number of authors, and fields. Panels A and C show the results separately by
the gender break down of the author team. Panel B splits these two categories further into referees' gender. The unit of observation
is a referee report, and observations are weighted by the number of referee reports for the paper to ensure that each paper receives
equal weight. Standard errors are clustered at the paper level. Panel B omits confidence intervals for legibility.




                                                                34
                                                                          Figure V
                                             Implication of Findings for R&R Rate for Female-Authored Papers
          Notes. This figure presents the implications of the results in Table IV for the actual and counterfactual R&R rate for teams of authors. The figure breaks down papers by
all-female authors, by mixed-gender teams with a senior female author and other mixed-gender teams. Within each group, the first bar plots the observed R&R rate for that group,
conditional on a paper not being desk-rejected. The second bar reports the counterfactual R&R rate for that category of papers that we would expect to observe if the editorial process
aimed to put the weight on the gender-author mix associated with citation maximization with respect to the author-gender mix variables (the details are in the text), keeping the R&R
rate constant in each journal-year cell. The third bar reports the counterfactual R&R rate if the editorial process put the citation-maximizing weight not only on the gender-author
mix variables, but also on the author past publication variables. The final set of columns presents an average over the first 3 sets of columns, weighting the different groups by the
number of papers in each category.




                                                                                         35
                                 Panel A. Referee Recommendations and Citations




                                Panel B. Referee Recommendations and R&R Rate




                                               Figure VI
                      Referee Informativeness, by Referee Gender and Publications
         Notes. Panel A shows the weighted asinh (citations) for a paper receiving a given recommendation. Panel B shows the
R&R rate for a paper receiving a given recommendation. Both show the results separately by referee gender.



                                                             36
                                                             TABLE I
                  SURVEY OF ECONOMISTS ABOUT ROLE OF AUTHOR AND REFEREE GENDER
                                                                                     Female        Female       Male         Male
Surveyed Group:                                                All     Editors       Asst. Pr.     EconLit     Asst. Pr.    EconLit
                                                               (1)       (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                            Sample Size
    Number surveyed                                           328        30              20          101          75          102
    Number responded                                          141        14               9           51          26           41
    Response Rate                                             0.43      0.47            0.45         0.50        0.35         0.40
                                           Classifying Papers by Author Gender
Consider an author team with both males and females, and the author with the most prior publications is female. Would
you say that the patterns, in terms of the previous questions, would be more similar to:
     All-female                                             0.24      0.14       0.22       0.29       0.23      0.23
     All-male                                               0.11      0.07       0.00       0.12       0.12      0.15
     Halfway                                                0.41      0.50       0.33       0.33       0.46      0.47
     It depends                                             0.23      0.29       0.44       0.25       0.19      0.15
If the author with the most prior publication is male, would you say that the patterns would be more similar to:
     All-female                                             0.01      0.00       0.00       0.00       0.04      0.00
     All-male                                               0.56      0.64       0.89       0.65       0.50      0.40
     Halfway                                                0.31      0.36       0.00       0.22       0.35      0.47
     It depends                                             0.11      0.00       0.11       0.14       0.12      0.13
                                                  Referee Assignment
For two papers in the same field, are female-authored papers more likely to be assigned to female referees?
   More likely                                           0.19        0.36      0.11         0.25       0.17                   0.08
   Equally likely                                        0.77        0.64      0.89         0.67       0.83                   0.90
   Less Likely                                           0.04        0.00      0.00         0.08       0.00                   0.03
                                                  Referee Assessment
Consider the referee rec. for a female-authored paper with at least one male and at least one female referee.
   What percent of female referees are positive?         22.6        20.7      25.0         22.0       24.4                   22.4
   What percent of male referees are positive?           19.0        17.5      21.6         18.5       17.9                   20.4
Consider the referee rec. for a male-authored paper with at least one male and at least one female referee.
   What percent of female referees are positive?         21.3        19.3      25.6         21.7       21.6                   20.6
   What percent of male referees are positive?           20.1        19.7      22.8         20.2       19.6                   20.0
                                                   Editor Assessment
Holding constant the prior publication record of the author(s), the field of the paper, and also the referee recs., do you
think a female-authored paper has a higher, lower, or the same probability of receiving a R&R?
    More likely                                          0.11         0.14        0.11       0.02         0.15        0.20
    About the same                                       0.67         0.57        0.67       0.63         0.69        0.73
    Less Likely                                          0.22         0.29        0.22       0.35         0.15        0.07
                                                   Citation Discounting
Conditional on field and quality, how large is the diff. in citations that a female-authored paper will receive?
   Mean citation gap in log points                           -6.5       -3.8       -11.1      -10.2       -4.7                -3.5
   Median citation gap in log points                           0          0         -10        -10          0                  0
                                                  Referee Informativeness
For a given paper, is a positive recommendation from a female referee more informative about future citations, equally
informative, or less informative than a positive recommendation from a male referee?
    More informative                                       0.08      0.00        0.11         0.08         0.12     0.07
    About the same                                         0.86      0.93        0.56         0.82         0.88     0.93
    Less informative                                       0.06      0.07        0.33         0.10         0.00     0.00
For a given paper, do you think that, on average, an editor is more, equally, or less likely to follow the recommendation
of a female (relative to a male) referee in the R&R decision?
    More likely                                            0.03      0.00        0.00         0.04         0.04     0.02
    About the same                                         0.75      0.93        0.78         0.67         0.81     0.76
    Less likely                                            0.22      0.07        0.22         0.29         0.15     0.22

    Notes. For legibility, questions are shortened from the original. Editor surveys were sent to the co-editors of the 4 journals; the
number of editors surveyed set at 30 is an estimate. We count as completed surveys with at least 50% of the questions answered.


                                                                 37
                                                      TABLE II
                       SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR NON-DESK-REJECTED PAPERS
                                                                 Non-Desk-Rejected Papers
Sample:                                   All male     All female Mix., F-led Mix., other Undet.                 All
                                             (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)                   (6)
Google Scholar Citations
  Asinh Citations                           2.72          2.61          3.09         2.92          2.15          2.74
                                           (1.84)        (1.85)        (1.81)       (1.81)        (1.77)        (1.84)
Editorial Decisions
  Received R&R Decision                 0.15              0.12          0.17         0.14          0.12          0.15
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
  Publications: 0                       0.32              0.59          0.00         0.22          0.53          0.32
  Publications: 1                       0.17              0.18          0.23         0.15          0.11          0.17
  Publications: 2                       0.12              0.09          0.22         0.13          0.11          0.12
  Publications: 3                       0.11              0.05          0.19         0.12          0.08          0.11
  Publications: 4-5                     0.13              0.07          0.20         0.16          0.08          0.13
  Publications: 6+                      0.16              0.02          0.17         0.22          0.09          0.15
Number of Authors
  1 author                              0.36              0.72          0.00         0.00          0.26          0.31
  2 authors                             0.43              0.25          0.53         0.46          0.39          0.42
  3 authors                             0.18              0.03          0.37         0.40          0.27          0.22
  4+ authors                            0.03              0.00          0.10         0.14          0.08          0.05
Field of Paper
  Development                           0.04              0.07          0.05         0.05          0.04          0.05
  Econometrics                          0.06              0.04          0.06         0.06          0.09          0.06
  Finance                               0.06              0.04          0.06         0.05          0.09          0.06
  Health, Urban, Law                    0.04              0.07          0.07         0.06          0.04          0.05
  History                               0.01              0.02          0.01         0.01          0.01          0.01
  International                         0.06              0.06          0.10         0.06          0.05          0.06
  Industrial Organization               0.05              0.05          0.04         0.05          0.05          0.05
  Lab/Experiments                       0.02              0.02          0.04         0.04          0.02          0.03
  Labor                                 0.11              0.20          0.14         0.15          0.10          0.12
  Macro                                 0.11              0.06          0.08         0.08          0.10          0.10
  Micro                                 0.11              0.08          0.09         0.11          0.09          0.11
  Public                                0.05              0.05          0.03         0.05          0.04          0.05
  Theory                                0.11              0.08          0.09         0.08          0.11          0.10
  Unclassified                          0.05              0.05          0.05         0.06          0.04          0.05
  Missing Field                         0.11              0.12          0.10         0.11          0.13          0.11
Gender-Field Variables
  Share female in fields                0.15              0.18          0.17         0.17          0.15          0.16
  Gender-topic fields                   0.03              0.08          0.06         0.06          0.04          0.04
Referee Recommendations
  Fraction Definitely Reject            0.12              0.12          0.10         0.12          0.19          0.12
  Fraction Reject                       0.54              0.56          0.54         0.54          0.51          0.54
  Fraction with No Rec'n                0.06              0.06          0.04         0.05          0.06          0.06
  Fraction Weak R&R                     0.10              0.10          0.12         0.11          0.10          0.10
  Fraction R&R                          0.10              0.10          0.12         0.10          0.09          0.10
  Fraction Strong R&R                   0.04              0.04          0.04         0.04          0.03          0.04
  Fraction Accept                       0.04              0.03          0.03         0.03          0.02          0.03
Referee Publications in 35 high-impact journals
  Share of refs w/ 3+ publications      0.46              0.40          0.47         0.45          0.45          0.45
Referee genders (share per paper)
  Male                                  0.85              0.75          0.79          0.81         0.84         0.83
  Female                                0.14             0.24           0.20          0.18         0.14         0.15
  Ambiguous                             0.01             0.01           0.01         0.01          0.02         0.01
  Number of Observations               10,199            1,097          585          2,612         654         15,147
  Share of Papers                       0.67             0.07           0.04         0.17          0.04         1.00

     Notes. Sample of submissions, excluding papers with no referees or only 1 referee assigned. Author publications are
counts of publications in 35 high-impact journals (see Online Appendix Table 1) in the 5 years prior to submission. In the
case of multiple authors, the measure is the maximum over all coauthors. Field is based on JEL codes at submission.
Indicators of fields for a paper with N codes are set to 1/N.
                                                           38
                                                        TABLE III
                      REFEREE RECOMMENDATIONS, IMPACT OF AUTHOR TEAM GENDER

                                               OLS Models for Index of Referee        Linear Probability Models for R&R
Specification:                                      Recommendations                       Recommendation or Better
                                                (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
Authors' Genders (Omitted: All Male Authors)
     All Female Authors                        -0.043    0.018                         -0.029    0.001
                                              (0.014)   (0.014)                       (0.008)   (0.008)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                  0.045     0.009                         0.014     -0.002
       senior author female                   (0.020)   (0.020)                       (0.012)   (0.012)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                  -0.015    -0.030                        -0.011    -0.018
       other                                  (0.010)   (0.011)                       (0.006)   (0.006)
     Undetermined Gender Team                  -0.121    -0.073                        -0.049    -0.026
                                              (0.019)   (0.019)                       (0.010)   (0.010)
Referee Gender (Omitted: Male Referee)
     Female Referee                                                -0.025      -                           -0.012      -
                                                                  (0.018)                                 (0.012)
Gender Interactions
     All Female Auth. × Female Ref.                                0.009     0.004                         -0.002    -0.007
                                                                  (0.047)   (0.049)                       (0.030)   (0.031)
     Mixed Auth. (F-senior) × Female Ref.                          -0.027    -0.024                        -0.009    -0.007
                                                                  (0.062)   (0.063)                       (0.041)   (0.042)
     Mixed Auth. (other) × Female Ref.                             -0.009    -0.001                        -0.003    0.001
                                                                  (0.036)   (0.037)                       (0.023)   (0.024)
     Undetermined Auth. × Female Ref.                              0.055     0.048                         0.004     -0.001
                                                                  (0.070)   (0.073)                       (0.042)   (0.044)
Paper Fixed Effects                             No        No       Yes       Yes        No        No       Yes       Yes
Controls for Author Pub., No. of Authors,
                                                No       Yes         -         -        No       Yes         -         -
 Field, Gender-Field, and Journal-Year
Control for Referee Pub.                        No        No       Yes       Yes        No        No       Yes       Yes
Control for Referee Pub. × Author Gender        No        No        No       Yes        No        No        No       Yes
Control for Referee Gender × Author Pub         No        No        No       Yes        No        No        No       Yes
Control for Referee Gender × Field              No        No        No       Yes        No        No        No       Yes
N                                             38,840    38,840    38,840    38,840    38,840    38,840    38,840    38,840
R-squared                                      0.016    0.044     0.504     0.504     0.012     0.030     0.452     0.453

      Notes. The index of referee recommendations is constructed using the coefficients in the cites model in Card and
DellaVigna (forthcoming). From Definitely Reject to Accept, the values are 0, 0.67, 1.01, 1.47, 1.92, 2.27, 2.33. Columns 3,
4, 7, and 8 also include a control for unknown-gender referee (coefficient not shown). In columns 4 and 8, Referee Gender ×
Field includes gender-field variables.




                                                            39
                                                    TABLE IV
            CITATIONS AND EDITOR DECISIONS, IMPACT OF AUTHOR TEAM GENDER

                                            OLS Models for Asinh of Google             Probit Models for Receiving
Specification:                                   Scholar Citations                         Revise-and-Resubmit
                                            (1)    (2)        (3)      (4)                (5)       (6)     (7)
Authors' Genders
    All Female                           -0.07  0.24             0.22       0.22          -0.08     0.03       0.01
                                        (0.05) (0.06)           (0.05)     (0.05)        (0.06)    (0.05)     (0.06)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team            0.37   0.05             0.06       0.06          0.13      0.05       0.10
        senior author female            (0.08) (0.07)           (0.07)     (0.07)        (0.07)    (0.07)     (0.07)
     Mixed, other                        0.26   -0.02            0.01       0.01          0.03      -0.08      -0.02
                                        (0.04) (0.04)           (0.04)     (0.04)        (0.05)    (0.04)     (0.05)
     Undetermined                        -0.36  -0.39            -0.31      -0.31         -0.09     -0.10      -0.06
                                        (0.05) (0.06)           (0.05)     (0.05)        (0.08)    (0.06)     (0.08)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
     Reject                              0.80                    0.64       0.64          0.87                 0.86
                                        (0.06)                  (0.06)     (0.06)        (0.15)               (0.16)
     No Recommendation                   1.24                    1.00       0.98          2.78                 2.73
                                        (0.12)                  (0.10)     (0.10)        (0.17)               (0.18)
     Weak R&R                            1.73                    1.47       1.45          3.16                 3.16
                                        (0.10)                  (0.09)     (0.10)        (0.17)               (0.18)
     R&R                                 2.33                    1.93       1.89          4.63                 4.61
                                        (0.10)                  (0.09)     (0.13)        (0.20)               (0.21)
     Strong R&R                          2.72                    2.32       2.26          5.57                 5.56
                                        (0.15)                  (0.13)     (0.22)        (0.21)               (0.21)
     Accept                              2.74                    2.36       2.30          5.39                 5.37
                                        (0.13)                  (0.12)     (0.19)        (0.21)               (0.22)
Author Publications in 35 High-Impact Journals
     1 Publication                              0.41             0.29       0.29                    0.24       0.04
                                               (0.04)           (0.04)     (0.04)                  (0.04)     (0.05)
     2 Publications                              0.65            0.49       0.49                    0.37       0.19
                                               (0.04)           (0.04)     (0.04)                  (0.05)     (0.07)
     3 Publications                              0.79            0.58       0.58                    0.47       0.17
                                               (0.04)           (0.04)     (0.04)                  (0.05)     (0.07)
     4-5 Publications                           1.06             0.81       0.80                    0.64       0.33
                                               (0.06)           (0.06)     (0.06)                  (0.05)     (0.06)
     6+ Publications                            1.31             0.99       0.99                    0.82       0.41
                                               (0.05)           (0.05)     (0.05)                  (0.06)     (0.08)
Gender-field controls
     Share female in sub-fields                 -0.03            -0.02      -0.01                   -0.48      -0.35
                                               (0.28)           (0.26)     (0.25)                  (0.28)     (0.32)
     Fraction of gender-topic sub-fields        -0.01            0.02       0.02                    -0.09      -0.14
                                               (0.09)           (0.10)     (0.10)                  (0.10)     (0.14)
R&R Indicator                                                               0.06
     (Mechanical Publ. Effect)                                             (0.14)
Control Function for Selection                                              0.32
     (Value Added of the Editor)                                           (0.08)
Editor Leave-out-Mean R&R                                                                                      3.43
     Rate                                                                                                     (0.73)
Controls for No. of Authors & Field       No     Yes             Yes        Yes           No        Yes        Yes
Indicators for Journal-Year               Yes    Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
N                                      15,147 15,147            15,147     15,147       15,147     15,147     15,147
R2 / pseudo R2                           0.20   0.20             0.26       0.27         0.48       0.07       0.49

      Notes. The sample is non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees assigned. The control function in Column
4 is calculated using predicted probabilities based on Column 7. Standard errors clustered by editor in parentheses.

                                                         40
                                                                              TABLE V
                                                      CITATIONS AND EDITOR DECISION, ROBUSTNESS

                                                                                                                                                    R&R Rate for All-
                                                  Coefficients in Citation Model                Coefficients in Probit of R&R Decision               Female Papers
                                            All-Female Gender, Senior       Mixed-             All-Female Mixed-Gender,       Mixed-                           Cite-
                                             Auhors         Female       Gender, Other          Authors Senior Female Gender, Other                  Data      Max
Robustness Dimesion:                            (1)             (2)              (3)                (4)             (5)               (6)              (7)         (8)
Benchmark                                       0.22           0.06              0.01              0.01            0.10              -0.02           0.122       0.185
                                               (0.05)         (0.07)            (0.04)            (0.06)          (0.07)            (0.05)           (0.01)
Varying Controls
  1. Extra Controls for Author and              0.17           0.04               0.00            -0.01            0.13             -0.01            0.122       0.183
  Institutional Prominence                     (0.05)         (0.07)            (0.04)            (0.07)          (0.07)            (0.05)
  2. Extra Controls for Auth, Inst.             0.19           0.04              -0.01             0.00            0.12              0.00            0.122       0.189
  Prominence, plus interactions of             (0.05)         (0.07)            (0.04)            (0.07)          (0.07)            (0.05)
  Field with Year and Gender-Field
Alternative Citation Measures
  3. Probit Model for Top-Cited                 0.13           0.10              0.00              0.01            0.10             -0.02            0.122       0.190
  Paper                                        (0.05)         (0.06)            (0.03)            (0.06)          (0.07)            (0.05)
  4. Dropping observations with 0               0.14           0.10              0.01              0.04            0.11             -0.01            0.146       0.222
  citations (N=12306)                          (0.04)         (0.06)            (0.03)            (0.07)          (0.06)            (0.05)
  5. Tobit Model of asinh (SSCI                 0.32           -0.04             -0.02            -0.01            0.41              0.10            0.124       0.215
  Cites) (2006-2008) (N=4507)                  (0.15)         (0.27)            (0.11)            (0.11)          (0.11)            (0.06)
By Year of Submissions
  6. Papers in Years 2003-2009                  0.31           0.10              0.02              0.00            0.36             -0.01            0.147       0.258
  (N=7207)                                     (0.08)         (0.13)            (0.06)            (0.08)          (0.14)            (0.07)
  7. Papers in Years 2010-2013                  0.13           0.02              0.00              0.05            -0.13            -0.02            0.097       0.129
  (N=7940)                                     (0.07)         (0.08)            (0.06)            (0.09)          (0.09)            (0.06)
  8. Papers in Years 2014-2017                    -              -                 -               0.09             0.06            -0.05               -           -
  (N=6544)                                                                                        (0.17)          (0.17)            (0.10)
By Number of Authors
  9. Papers with 1 Author                       0.17             -                 -               0.11              -                 -             0.122       0.150
  (N=4639)                                     (0.07)                                             (0.08)
  10. Papers with 2 Authors                     0.34           -0.08             0.01              -0.23           0.12             -0.13            0.128       0.308
  (N=6406)                                     (0.08)         (0.10)            (0.06)            (0.12)          (0.11)            (0.08)
  11. Papers with 3 Authors                     0.06           0.23              0.03             -0.15            0.10              0.05            0.079       0.115
  (N=4102)                                     (0.23)         (0.09)            (0.05)            (0.49)          (0.10)            (0.07)
By Author Publications
  12. Papers by Authors with                    0.18           0.06               0.06             0.04            0.08             -0.03            0.113       0.167
  0-3 Previous Pubs. (N=10771)                 (0.05)         (0.09)            (0.04)            (0.07)          (0.10)            (0.07)
  13. Papers by Authors with                    0.49           0.05              -0.05             -0.14           0.15              -0.01           0.219       0.533
  4+ Previous Pubs. (N=4376)                   (0.10)         (0.10)            (0.07)            (0.22)          (0.13)            (0.07)
By Share of Women in the Field
  14. Fields with Lower Share                   0.08           0.08              0.04              0.06            0.19              -0.14           0.112       0.128
  of Women (N=6753)                            (0.09)         (0.11)            (0.05)            (0.15)          (0.11)            (0.08)
  15. Fields with Higher Share                  0.24           0.00               0.02             -0.02            0.11              0.07           0.105       0.178
  of Women (N=6754)                            (0.07)         (0.08)            (0.06)            (0.12)          (0.11)            (0.07)
  16. Field Variable Missing                    0.47           0.22              -0.28              0.00           -0.02             -0.01           0.203       0.341
  (N=1640)                                     (0.15)         (0.28)            (0.11)            (0.25)          (0.25)            (0.17)
By Number of Referees
  17. Papers with 1-2 Referees                  0.29           0.07              0.03              0.07            0.14              0.03            0.105       0.203
  (N=7940)                                     (0.07)         (0.12)            (0.05)            (0.08)          (0.15)            (0.08)
  18. Papers with 3+ Referees                   0.12           0.04              -0.02             -0.04           0.08              -0.05           0.142       0.198
  (N=7207)                                     (0.07)         (0.08)            (0.06)            (0.09)          (0.08)            (0.08)
By Share of Women Referees
  19. Papers with All-Male                      0.17           -0.05             -0.03             0.02            0.03              -0.08           0.133       0.183
  Referees (N=10195)                           (0.06)         (0.11)            (0.06)            (0.09)          (0.08)            (0.07)
  20. Papers with some Female                   0.29           0.19              0.08              0.09            0.22               0.08           0.109       0.200
  Referees (N=4952)                            (0.07)         (0.09)            (0.05)            (0.11)          (0.11)            (0.11)

      Notes. The table reports the result of multiple robustness checks and sample splits. The coefficients in Columns 1-3 come from regressions with the same controls as
in Table IV, Column 4. The coefficients in Columns 4-6 come from regressions with the same controls as in Table IV, Column 7. Column 7 reports the observed R&R
rate (in the sample of non-desk-rejected papers) for all-female-authored papers, while Column 8 reports the counterfactual R&R rate for all-female papers if the R&R
decision had the weights that maximize citation with respect to the author-gender variables (see Figure V for further detail).

                                                                                  41
                                                                TABLE VI
                          CITATIONS, RESULTS ACCEPTED PAPERS, AND PUBLISHED PAPERS

Data Set:                                        Editorial Express                      Published Papers from Econlit
Sample of Papers:                                Accepted Papers                   Publications in our 4 Journals, 2008-2015
Asinh of GS Citations Measured in:                     2015                                           2019
                                                        (1)                 (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)            (7)
Authors' Genders                                                                                                                    Lasso
    All Female                                          0.24                0.12       0.12        0.08        0.10       0.09      0.08
                                                       (0.13)             (0.11)      (0.13)     (0.13)      (0.13)     (0.13)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                          -0.11                0.24       0.20        0.13       0.15        0.13       0.19
       senior author female                            (0.16)             (0.13)      (0.16)     (0.15)      (0.15)     (0.15)
     Mixed, other                                       0.09               -0.00       0.04       0.02        0.03       0.03       -0.02
                                                       (0.11)             (0.07)      (0.08)     (0.08)      (0.08)     (0.08)
     Undetermined                                      -0.40               -0.63      -0.75       -0.75       -0.78      -0.78      -0.67
                                                       (0.19)             (0.29)      (0.31)     (0.32)      (0.34)     (0.33)
Asinh(sum of counts of words)
     Theorem, Proposition, etc.                                                                  -0.12                   -0.07      -0.05
      (6 words)                                                                                  (0.04)                 (0.04)
     Empirical, Table, etc.                                                                       0.20                   0.15        0.17
      (11 words)                                                                                 (0.04)                 (0.04)
     Structural, Simulation, etc.                                                                 0.00                   -0.01
      (8 words)                                                                                  (0.02)                 (0.02)
     RCT, Laboratory, etc.                                                                        0.04                    0.03       0.00
      (5 words)                                                                                  (0.02)                 (0.03)
Coding of Paper Content
     Role of Model                                                                                            -0.15     -0.12
      (0-1 scale)                                                                                            (0.15)     (0.15)
     Role of empirical analysis                                                                                0.41       0.15       0.12
      (0-1 scale)                                                                                            (0.16)     (0.17)
     Role of Policy                                                                                           0.20        0.20       0.15
      (0-1 scale)                                                                                            (0.12)     (0.12)
     # Propositions/theorems < 75th percentile                                                                -0.24      -0.20      -0.08
      among positives                                                                                        (0.11)     (0.11)
     # Propositions/theorems > 75th percentile                                                                -0.41      -0.29      -0.05
      among positives                                                                                        (0.12)     (0.12)
     # Modeling equations < 75th percentile                                                                   0.04       0.04
      among positives                                                                                        (0.08)     (0.09)
     # Modeling equations > 75th percentile                                                                   0.24       0.25
      among positives                                                                                        (0.14)     (0.14)
     # Estimating Equations < 75th percentile                                                                 0.07       0.02
      among positives                                                                                        (0.08)     (0.08)
     # Estimating Equations > 75th percentile                                                                  0.01      -0.01
      among positives                                                                                        (0.09)     (0.09)
Controls for Fraction Referee Recs                      Yes                No          No         No            No         No        No
Controls for Author Pub., No. of Authors,               Yes                Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
     Field, Gender-Field, and Journal-Year
Controls for 2-Digit JEL                                No                 No          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
N                                                      1,713              1,719       1,719      1,719       1,719      1,719       1,719
R2                                                     0.30               0.28        0.54       0.56        0.56       0.57          -

     Notes. The sample in Column 1 is accepted papers in main sample. The sample in Columns 2-7 is published articles from Econlit, in
the 4 journals in our sample in 2008-2015, corresponding approximately to submissions in our sample. For this data set, we measure
Google Scholar citations in March 2019 (as opposed to mid 2015 for Column 1). For the sum of word-counts, we create four groups of
words out of 29 words. The qualitative coding of the role of model, empirical analysis, and policy is on a 0-10 scale, which we rescale to a
0-1 scale. Additionally, we counted the number of propositions and theorems, model equations, and estimating equations. For each of these
three categories, we indicate (if the paper has a positive number) whether or not the paper exceeds the 75th percentile for that variable. In
                                                                     42
column 7, we perform a lasso variable selection, forcing the inclusion of the author-gender variables.
                                                          TABLE VII
                            DESK REJECTION, IMPACT OF AUTHOR TEAM GENDER

Specification:                                  OLS Reg.                   Probit                           OLS Reg.
                                                 Asinh of           Indicator for Paper
Dependent Variable:                              Citations          Not Desk Rejected                 Asinh of Citations
                                                    (1)                      (2)                      (3)              (4)
Authors' Genders
     All Female                                     0.24                     0.13                    0.17             0.15
                                                   (0.04)                   (0.04)                  (0.05)           (0.04)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                       0.02                     -0.03                   0.10             0.15
       senior author female                        (0.05)                   (0.09)                  (0.05)           (0.05)
     Mixed, other                                   -0.02                    -0.03                   0.12             0.15
                                                   (0.03)                   (0.04)                  (0.04)           (0.03)
     Undetermined                                   -0.50                    -0.39                   -0.41            -0.34
                                                   (0.04)                   (0.05)                  (0.06)           (0.05)
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
     Publications: 1                                0.53                     0.40                    0.56             0.55
                                                   (0.05)                   (0.04)                  (0.06)           (0.05)
     Publications: 2                                0.83                     0.62                    0.90             0.87
                                                   (0.07)                   (0.04)                  (0.09)           (0.07)
     Publications: 3                                0.98                     0.81                    1.06             1.01
                                                   (0.08)                   (0.06)                  (0.10)           (0.09)
     Publications: 4-5                              1.28                     1.05                    1.41             1.32
                                                   (0.10)                   (0.08)                  (0.14)           (0.11)
     Publications: 6+                               1.58                     1.34                    1.67             1.62
                                                   (0.12)                   (0.10)                  (0.16)           (0.13)
Gender-field controls
     Share female in sub-fields                     0.25                     0.21                                     0.93
                                                   (0.24)                   (0.17)                                   (0.21)
     Fraction of gender-topic sub-fields            0.01                     0.01                                     -0.06
                                                   (0.06)                   (0.06)                                   (0.07)
NDR Indicator                                       0.41                                             0.86             0.86
                                                   (0.29)                                           (0.07)           (0.06)
Control Function for Selection into NDR             0.27
    (Value Added of the Editor)                    (0.15)
Editor Leave-out-Mean NDR Rate                                               2.78
                                                                            (0.36)
Controls for No. of Authors and Field               Yes                      Yes                      No               No
Indicators for Journal-Year                         Yes                      Yes                      No               Yes
Control for Cubic in P(NDR)                         No                       No                      Yes               Yes
Number of Observations                            29,890                   29,890                   29,890           29,890
 2             2
R / pseudo R                                        0.28                     0.24                    0.20              0.27

      Notes. Dependent variable for OLS model in Columns 1 and 3-4 is asinh of Google Scholar citations. Dependent variable
in probit model in Column 2 is indicator for avoiding desk rejection. The control function for selection in Column 1 is
calculated using predicted probabilities based on Column 2. In Columns 3 and 4 we control for a cubic polynomial in the
probability of non-desk-rejection, built using the specification in Column 2. Standard errors clustered by editor in parentheses.


                                                              43
                                                         TABLE VIII
               EFFECT OF REFEREE GENDER ON REFERE INFORMATIVENESS AND WEIGHT

                                              NLS Models for Asinh of Google               ML Probit Models for Receiving
                                                    Scholar Citations                      Revise-and-Resubmit Decision
                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)           (6)
Gender Slope Variables
     Female Referee                                          0.060         0.057                          -0.028        -0.018
                                                            (0.095)       (0.096)                        (0.049)       (0.050)
Gender Level Controls
     Female Referee                                          -0.019        -0.016                         -0.111        -0.143
                                                            (0.110)       (0.111)                        (0.146)       (0.148)
     All Female Authors                        0.221         0.219         0.218            0.011         0.039         0.042
                                              (0.053)       (0.055)       (0.055)          (0.064)       (0.067)       (0.068)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                   0.058        0.054         0.051            0.099         0.106         0.102
       senior author female                    (0.068)      (0.068)       (0.068)          (0.069)       (0.067)       (0.066)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                  0.013         0.009         0.009            -0.021        -0.020        -0.021
       other                                  (0.040)       (0.039)       (0.039)          (0.049)       (0.049)       (0.050)
Other Slope Variables
     Referee Publications 3+                                 0.001         -0.011                         0.187         0.163
                                                            (0.059)       (0.056)                        (0.032)       (0.032)
     Asinh (No. Reports for Editor)                                        0.048                                        0.076
                                                                          (0.028)                                      (0.021)
     Journal Fixed Effect                        No           Yes           Yes              No            Yes           Yes
     Field Fixed Effect                          No           Yes           Yes              No            Yes           Yes
Level Additional Controls
     Share Referees with 3+ Pubs.                            0.285         0.290                          -0.299        -0.248
                                                            (0.061)       (0.061)                        (0.145)       (0.147)
     Mean Asinh (No. Reports for Editor)                                   -0.029                                       -0.131
                                                                          (0.035)                                      (0.074)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations (Other Fractions Included, not Reported)
     R&R                                       1.886         1.821         1.790            4.593         4.155         4.024
                                              (0.126)       (0.235)       (0.241)          (0.214)       (0.433)       (0.421)
Author Publications (Other Indicators Included, not Reported)
     6+ Publications                           0.996         0.953         0.952            0.415         0.394         0.399
                                              (0.049)       (0.049)       (0.048)          (0.079)       (0.078)       (0.078)
R&R Indicator                                   0.060        0.212         0.242
   (Mechanical Publ. Effect)                   (0.142)      (0.131)       (0.132)
Control Function for Selection                 0.324         0.233         0.214
    (Value Added of the Editor)               (0.085)       (0.075)       (0.074)
Editor Leave-out-Mean R&R                                                                   2.749         3.097         3.014
     Rate                                                                                  (0.721)       (0.762)       (0.766)

     Notes. Standard errors clustered by editor in parentheses. For papers with more than 5 referees, referees after the fifth are
randomly dropped. See the text for details.


                                                               44
                                                        TABLE IX
                        REFEREE DELAYS, DECISION TIME, AND DURATION OF REVISIONS

                                              OLS Regression of            Number of Days                      Total Days
                                             Number of Days from      Sub. To Last Submission         No. of    from First
                                             Submission to Referee      Report      To Editor       Rounds (for Sub. to
                                                   Report              Received       Dec.            R&Rs)       Accept
                                                 (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)
Authors' Genders
    All Female                                  -1.36                      -1.10        -1.85           0.03         3.59
                                               (0.97)                     (1.40)       (1.49)          (0.09)      (30.47)
    Mixed-Gender Author Team                    -0.24                      0.60         0.71            -0.06       -8.39
      senior author female                     (1.93)                     (2.03)       (3.18)          (0.08)      (31.89)
    Mixed-Gender, other                         0.17                       1.18         1.82            0.01        19.41
                                               (0.72)                     (0.84)       (1.60)          (0.05)      (22.27)
    Undetermined Gender Mix                     -1.81                      -0.32        -0.71           0.08        38.45
                                               (1.45)                     (1.97)       (2.50)          (0.11)      (52.18)
Referee Gender (Omitted: Male Referee)
    Female Referee                                         0.44
                                                          (0.98)
Gender Interactions
    All Female Auth. X Female Ref.                         1.32
                                                          (2.52)
    Mixed Auth. (senior-F) X Female Ref.                   -2.91
                                                          (3.39)
    Mixed Auth. (other) X Female Ref.                      1.11
                                                          (1.92)
    Undetermined Auth. X Female Ref.                       0.87
                                                          (4.71)
R&R Indicator                                                              1.71        31.67
                                                                          (1.62)       (9.26)
                                                                                                     R&R Papers That Are
Sample                                       Non-Desk-Rejected Papers Non-Desk-Rejected Papers       Ultimately Accepted
Paper Fixed Effects                             No         Yes             No            No             No           No
Controls for Referee Publications               No         Yes             No            No             No           No
Controls for Referee Recommendations            No         No              Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
Controls for Author Pub., No. of Authors,
    Field & Gender-Field, Journal-Year f.e      Yes          -             Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
Editor Fixed Effects                             No          -             Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
Mean of Dependent Variable:                     73.6       73.6           94.9          116.9           2.79        634.1
N                                              38,825     38,825         15,147        15,147          1,713        1,667
R-squared                                       0.31       0.71           0.43          0.44            0.39        0.40


     Notes. The sample in Columns 1-2 is referee-paper observations, including any referee who returned a review for that
paper. Report time is calculated as the number of days from paper submission to referee report submission, rounded to the
nearest 10. The sample in Columns 3-6 is papers observations, inlcuding only R&R papers that are ultimately published in
Columns 5-6. Decision time is calculated as the number of days from paper submission to referee report submission, rounded to
the nearest 10. Clustered standard errors by editor in parentheses.




                                                             45
A     Online Appendix
A.1     Data
A.1.1    Google Scholar Citations
We extract Google Scholar citations using an automated web scraper. For every paper, we search
the title of the paper in Google Scholar with "allintitle:" (e.g. "allintitle:Behavioral Welfare Eco-
nomics"). This ensures that every result contains every word of our search criterion. Then, we
extract the results of the first page of the search, storing the paper title, list of authors, and number
of citations. We then compare the last names of the authors from Google Scholar compared to our
data base and keep every entry with at least one matching last name. Finally, we sum the citations
of the remaining entries to take into account earlier versions of the paper with many citations.

A.1.2    Published Papers
Sample. For the sample of published papers, we analyze papers in the Journal of the European
Economic Association, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, the Review of Economic Studies, and
the Review of Economics and Statistics from 2008 to 2015. To ensure a complete dataset, we
extract the list of articles directly from the journal websites, for a total of 1838 articles. (We found
that Econlit does not always provide the full list of papers published.) We then exclude articles
that fall under the following categories: Papers and Proceedings, comments, errata, corrigenda,
notes, and editorial announcements and letters, yielding a final sample of 1719 papers. For each
article, we download the PDF.
      In his sample, we run the same code used to generate the measures for author publications,
author gender, number of authors, broad field, and the two measures of gender-field composition,
as for our main sample. We also use the same procedure to extract the Google Scholar citations in
March of 2019. We also extract the Web of Science (SSCI) citations, in this case downloading the
micro data on all the citing papers, allowing us to perform the more detailed analysis of citations
in Online Appendix Table 10.
      Unlike in our main sample, we are able to check directly the accuracy of the key variables
above. In particular, we hand check the Google Scholar citations and the gender coding of the
authors for all papers in the sample. Online Appendix Table 11 presents the resulting evidence on
the degree of measurement error in the data.
      Additional Controls. For this sample of published papers, we build additional measures
of characteristics of papers which we do not have for the main sample. The first one is a precise
measure of sub-field of the paper. Specifically, for each paper, we obtain all the two-digit JEL code
(i.e., G21) listed in EconLit. We create indicators for each individual JEL code, for a total of over
500 sub-field controls. We classify a paper with J JEL codes as being assigned with weight 1/J to
each of the listed fields. For example, for a paper with 3 two-digit JELs, each of the three JELs
               1
are assigned 3   and the remaining two-digit JELs are assigned 0.
      The second set of controls aims to measure differences even within a sub-field in the content
of a paper using word counts. We search within the full text of the paper, using an R program
to search PDFs, for occurrence of a set of words. We count as as associated with a theoretical
profile the words "proposition, theorem, lemma, proof, model, theory." Similarly, we count as
associated with an empirical profile for the paper the words "empirical, data, standard error, table,
regression, diff-in-diff, natural experiment, IV, RDD, impact, research design." We also count words
indicating structural estimates ("structural, logit, BLP, maximum likelihood, mixture, simulation,
policy simulation, calibration") and words associated with experimental results ("field experiment,


                                                   46
RCT, laboratory, subjects, survey"). We then use the asinh of the sum of counts of words in a
category as control for the that feature of the paper in Table VI.
     The third set of controls also measures differences along the empirical/theoretical line, but
using qualitative assessment by a team of undergraduate research assistants. For the coding of
paper content we assigned each paper randomly to 1 of 12 undergraduates. The undergraduates
were then asked to rate the roles of empirical analysis, modeling, and policy of the papers on a scale
of 1-10. Additionally, they were tasked with counting the number of propositions and theorems,
modeling equations, and estimating equations.
     The instructions for the task are the following: "For NoPropsTheorems, count the number of
Propositions, Theorems, Lemmas, and Corollaries, including the Appendices if a part of the pub-
lished paper. Do not count Claims or Definitions. If the Appendix includes a proof of a Proposition
stated within the text, do not count this twice. Include Corollaries not in the text but present in
any such proofs. For NoMathEquations, count the number of equations related to a "theoretical
model," such as utility maximization, market equilibrium, etc. Count also equations that derive a
theoretical econometric model. Include displayed equations but not those in footnotes. As in No-
PropsTheorems, include equations in the published Appendix. Equations that span multiple lines
count as one equation. For NoEstimatingEquations, count the number of equations related to em-
pirical econometrics or estimation, such as OLS or IV specifications. If the equation is a derivation
of a theoretical property of an econometric model, then include the equation in NoProsTheorems
instead. For PagesofModel, count approximately the number of pages dedicated to modeling and
deriving. Use integer numbers. For PagesofEmpirical, count approximately the number of pages
dedicated to data or empirical model. Include any "Data Sections." Use integer numbers. For
RoleofModel, provide a qualitative assessment of the role of model and theory in the paper on an
integer scale from 0 (none) to 10 (absolutely central). Ask yourself, "How central is the modeling
contribution in the paper?" For RoleofEmpirical, provide a qualitative assessment of the role of data
and empirical methods in the paper, on an integer scale from 0 (none) to 10 (absolutely central).
Ask yourself, "How central is the empirical contribution of the paper?" For RoleofPolicy, provide
a qualitative assessment of the role and influence of policy in the paper, on an integer scale from 0
(none) to 10 (absolutely central). Ask yourself, "How relevant is this paper to policy?"
     For the published papers, we also extract SSCI cites. For papers that cite the published
papers, we attempt to assign 5-year impact factors for the journal in which it is published. In
Online Appendix 10 Column 5, the sample is papers published in journals with 5-year impact
factor 5 or greater. In Column 6, we have papers published with 5-year impact factor less than 3.
Finally, in Column 7, we have papers published in journals that we could not match to an impact
factor. Notably, some journals are outside of economics.




                                                 47
                     Online Appendix Figure 1. Coding Gender for Names




Notes. Graph shows the process by which gender is assigned to names.




                                                   48
                                                 Online Appendix Figure 2a. Paper Citations by Gender

                  1
                                             All male
                                             All female
                                             Mixed, senior-F
                  .8


                                             Mixed, other
       Fraction <= asinh(cites)
             .4   .2
                  0    .6




                                  0             1              2        3             4          5            6              7
                                                                         asinh(cites)
                                      Online Appendix Figure 2b. Paper Citations by Gender, Citations Residualized




           Notes. The Figure displays a few key summary statistics by gender. Figure 2a displays the CDF of the (asinh of) paper
citations. Figure 2b displays the same citation variable, but after partialling out the key controls for journal-year fixed effects,
fields, number of authors, and number of author publications (as in Table 5, Column 3).




                                                                          49
Online Appendix Figure 3. Share of Female Authors and Referees, by Field
OA Figure 3a. Author Gender by Field                                                                                                                                                    OA Figure 3b. Referee Gender by Field
                       .25




                                                                                                                                                        .25
                                                                                                                  Labor
 Frac. of female authors in four-journal sample




                                                                                                                                 Frac. of female referees in four-journal sample
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Labor

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HealthUrbanLaw
                                                                                                Exp               Dev
                                                                                                 HealthUrbanLaw                                                                                                                                    Dev
                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                             Intl
                                                                        Hist
                                                                                               Other                                                                                                        Hist                Other

                                                                               Public                                                                                                                                             Exp
                                                                                        IO                                                                                                                                     Intl
                                                                     Micro




                                                                                                                                              .15
             .15




                                                       Metrics                                                                                                                                                     Public IO

                                                          Theory
                                                             Macro      Fin
                                                                                                                                                                                          Metrics        Micro
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Macro
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fin



                                                                                                                                                                                             Theory




                                                                                                                                                        .1
                       .1




                                                  .1                   .15                        .2                      .25                                                      .1                      .15                       .2                    .25
                                                                         Fraction female in EconLit                                                                                                         Fraction female in EconLit

OA Figure 3c. Author and Referee Gender Over Time




           Notes. In this figure, we compare the fraction of female referees and female authors in our four journal sample as well as in a sample of authors with publications in 63
high-impact journal listed in Online Appendix Table 1, Panel B (which we label "EconLit authors"). In 3a and 3b, we break down the distributions by field, giving equal weight to
each paper (ensuring papers with multiple JELs do not receive too much weight), with a 45 degree line for reference. In 3c, we compare fraction female across time. Each observation
is either an author-paper or referee-paper. For the Econlit sample, we obtain the approximate year of submission as the year of publication minus 2. A vertical line has been added
halfway through 2013, marking the end of our main sample.

                                                                                                                                50
Online Appendix Figure 4. Referee Evaluation by Author Gender and Referee Gender, Extended Sample
                                           (Up to 2017)
                          Online Appendix Figure 4a. Index of Referee Recommendations




Online Appendix Figure 4b. Share of Positive Referee Recommendations




          Notes. Online Appendix Figure 4a displays the mean recommendation given by referees based on gender. The index of
referee recommendations is constructed using the coefficients in the citation model in Card and DellaVigna (forthcoming). From
Definitely Reject to Accept, the values are 0, 0.67, 1.01, 1.47, 1.92, 2.27, 2.33. The bands show 2 standard error intervals, clustered
at the paper level. The figure includes only 12,273 paper-referees that satisfy having both male and female referees. Additionally,
we have dropped unknown gender referees and authors. Figure 4b shows the share of positive recommendations, defined as RR-
Accept. In both panels, female referees are weighted at the paper level by Nmale / Nfemale.

                                                                 51
                                      Online Appendix Figure 5. Citation Penalty for Female Authors: Survey Responses by Gender
                         70

                         60
                                                                                                                 Female Respondents
                         50                                                                                    median=-10, mean=-10.3, N=53
  Percent of Responses




                         40                                                                                         Male Respondents
                                                                                                               median=0, mean=-3.1, N=64
                         30
                                                                                                                    Editors
                         20                                                                                    median=0, mean=-3.8, N=14

                         10

                         0
                              -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5                         0      5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                                     Percentage Citation Penalty
         Notes. Tabulation of the response to question Q8 in the survey (Table I). The number of observations differs from the one in Table I because some of the survey
respondents did not answer question Q8.




                                                                                       52
 Appendix Figure 6. Differences in Citations and R&R Rate, by Author Gender, Additional Material
        Online Appendix Figure 6a. Referee Recommendations and Citations, No Controls




Online App. Figure 6b. Recommendations and Citations, by Author and Referee Gender, No Controls




                                               53
Online Appendix Figure 6c. Referee Recommendations and R&R Rate, No Controls




  Online Appendix Figure 6d. Referee Recommendations and Citations, Controls




                                     54
                Online Appendix Figure 6e. Referee Recommendations and R&R Rate, Controls




          Notes. Online Appendix Figure 6b shows the weighted asinh (citations) for a paper receiving a given recommendation,
while OA Figure 6c shows the R&R rate for a paper receiving a given recommendation. Figures 6a and 6c show the results
separately by author gender. Figure 6b splits these two categories further into referees' gender. The unit of observation is a referee
report, and observations are weighted by the number of referee reports for the paper to ensure that each paper receives equal weight.
Standard errors are clustered at the paper level. Figure 6b omits confidence intervals for legibility. Figures 6d and 6e are versions
of, respectively, Figure IV Panel A and Figure IV Panel B with confidence intervals.




                                                                 55
      Online Appendix Figure 7. Share of Papers With 0 and Low Citations (by Author Gender Mix)




          Notes. This figure presents, within each gender group, the share of papers with 0 citations and papers from
the 35th up to the 55th percentile in citations. The percentile of citations is calculated within a journal-year cell.




                                                          56
              Online Appendix Figure 8. Other Editorial Outcomes: Referee and Editorial Delay
                           Online Appendix Figure 8a. Referee Response Time




                                 Online Appendix Figure 8b. Editor Response Time




                        Online Appendix Figure 8c. Number of Rounds (for R&R papers)




           Notes. Figure 8a includes 12,273 paper-referees that satisfy having both male and female referees. Additionally, we have
dropped unknown gender referees and authors. In 8b and 8c, each observation is a paper, submitted 2003-2013, for which we have
the appropriate variable. In Panel A, female referees are weighted at the paper level by Nmale / Nfemale. Panel B omits papers when
the editor decides before the last report arrives.


                                                               57
  Onl. App. Table 1. Journals Used for Publication Counts and Gender Coding
Panel A. List of Journals Used in Publication Counts
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics                Journal of Economic Growth
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics                   Journal of Economic Theory
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics                   Journal of Finance
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy                  Journal of Financial Economics
American Economic Review                                    Journal of Health Economics
Brookings Papers on Economic Policy                         Journal of International Economics
Econometrica                                                Journal of Labor Economics
Economic Journal                                            Journal of Monetary Economics
Experimental Economics                                      Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
Games and Economic Behavior                                 Journal of Political Economy
International Economic Review                               Journal of Public Economics
International Journal of Industrial Organization            Journal of Urban Economics
Journal of the European Economic Association                Quarterly Journal of Economics
Journal of Accounting and Economics                         The RAND Journal of Economics
Journal of American Statistical Association                 Review of Economics and Statistics
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics                 Review of Financial Studies
Journal of Development Economics                            Review of Economic Studies
Journal of Econometrics

Panel B. List of Additional Journals Used to Generate List of Authors Coded for Gender
Economic Theory                                   Journal of Economics and Management Strategy
European Economic Review                          Labour Economics
Quantitative Economics                            Public Choice
Theoretical Economics                             European Journal of Political Economy
Review of Economic Dynamics                       Scandinavian Journal of Economics
Journal of Applied Econometrics                   Regional Science and Urban Economics
Journal of Economic Perspectives                  Mathematical Social Sciences
Economic Policy                                   International Tax and Public Finance
World Bank Economic Review                        Environmental and Resource Economics
Journal of Law and Economics                      Journal of Development Studies
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty                   Energy Economics
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management Journal of International Money and Finance
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization     Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
Journal of Theoretical Public Economics           Journal of Public Economic Theory
     Notes. The 35 journals in Panel A are used to build measures of author and referee prominence, as the
number of articles published in the previous 5 years in one of the journals by an author/referee. The additional
journals in Panel B are used to build a database of economists, which we gender code.




                                                      58
          Online Appendix Table 2. Summary Statistics for all Submissions
                                                                  All Papers
Sample:                          All male    All female Mix., F-led Mix., other          Undet.         All
                                    (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)                (5)           (6)
Google Scholar Citations
  Asinh Citations                  2.11          1.97          2.72         2.41          1.27          2.11
                                  (1.83)        (1.80)        (1.85)       (1.82)        (1.57)        (1.83)
Editorial Decisions
  Not Desk-Rejected             0.59        0.56               0.67         0.61          0.41          0.58
  Received R&R Decision         0.08       0.06                0.11         0.08          0.04          0.08
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
  Publications: 0               0.46        0.69               0.00         0.33          0.70          0.46
  Publications: 1               0.17        0.15               0.28         0.17          0.11          0.17
  Publications: 2               0.10        0.07               0.24         0.13          0.07          0.10
  Publications: 3               0.08        0.04               0.18         0.10          0.04          0.08
  Publications: 4-5             0.09        0.04               0.17         0.12          0.04          0.09
  Publications: 6+              0.10       0.01                0.13         0.14          0.04          0.10
Number of Authors
  1 author                      0.44       0.76                0.00         0.00          0.34          0.37
  2 authors                     0.39       0.21                0.52         0.48          0.36          0.39
  3 authors                     0.15       0.03                0.39         0.39          0.23          0.19
  4+ authors                    0.03        0.00               0.09         0.13          0.07          0.05
Field of Paper
  Development                   0.04       0.06                0.05         0.05          0.05          0.05
  Econometrics                  0.07        0.05               0.06         0.06          0.09          0.07
  Finance                       0.07       0.05                0.07         0.06          0.10          0.07
  Health, Urban, Law            0.05        0.06               0.06         0.06          0.04          0.05
  History                       0.01       0.01                0.01         0.01          0.01          0.01
  International                 0.06        0.07               0.09         0.06          0.06          0.06
  Industrial Organization       0.05        0.05               0.04         0.05          0.05          0.05
  Lab/Experiments               0.02        0.02               0.04         0.04          0.01          0.02
  Labor                         0.10       0.17                0.13         0.13          0.07          0.11
  Macro                         0.11       0.08                0.08         0.08          0.13          0.10
  Micro                         0.11       0.08                0.10         0.11          0.08          0.11
  Public                        0.05       0.04                0.04         0.05          0.03          0.05
  Theory                        0.10       0.07                0.08         0.07          0.08          0.09
  Unclassified                  0.06       0.06                0.06         0.06          0.07          0.06
  Missing Field                 0.11        0.12               0.10         0.11          0.14          0.11
Gender-Field Variables
  Share female in fields        0.15        0.18               0.17         0.17         0.15          0.16
  Gender-topic fields           0.03        0.08               0.05         0.05         0.03          0.04
  Number of Observations      19,814       2,273               921          4,723        2,159        29,890
  Share of Papers               0.66       0.08                0.03         0.16         0.07          1.00

     Notes. Table presents information on mean characteristics of all submitted papers. Author publications are
based on publications in 35 high-impact journals (Online Appendix Table 1) in the 5 years prior to submission. In
the case of multiple authors, the measure is the maximum over all coauthors. Field is based on JEL codes at paper
submission. Indicators of fields for a paper that lists N codes are set to 1/N.




                                                             59
                      Online Appendix Table 3. Referee Assignment
                                                              Linear Probability Models
                                                                                     Referee with
     Dependent Variable:                            Indicator for Female Referee        3+ Pub.
                                                       (1)          (2)           (3)               (4)
Authors' Genders (Omitted: All Male Authors)
    All Female Authors                        0.111                0.103        0.074              -0.025
                                             (0.009)              (0.010)      (0.009)            (0.010)
    Mixed-Gender Author Team                  0.064                0.062        0.049              -0.006
        senior author female                 (0.011)              (0.011)      (0.011)            (0.013)
    Mixed-Gender Author Team                  0.043                0.040        0.026              -0.010
        other                                (0.006)              (0.006)      (0.006)            (0.007)
    Undetermined Gender Team                  0.014                0.007        0.004              -0.001
                                             (0.009)              (0.009)      (0.009)            (0.014)
Gender-field controls
    Share female in sub-fields                                                  0.297              -0.036
                                                                               (0.043)            (0.049)
     Fraction of gender-topic sub-fields                                        0.198              -0.034
                                                                               (0.019)            (0.021)
Mean of the Dependent Variable:                      0.157         0.157        0.157              0.461
Controls for Author Publications                      No           Yes          Yes                Yes
Controls for Referee Publications                     No           Yes          Yes                 No
Controls for No. of Authors                           No           Yes          Yes                Yes
Controls for Field                                    No            No          Yes                Yes
Indicators for Journal-Year                           Yes          Yes          Yes                Yes
N                                                   38,438        38,438       38,438             38,438
R-squared                                            0.015        0.029        0.048              0.023
     Notes. The sample is paper-referee observations for 15,147 papers with at least two referees assigned,
excluding unknown gendered referees. The dependent variable in Columns 1-3 is an indicator for the referee
being female, while the dependent variable in Column 4 is an indicator for the referee having at least 3
publications in the 35 publications in the previous 5 years. Standard errors clustered by paper in parentheses.




                                                     60
Online Appendix Table 4. Referee Recommendations, by Referee Publications

                                                                             Linear Probability Models
                                                OLS Models for Index of        for Receiving an R&R
Specification:                                  Referee Recommendations      Recommendation or Better
                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
Referee Gender (Omitted: Male Referee)
     Female Referee                                0.066            -           -0.005           -
                                                  (0.141)                      (0.086)
     Female Referee × 3+Publications for Ref.      -0.020        -0.015        -0.023         -0.019
                                                  (0.036)        (0.036)       (0.023)        (0.023)
Gender Interactions
     All Female Auth. × Female Ref.                -0.008         -0.002        -0.033         -0.035
                                                  (0.057)        (0.058)       (0.037)        (0.038)
     Mixed Auth. (F-senior) × Female Ref.          -0.006         -0.023        -0.004         -0.014
                                                  (0.080)        (0.080)       (0.054)        (0.054)
     Mixed Auth. (other) × Female Ref.             0.035          0.023         0.021          0.009
                                                  (0.045)        (0.047)       (0.029)        (0.030)
     Undetermined Auth. × Female Ref.              0.073          0.055         -0.019         -0.029
                                                  (0.092)        (0.093)       (0.060)        (0.060)
Gender Interactions × Publication
     All Female Auth. × Female Ref. ×              0.039          0.034         0.097          0.094
      3+ Publications for Ref.                    (0.095)        (0.095)       (0.060)        (0.060)
     Mixed Auth. (F-senior) × Female Ref. ×       -0.032         -0.026         0.003          0.004
      3+ Publications for Ref.                    (0.115)        (0.114)       (0.074)        (0.074)
     Mixed Auth. (other) × Female Ref. ×          -0.098         -0.102        -0.047         -0.047
      3+ Publications for Ref.                    (0.070)        (0.070)       (0.044)        (0.044)
     Undetermined Auth. × Female Ref. ×            -0.070        -0.042         0.048          0.059
      3+ Publications for Ref.                    (0.146)        (0.148)       (0.088)        (0.089)
Paper Fixed Effects                                 Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Control for Referee Pub.                            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Control for Referee Pub.*Author Gender              No            Yes            No             Yes
Control for Referee Gender * Author Pub             No            Yes            No             Yes
Control for Referee Gender * Field                  No            Yes             No            Yes
N                                                 38,840         38,840         38,840        38,840
R-squared                                           0.51          0.51           0.45          0.45


     Notes. The index of referee recommendations is constructed using the coefficients in the cites model
in Card and DellaVigna (forthcoming). From Definitely Reject to Accept, the values are 0, 0.67, 1.01,
1.47, 1.92, 2.27, 2.33. We also include a control for unknown-gender referee (coefficient not shown).




                                                   61
                         Online Appendix Table 5. Citations and Editor Decision, Impact of Controls
                                                    OLS Models for Asinh of GS Citations                   Probit Models for Receiving R&R Dec.
                                                    (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)      (10)
Authors' Genders
    All Female                                 -0.11   0.14      0.22     0.17    0.19                    -0.08      0.02      0.01       -0.01     0.01
                                              (0.05) (0.05) (0.05) (0.05) (0.05)                         (0.06)     (0.06)    (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.07)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                   0.33   0.14      0.08     0.04    0.04                     0.15      0.11       0.14       0.13     0.13
         senior author female                 (0.07) (0.07) (0.07) (0.07) (0.07)                         (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.07)
     Mixed, other                               0.24   0.13      0.01    0.00    -0.00                    0.04       -0.00     -0.01      -0.01     0.02
                                              (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)                         (0.05)     (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.05)    (0.05)
     Undetermined                              -0.37   -0.24     -0.30   -0.27   -0.27                    -0.08      -0.04     -0.03      -0.03     0.04
                                              (0.05) (0.05) (0.05) (0.05) (0.05)                         (0.08)     (0.08)    (0.08)     (0.09)    (0.08)
Author Publications in 35 High-Impact Journals (Max across Authors)
     1 Publication                                     0.37      0.22    0.22     0.23                               0.04      -0.06      -0.05     -0.05
                                                      (0.04) (0.05) (0.05) (0.05)                                   (0.05)    (0.06)     (0.06)    (0.06)
     2 Publications                                    0.59      0.33     0.32    0.33                               0.19      -0.00      -0.01     -0.00
                                                      (0.04) (0.05) (0.05) (0.05)                                   (0.06)    (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.08)
     3 Publications                                    0.70      0.33     0.33    0.34                               0.17      -0.11      -0.10     -0.12
                                                      (0.03) (0.06) (0.06) (0.06)                                   (0.06)    (0.09)     (0.09)    (0.09)
     4-5 Publications                                  0.95      0.43     0.42    0.43                               0.33      -0.05      -0.05     -0.03
                                                      (0.05) (0.09) (0.09) (0.09)                                   (0.05)    (0.11)     (0.11)    (0.11)
     6+ Publications                                   1.15      0.36     0.33    0.34                               0.42      -0.14      -0.15     -0.13
                                                      (0.05) (0.12) (0.11) (0.12)                                   (0.07)    (0.13)     (0.14)    (0.14)
Author Publications in 35 High-Impact Journals, Mean across Authors
     Average Publications Across Coauthors                       0.06    0.06     0.06                                         0.04       0.04      0.03
                                                                (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)                                          (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.03)
Author Publications in Top 5 Journals (Max Across Authors)
     1 Publication                                               0.29    0.23     0.23                                         0.22       0.19      0.20
                                                                (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)                                          (0.05)     (0.05)    (0.05)
     2 Publications                                              0.41     0.30    0.30                                         0.27       0.22      0.23
                                                                (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)                                          (0.08)     (0.08)    (0.08)
     3+ Publications                                             0.53     0.34    0.34                                         0.45       0.37      0.39
                                                                (0.07) (0.06) (0.06)                                          (0.08)     (0.07)    (0.07)
Author Publications in 35 High-Impact Journals, 6-10 years ago (Max Across Authors)
     1-3 Publications                                            -0.10   -0.07   -0.07                                         0.15       0.17      0.17
                                                                (0.03) (0.03) (0.03)                                          (0.05)     (0.05)    (0.05)
     4+ Publications                                             0.03     0.04    0.05                                         0.11       0.12      0.12
                                                                (0.05) (0.04) (0.04)                                          (0.06)     (0.06)    (0.06)
Rank of Authors' Institution
     US: 1-10                                                            0.43     0.43                                                    0.21      0.24
                                                                        (0.04) (0.04)                                                    (0.05)    (0.06)
     US: 11-20                                                           0.29     0.29                                                    0.18      0.19
                                                                        (0.05) (0.05)                                                    (0.05)    (0.05)
     Europe: 1-10                                                        0.32     0.31                                                    0.10      0.08
                                                                        (0.04) (0.04)                                                    (0.06)    (0.06)
     Rest of World: 1-5                                                  -0.16   -0.17                                                    0.10      0.09
                                                                        (0.09) (0.08)                                                    (0.09)    (0.09)
R&R Indicator                                  -0.02   0.05      0.03    0.05     0.15
     (Mechanical Publ. Effect)                (0.14) (0.14) (0.13) (0.14) (0.14)
Control Function for Selection                 0.42    0.33      0.33    0.30     0.25
     (Value Added of the Editor)              (0.08) (0.08) (0.08) (0.08) (0.08)
Editor Leave-out-Mean R&R                                                                                 3.38       3.41      3.39       3.42      3.44
     Rate                                                                                                (0.71)     (0.73)    (0.73)     (0.72)    (0.71)
Controls for Referee Rec., # Authors, Field &
                                                Yes     Yes       Yes     Yes     Yes                      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
     Gender-Field, and Journal-Year
Controls for No. of Authors                     No      No        Yes     Yes     Yes                      No         No        Yes       Yes        Yes
Interactions of Field with Year
     and Gender-Field Variables                  No     No        No       No     Yes                      No         No        No         No       Yes
R2 / pseudo R2                                 0.22    0.27      0.28    0.29     0.30                    0.48       0.49      0.50       0.50      0.52
      Notes. The sample is 15,147 non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees assigned. Dependent variable for OLS models in Columns 1-5 is asinh of
Google Scholar citations. Dependent variable in probit models in Columns 6-10 is indicator for receiving revise and resubmit decision. The control function
for selection in Columns 1-5 is calculated using predicted probabilities based on Columns 6-10. Standard errors clustered by editor in parentheses.

                                                                            62
                                                                          Online Appendix Table 6. Models of Alternative Measures of Citations
                                                                                                                                           Tobit Model for                       Tobit Model Tobit Model Tobit Model
                                                                                            OLS Model                                          asinh(GS                          for asinh(GS for asinh(GS for asinh(SSCI
                                                       OLS Model Poisson Model               for GS          Probit Model for Probit Model Citations) Right- OLS Model for Asinh Citations)     Citations)    Citations)
                                                      for Log(1+GS for Number of             Citation         Top Group of for Top 2% of Censored at 100 Citations for Papers
                                                        Citations)  GS Citations            Percentile         GS Citations   GS Citations     Citations      With Nonzero Cites   All Years   2006-2008     2006-2008
                                                           (1)          (2)                     (3)                 (4)            (5)            (6)                (7)               (8)         (9)           (10)
Authors' Genders
    All Female                                               0.19               0.19              3.60                0.13                0.17                0.22                     0.14                  0.27     0.31     0.32
                                                           (0.05)             (0.06)            (0.85)              (0.05)              (0.09)              (0.05)                   (0.04)                (0.07)   (0.13)   (0.15)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                               0.05               0.07              0.51                 0.10                0.07               0.07                      0.10                  0.05     0.14    -0.04
       senior author female                                (0.06)             (0.06)            (1.10)              (0.06)              (0.11)              (0.07)                   (0.06)                (0.08)   (0.14)   (0.27)
     Mixed, other                                           0.01               0.03              0.07                -0.00               0.00                0.01                      0.01                  0.01     0.12    -0.02
                                                           (0.03)             (0.05)            (0.64)              (0.03)              (0.05)              (0.04)                   (0.03)                (0.05)   (0.10)   (0.11)
     Undetermined                                           -0.27              -0.32             -5.05               -0.19               -0.18               -0.31                    -0.19                 -0.41    -0.66    -0.61
                                                           (0.04)             (0.07)            (0.81)              (0.07)              (0.11)              (0.05)                   (0.07)                (0.07)   (0.17)   (0.27)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
    Reject                                                  0.54               0.48             10.55                0.30                0.30                0.65                     0.43                  0.86     0.60     0.80
                                                           (0.05)             (0.09)            (0.95)              (0.08)              (0.13)              (0.06)                   (0.06)                (0.08)   (0.18)   (0.21)
     No Recommendation                                      0.84               0.84             16.04                0.55                0.51                1.00                     0.79                  1.26     1.04     1.58
                                                           (0.09)             (0.12)            (1.52)              (0.11)              (0.21)              (0.11)                   (0.11)                (0.12)   (0.20)   (0.26)
     Weak R&R                                               1.24               1.14             23.32                0.79                0.72                1.46                     0.98                  1.84     1.58     1.58
                                                           (0.09)             (0.11)            (1.48)              (0.11)              (0.18)              (0.11)                   (0.10)                (0.11)   (0.17)   (0.28)
     R&R                                                    1.61               1.39             30.57                1.09                0.76                1.93                     1.23                  2.39     2.08     1.90
                                                           (0.12)             (0.13)            (1.96)              (0.14)              (0.21)              (0.13)                   (0.15)                (0.14)   (0.25)   (0.37)
     Strong R&R                                             1.94               1.73             36.48                1.21                0.94                2.30                     1.52                  2.83     2.46     2.48
                                                           (0.20)             (0.18)            (3.10)              (0.21)              (0.26)              (0.24)                   (0.22)                (0.23)   (0.36)   (0.51)
     Accept                                                 1.99               1.84             36.46                1.34                1.19                2.37                     1.52                  2.87     2.81     3.17
                                                           (0.18)             (0.17)            (2.47)              (0.20)              (0.26)              (0.20)                   (0.22)                (0.19)   (0.28)   (0.39)
Author Publications in 35 High-Impact Journals
    1 Publication                                           0.25               0.21              4.52                0.19                0.20                0.29                     0.15                  0.38     0.35     0.46
                                                           (0.04)             (0.05)            (0.70)              (0.05)              (0.11)              (0.04)                   (0.03)                (0.05)   (0.12)   (0.13)
     2 Publications                                         0.42               0.39              7.52                0.32                0.35                0.50                     0.27                  0.62     0.72     0.86
                                                           (0.03)             (0.04)            (0.58)              (0.05)              (0.07)              (0.04)                   (0.03)                (0.05)   (0.10)   (0.18)
     3 Publications                                         0.50               0.43              9.08                0.32                0.39                0.59                     0.32                   0.72    0.78     0.76
                                                           (0.03)             (0.03)            (0.55)              (0.05)              (0.08)              (0.04)                   (0.04)                (0.05)   (0.10)   (0.16)
     4-5 Publications                                       0.70               0.64             12.11                0.50                0.57                0.82                     0.50                   0.97    1.02     1.24
                                                           (0.05)             (0.07)            (0.80)              (0.05)              (0.08)              (0.06)                   (0.04)                (0.07)   (0.11)   (0.14)
     6+ Publications                                        0.86               0.79             14.82                0.67                0.78                1.02                     0.70                  1.15     1.14     1.23
                                                           (0.04)             (0.05)            (0.76)              (0.05)              (0.07)              (0.05)                   (0.04)                (0.06)   (0.10)   (0.19)
R&R Indicator                                               0.11               0.09              -0.69               0.21                0.33                0.11                     0.21                  -0.10    0.12     1.63
      (Mechanical Publ. Effect)                            (0.13)             (0.11)            (2.24)              (0.13)              (0.18)              (0.15)                   (0.12)                (0.16)   (0.26)   (0.40)
Control Function for Selection                              0.27               0.27               5.48               0.17                0.11                0.32                     0.19                  0.44     0.39     0.07
      (Value Added of the Editor)                          (0.08)             (0.06)            (1.28)              (0.08)              (0.10)              (0.09)                   (0.07)                (0.09)   (0.15)   (0.23)
Controls for No. of Authors, Field, Gender-
                                                            Yes                Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                      Yes                   Yes      Yes      Yes
Field, Journal-Year
N                                                          15,147            15,147             15,147             15,147              15,147               15,147                  15,147                15,147    4,507    4,507
R2 / pseudo R2                                              0.28             0.352               0.20               0.15                0.16                 0.49                    0.28                  0.49     0.49     0.49
    Notes. In columns 1-7, the sample is 15,147 non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees assigned. Columns 8 and 9 restricted to years 2006-08. Standard errors clustered by editor in parentheses.


                                                                                                                           63
 Online Appendix Table 7. Citations and Editor Decision, Results Split by Number of Authors
                                                OLS Models for Asinh of Google                Probit Models for Receiving
                                                     Scholar Citations                           Revise-and-Resubmit
Number of Authors:                             1 Author      2 Authors 3+ Authors          1 Author      2 Authors 3+ Authors
                                                  (1)           (2)        (3)                (4)           (5)        (6)
Authors' Genders
    All Female                                    0.17          0.34          0.06            0.11          -0.23         -0.15
                                                 (0.07)        (0.08)        (0.23)          (0.08)        (0.12)        (0.49)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                                   -0.08         0.23                           0.12          0.10
       senior author female                                    (0.10)        (0.09)                        (0.11)        (0.10)
     Mixed, other                                                0.01         0.03                          -0.13         0.05
                                                               (0.06)        (0.05)                        (0.08)        (0.07)
     Undetermined                                -0.22          -0.28         -0.37           -0.04         -0.10         -0.00
                                                 (0.12)        (0.08)        (0.09)          (0.20)        (0.14)        (0.15)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
    Reject                                  0.79        0.48         0.67                     0.75          0.83          1.01
                                           (0.08)      (0.10)       (0.14)                   (0.29)        (0.27)        (0.24)
      No Recommendation                     1.07        0.77         1.20                     2.60          2.86          2.94
                                           (0.14)      (0.17)       (0.24)                   (0.34)        (0.26)        (0.23)
      Weak R&R                              1.52        1.36         1.40                     3.14          3.18          3.33
                                           (0.12)      (0.15)       (0.19)                   (0.33)        (0.25)        (0.24)
      R&R                                   2.37        1.57         1.75                     4.85          4.69          4.62
                                           (0.22)      (0.18)       (0.18)                   (0.40)        (0.31)        (0.24)
      Strong R&R                            2.99        1.82         2.02                     5.88          5.71          5.43
                                           (0.31)      (0.28)       (0.31)                   (0.48)        (0.33)        (0.32)
      Accept                                2.55        1.99          2.35                    5.35          5.52          5.53
                                           (0.28)      (0.29)       (0.36)                   (0.37)        (0.33)        (0.30)
Author Publications in 35 High-Impact Journals (Max across Authors)
      1 Publication                         0.36        0.28         0.21                     0.03          0.12          -0.09
                                           (0.07)      (0.06)       (0.10)                   (0.09)        (0.09)        (0.14)
      2 Publications                        0.46        0.49         0.51                     0.19          0.06           0.36
                                           (0.09)      (0.06)       (0.09)                   (0.14)        (0.10)        (0.15)
      3 Publications                        0.40        0.60         0.65                     -0.00         0.26           0.09
                                           (0.13)      (0.06)       (0.08)                   (0.15)        (0.09)        (0.14)
      4-5 Publications                      0.83        0.76         0.88                     0.41          0.39           0.22
                                           (0.10)      (0.07)       (0.11)                   (0.14)        (0.10)        (0.14)
      6+ Publications                       0.68        0.98         1.12                     0.26          0.45           0.39
                                           (0.19)      (0.08)       (0.10)                   (0.21)        (0.10)        (0.12)
R&R Indicator                               0.15        0.19         -0.10
      (Mechanical Publ. Effect)            (0.25)      (0.21)       (0.23)
Control Function for Selection              0.37        0.22          0.38
      (Value Added of the Editor)          (0.15)      (0.13)       (0.14)
Editor Leave-out-Mean R&R                                                                     3.27          4.09          2.80
      Rate                                                                                   (1.20)        (1.00)        (0.95)
Controls for Field & Gender-Field Ctrls     Yes         Yes           Yes                     Yes           Yes           Yes
Indicators for Journal-Year                 Yes         Yes           Yes                     Yes           Yes           Yes
Indicator for 4+ Authors                      -           -           Yes                       -             -           Yes
N                                          4,639       6,406        4,102                    4,639         6,406         4,102
R2 / pseudo R2                              0.26        0.25         0.27                     0.53          0.50          0.48
     Notes. Dependent variable for OLS models in Columns 1-3 is asinh of Google Scholar citations. Dependent variable in probit
models in Columns 4-6 is indicator for receiving revise and resubmit decision. The control function for selection in Columns 1-3 is
calculated using predicted probabilities based on Columns 4-6. Standard errors clustered by editor in parentheses.

                                                                64
           Online Appendix Table 8. Citations and Editor Decision, Heterogeneity
                                                OLS Models for Asinh of                Probit Models for Receiving
                                                Google Scholar Citations                  Revise-and-Resubmit
                                                (1)       (2)        (3)                (4)        (5)        (6)
Authors' Gender
    All Female                                  0.20          0.10        0.28           0.06         0.05        0.03
                                               (0.05)       (0.10)      (0.08)         (0.07)       (0.17)      (0.08)
     Mixed-Gender                                0.06         0.10        0.07           0.01         0.01       0.06
                                               (0.04)       (0.08)      (0.05)         (0.06)       (0.08)      (0.07)
     Undetermined                               -0.31        -0.31       -0.31          -0.05        -0.05       -0.05
                                               (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.05)         (0.08)       (0.08)      (0.08)
Authors' Genders and Publications
      All Female *                              0.13                                    -0.24
      (Max Publication >=3)                    (0.15)                                  (0.18)
      Mixed-Gender *                           -0.11                                     0.10
      (Female pub 3+, Male Pub<3)              (0.10)                                  (0.09)
      Mixed-Gender *                           -0.18                                    -0.13
      (Female pub <3, Male Pub 3+)             (0.06)                                  (0.09)
      Mixed-Gender *                            0.22                                    0.23
      (Female pub 3+, Male Pub 3+)             (0.13)                                  (0.11)
Authors' Genders and Field
      All Female *                                           0.75                                    -0.27
      Share females in Sub-field                            (0.61)                                  (1.06)
      Mixed-Gender *                                        -0.53                                    -0.05
      Share females in Sub-field                            (0.49)                                  (0.57)
Authors' Genders and Year of Submission
      All Female *                                                       -0.13                                   -0.04
      (Years of Submission 2010 on)                                     (0.10)                                  (0.11)
      Mixed-Gender *                                                     -0.09                                  -0.11
      (Years of Submission 2010 on)                                     (0.08)                                  (0.07)
R&R Indicator                                   0.07         0.06        0.06
      (Mechanical Publ. Effect)                (0.14)       (0.14)      (0.14)
Control Function for Selection                  0.32         0.32        0.32
      (Value Added of the Editor)              (0.08)       (0.09)      (0.09)
Editor Leave-out-Mean R&R                                                               3.43        3.42         3.40
      Rate                                                                             (0.74)      (0.73)       (0.73)
Controls for Author Publications                Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
Controls for No. of Authors                     Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
Controls for Field & Gender-Field               Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
Indicators for Journal-Year                     Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
N                                              15,147      15,147       15,147         15,147      15,147       15,147
R2 / pseudo R2                                  0.27        0.27         0.27           0.49        0.49         0.49
      Notes. The sample for all models is non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees assigned. Standard errors
clustered by editor in parentheses. Dependent variable for OLS models in Columns 1-3 is asinh of Google Scholar citations.
Dependent variable in probit models in Columns 4-6 is indicator for receiving revise and resubmit decision. The control
functions for selection in Columns 1-3 are calculated using predicted probabilities based on Columns 4-6.




                                                             65
                                         Online Appendix Table 9. Summary Statistics for Published Papers and Accepted Papers
                                                            Accepted Papers in Editorial Express                                                Publications in our 4 Journals, 2008-2015
Sample:                                  All male     All female Mix., F-led Mix., other     Undet.                All          All male     All female Mix., F-led Mix., other      Undet.               All
                                            (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)                 (6)             (7)           (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)               (12)
Google Scholar Citations
  Asinh Citations                      4.09               4.16          4.15          4.19          3.44          4.09            5.26          5.18          5.81          5.40          4.90          5.30
                                      (1.68)             (1.66)        (1.73)        (1.69)        (1.85)         1.69           (1.20)        (1.04)        (1.19)        (1.17)        (1.19)         1.19
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
  Publications: 0                      0.19               0.50          0.00          0.11          0.48          0.20            0.14          0.47          0.00          0.07          0.10          0.14
  Publications: 1                      0.14               0.21          0.08          0.11          0.15          0.14            0.15          0.21          0.08          0.11          0.00          0.14
  Publications: 2                      0.11               0.10          0.19          0.14          0.02          0.11            0.12          0.13          0.18          0.15          0.10          0.13
  Publications: 3                      0.12               0.04          0.19          0.13          0.10          0.12            0.12          0.09          0.19          0.14          0.20          0.13
  Publications: 4-5                    0.19               0.07          0.16          0.20          0.10          0.18            0.20          0.07          0.24          0.19          0.20          0.19
  Publications: 6+                     0.24               0.07          0.38          0.32          0.15          0.25            0.26          0.02          0.31          0.34          0.40          0.27
Number of Authors
  1 author                             0.31               0.71          0.00          0.00          0.29          0.26            0.25          0.64          0.00          0.00          0.00          0.21
  2 authors                            0.45               0.26          0.43          0.40          0.31          0.42            0.49          0.34          0.47          0.40          0.50          0.46
  3 authors                            0.19               0.03          0.39          0.41          0.33          0.23            0.21          0.02          0.36          0.38          0.40          0.24
  4+ authors                           0.05               0.00          0.18          0.19          0.08          0.08            0.06          0.00          0.16          0.22          0.10          0.09
Field of Paper
  Development                          0.05               0.10          0.07          0.05          0.04          0.05            0.05          0.12          0.08          0.07          0.07          0.06
  Econometrics                         0.05               0.05          0.06          0.06          0.13          0.06            0.05          0.01          0.06          0.04          0.13          0.05
  Finance                              0.06               0.04          0.06          0.04          0.05          0.05            0.06          0.04          0.09          0.03          0.09          0.06
  Health, Urban, Law                   0.03               0.10          0.04          0.06          0.01          0.04            0.06          0.09          0.06          0.08          0.01          0.07
  History                              0.02               0.02          0.02          0.02          0.01          0.02            0.03          0.03          0.01          0.02          0.00          0.02
  International                        0.06               0.06          0.14          0.05          0.07          0.06            0.05          0.05          0.12          0.06          0.03          0.06
  Industrial Organization              0.05               0.07          0.02          0.06          0.06          0.05            0.08          0.11          0.07          0.08          0.01          0.08
  Lab/Experiments                      0.02               0.02          0.05          0.03          0.01          0.02            0.00          0.00          0.00          0.01          0.00          0.00
  Labor                                0.10               0.12          0.14          0.13          0.13          0.11            0.16          0.25          0.18          0.22          0.23          0.18
  Macro                                0.10               0.08          0.07          0.06          0.11          0.09            0.10          0.05          0.05          0.07          0.12          0.09
  Micro                                0.11               0.04          0.09          0.09          0.12          0.10            0.12          0.08          0.10          0.11          0.06          0.11
  Public                               0.06               0.06          0.05          0.03          0.02          0.05            0.05          0.06          0.04          0.03          0.00          0.04
  Theory                               0.10               0.05          0.05          0.08          0.04          0.09            0.13          0.05          0.08          0.08          0.17          0.11
  Unclassified                         0.05               0.03          0.04          0.04          0.04          0.04            0.07          0.06          0.07          0.11          0.08          0.08
  Missing Field                        0.17               0.20          0.13          0.23          0.15          0.18              -             -             -             -             -             -
Gender-Field Variables
  Share female in fields               0.15               0.18          0.16          0.16          0.14          0.15            0.17          0.21          0.20          0.20          0.18          0.18
  Gender-topic fields                  0.03               0.06          0.07          0.05          0.05          0.04            0.08          0.10          0.11          0.11          0.13          0.09
  Number of Observations                   1175           107            77           302            52           1713            1190           97            74           348            10           1719
  Share of Papers                          0.69           0.06          0.04          0.18          0.03          1.00            0.69          0.06          0.04          0.20          0.01          1.00

     Notes. Table presents information on mean characteristics of published papers from EconLit as well as accepted papers from Editorial Express. Author publications are based on publications in 35 high-
impact journals (Online Appendix Table 1) in the 5 years prior to submission. In the case of multiple authors, the measure is the maximum over all coauthors. Field is based on JEL codes at paper submission.
Indicators of fields for a paper that lists N codes are set to 1/N. The JELs from EconLit are those assigned by the journals whereas the JELs from Editorial Express are self-reported by the authors. To make the
Gender-Field Variables comparable between the two groups, for just these variables, we have excluded papers that are missing JELs.
                                                                                                       66
                                  Online Appendix Table 10. Citations and Published Papers, Robustness
                                                                               Asinh of Web of Science (SSCI) Citations
                                                                 0-1 Years 2-3 Years 4-5 Years          In Top        In Lower-        With
                                                         All       After      After       After      Journals by Ranked Journals     Unknown
Dependent Variable:                                   Citations Publication Publication Publication Impact Factor by Impact Factor Impact Factor
                                                         (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)             (6)           (7)
Authors' Genders
    All Female                                           0.11          0.08           -0.01          0.09             0.06                0.01                0.17
                                                        (0.13)        (0.13)         (0.14)         (0.19)           (0.14)              (0.13)              (0.15)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                             0.19          0.21           0.20          0.22             0.15                0.14                0.29
       senior author female                             (0.16)        (0.17)         (0.15)         (0.20)           (0.17)              (0.17)              (0.17)
     Mixed, other                                        0.05          -0.04          0.01           0.02             0.03                0.01                0.04
                                                        (0.08)        (0.08)         (0.08)         (0.11)           (0.08)              (0.08)              (0.09)
     Undetermined                                        -0.58         -0.04          -0.62          -0.38            -0.11               -0.64               -0.99
                                                        (0.27)        (0.27)         (0.29)         (0.36)           (0.40)              (0.28)              (0.36)
Author Publications in 35 High-Impact Journals
    1 Publication                                        0.05          0.15           0.18           -0.12            0.13                0.01                0.10
                                                        (0.11)        (0.11)         (0.11)         (0.15)           (0.12)              (0.11)              (0.12)
     2 Publications                                      0.15          0.26           0.29           -0.10            0.26                0.10                0.10
                                                        (0.12)        (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.16)           (0.13)              (0.12)              (0.14)
     3 Publications                                      0.23          0.19           0.39           0.14             0.29                0.19                0.31
                                                        (0.12)        (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.16)           (0.13)              (0.12)              (0.14)
     4-5 Publications                                    0.22          0.29           0.29           0.08             0.26                0.13                0.20
                                                        (0.11)        (0.11)         (0.12)         (0.15)           (0.12)              (0.12)              (0.13)
     6+ Publications                                     0.45          0.40           0.54           0.36             0.46                0.36                0.56
                                                        (0.11)        (0.11)         (0.11)         (0.14)           (0.12)              (0.11)              (0.13)
Controls No. of Authors, for 2-Digit JEL,                Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes                 Yes                 Yes
    Gender-Field and Journal-Year
Mean of Dependent Variable:                             3.84          1.47            2.55          2.39             1.81                 3.09               2.13
N                                                       1,719         1,719          1,719          1,300            1,719               1,719               1,719
R2                                                      0.550         0.401          0.477          0.523            0.541               0.524               0.518

     Notes. The sample is published papers from Econlit, as in Table VI. In Column 1, the dependent variable is asinh of web of science citations extracted in March
2019. In Columns 2-4, the dependent variables are asinh of web of science citations 0-1, 2-3, and 4-5 years out of publication. For 4-5 years out, we exclude papers from
2014 and 2015. In Columns 5-7, the dependent variables are asinh of web of science citations by papers published in journals with 5-year impact factors greater than 5
(Column 5), less than 3 (Column 6), and those with unknown impact factor (Column 7).

                                                                                  67
  Online App. Table 11. Measurement Error in Citation and Gender Coding, Published Papers
Sample:                                                       Published Papers, Econlit Sample
                                                             Missing Cites
                                           No Meas.         Because of Title   Too Many Cites              Missing Cites
                                           Error in          with Special      Because of Title             Because of
                                            Cites             Characters            Issue                  Author Name
Panel A. Meas. Error in Cites                  (1)                  (2)                     (3)                   (4)
All papers (N=1719)                         N=1654                N=31                     N=7                  N=27
                                            96.2%                 1.8%                     0.4%                 1.6%
By Authors' Genders
    All Male                                N=1142                N=24                     N=3                  N=21
     All Female                               N=92                 N=3                     N=0                   N=2
     Mixed-Gender Author Team
                                              N=72                 N=1                     N=1                   N=0
        senior author female
     Mixed, other                            N=338                 N=3                     N=3                   N=4
     Undetermined                             N=10                 N=0                     N=0                   N=0
Citations
     Asinh(Citation) as Scraped                                    0.00                    6.92                  0.68
                                              5.26
     Asinh(Citation) as Corrected                                 4.94                     5.74                  5.00
                                                            "&" in title, e.g.,   Multiple papers by           Special
Example(s):                                                  "Hybrid R&D"         Douglas Bernheim          characters in
                                                           "" inside title, e.g., with words in title        author last
                                                          "Jobs, Jobs, Jobs: A       "Behavioral             name, e.g.,
                                                           "New" Perspective           Welfare              Jordi Galí vs
                                                           on Protectionism"         Economics"              Jordi Gali

                                                                       Correct Author Gender is
                                                                               Mixed Gender, Mixed Gender, Undetermi
                                           All Male            All Female      Senior Female    Other        ned
Panel B. Meas. Error in Gender                 (1)                  (2)                     (3)                   (4)             (4)
Initial Author Gender Coding
      All Male                                1173                  0                        0                     1               0
      All Female                                0                   94                       0                     0               0
      Mixed-Gender,
                                                1                    0                      71                     0               0
         senior author female
      Mixed Gender, other                      3                     0                       0                   342                0
      Undetermined                             13                    3                       3                    5                10
      Notes. In Panel A, we present the gender breakdown of cases of measurement error in the Google Scholar citations, and reason
that the citation changed. We also present the average asinh of citations before and after correcting the citations. In Panel B, we present
the cases of measurement error in gender, with a tabulation of the initial gender coding and corrected gender coding.




                                                                   68
      Online Appendix Table 12. Editorial Delays, Robustness
                                                          OLS Regression
                                             Days Before Resub. Days from Resub.
                                                  (R&Rs)           to Accept
                                                    (1)                    (2)
Authors' Genders
    All Female                                     -10.65              16.17
                                                  (18.76)             (23.27)
    Mixed-Gender Author Team                       -11.32              -2.83
      senior author female                        (16.62)             (20.03)
    Mixed-Gender, other                             1.36               13.24
                                                  (12.42)             (12.27)
    Undetermined Gender Mix                        -29.72              49.23
                                                  (24.52)             (38.79)
Sample
Controls for Referee Recommendations                Yes                    Yes
Controls for Author Pub., No. of Authors,
    Field & Gender-Field, Journal-Year f.e          Yes                    Yes
Editor Fixed Effects                                Yes                    Yes
Mean of Dependent Variable:                        245.1               229.1
N                                                  1,668               1,673
R-squared                                          0.24                    0.35


     Notes. The sample is papers observations, inlcuding only R&R papers that are
ultimately published. Clustered standard errors by editor in parentheses.




                                        69
  Online Appendix Table 13. Referee Acceptance, by Author and Referee Gender
                                                         Linear Probability Model for Referee Accepting
Specification:                                                         a Report Request
                                                            (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)
Authors' Genders (Omitted: All Male Authors)
    All Female Authors                                     0.009       0.009
                                                          (0.008)     (0.008)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                              0.033       0.029
       senior author female                               (0.011)     (0.011)
     Mixed-Gender Author Team                              -0.000      0.000
        other                                             (0.006)     (0.006)
     Undetermined Gender Team                              -0.015      -0.007
                                                          (0.010)     (0.010)
Referee Gender (Omitted: Male Referee)
     Female Referee                                                                 -0.000          -
                                                                                   (0.010)
Gender Interactions
    All Female Auth. X Female Ref.                                                   0.010        -0.002
                                                                                   (0.026)       (0.028)
     Mixed Auth. (senior-F) X Female Ref.                                           -0.008        -0.006
                                                                                   (0.033)       (0.034)
     Mixed Auth. (other) X Female Ref.                                              -0.025        -0.020
                                                                                   (0.019)       (0.020)
     Undetermined Auth. X Female Ref.                                               0.011         0.001
                                                                                   (0.038)       (0.039)
Paper Fixed Effects                                         No          No            Yes          Yes
Controls for Referee Publications                           No          No            Yes          Yes
Controls for Author Publications, Number of Authors,
                                                            Yes         Yes            -            -
    Field, Gender-Field, and Journal-Year
Control for Referee Pub.*Author Gender                      No          No            No          Yes
Control for Referee Gender * Author Pub                     No          No            No          Yes
Control for Referee Gender * Field                          No          No            No          Yes
N                                                          60,445     60,445        60,445       60,445
R-squared                                                   0.013      0.018         0.249        0.251
     Notes. Standard errors clustered by paper in parentheses. The sample in each column is a referee-paper
observation, including any referee invited to review a paper.




                                                    70
        Online App. Table 14. Abstract Complexity, Impact of Author Team Gender
                                                                     Measure of Complexity of Abstract
                                                           Gunning       Coleman-          Gunning        Coleman-
                                                             Fog           Liau              Fog            Liau
                                                              (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)
Authors' Genders
    All Female                                         -0.05         0.11                     0.50           0.18
                                                      (0.07)        (0.05)                   (0.30)         (0.19)
    Mixed-Gender Author Team                            0.29         0.12                     0.07           0.09
        senior author female                          (0.11)        (0.07)                   (0.31)         (0.22)
    Mixed, other                                       0.12          0.04                     -0.13          0.11
                                                      (0.06)        (0.04)                   (0.20)         (0.13)
    Undetermined                                       0.32          -0.02                    -0.51          0.16
                                                      (0.08)        (0.05)                   (0.33)         (0.25)
Author Publications in 35 High-Impact Journals (Max across Authors)
    1 Publication                                      -0.10         0.05                     -0.24          -0.19
                                                      (0.05)        (0.04)                   (0.23)         (0.15)
    2 Publications                                     -0.10         0.11                     -0.11          -0.14
                                                      (0.07)        (0.04)                   (0.25)         (0.26)
    3 Publications                                     -0.21         -0.03                    -0.43          -0.34
                                                      (0.08)        (0.05)                   (0.26)         (0.20)
    4-5 Publications                                   -0.23         -0.03                    0.19           -0.04
                                                      (0.07)        (0.05)                   (0.24)         (0.16)
    6+ Publications                                    -0.18         -0.06                    -0.11          -0.33
                                                      (0.07)        (0.05)                   (0.23)         (0.15)
                                                       Rejected and Desk-
Sample                                                   Rejected Papers                      R&R Papers Only
Controls for Author Publications, Number of Authors,
                                                        Yes           Yes                     Yes            Yes
    Field, Gender-Field, and Journal-Year
Mean of the Dependent Variable:                              19.4           15.3              19.3          15.4
N                                                           27,545         27,545            2,366          2,366
R-squared                                                    0.02           0.02             0.04           0.04
     Notes. Dependent variables are measures of reading complexity. The Gunning fog index is as 0.4[(words/sentences) +
100(complex words/words)], where complex words are tri-syllabic words, excluding common suffixes and proper nouns. The
Coleman-Liau index is calculated as 0.0588(letters/words) - 0.296(sentences/words) - 15.8. Robust standard errors in
parentheses.




                                                         71
