                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              MEASURING INTANGIBLE CAPITAL WITH MARKET PRICES

                                          Michael Ewens
                                          Ryan H. Peters
                                           Sean Wang

                                       Working Paper 25960
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25960


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2019, Revised January 2020




The paper previously circulated under the title "Acquisition Prices and the Measurement of
Intangible Capital." Special thanks to Dimitris Papanikolaou and Luke Taylor. We thank Gordon
Phillips for providing data for the SDC-Compustat merge and Shiyu Zhang for research
assistance. Jan Bena (discussant), Nagpurnanand Prabhala (discussant), Hila Fogel-Yaari, Arthur
Korteweg, Pierre Liang, Song Ma, Tom Ruchti and seminar participants at Columbia University,
Cornell University (accounting and finance), University of Rochester, Michigan State University,
University of Michigan, UT-Dallas, Southern Methodist University, Singapore Management
University, National University of Singapore, HKUST, University of Hong Kong, CityU Hong
Kong, University of Utah, Tulane University, Caltech, American Finance Association, Paris
Financial Management conference, Washington University Conference on Corporate Finance,
Midwest Finance Association, the Cass Mergers and Acquisitions Conference, and the Finance,
Organizations and Market Conference (2018) provided helpful feedback. Code and data to
incorporate the intangible capital measures can be found at: http://bit.ly/intan_cap. First version:
September 2018. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael Ewens, Ryan H. Peters, and Sean Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Intangible Capital with Market Prices
Michael Ewens, Ryan H. Peters, and Sean Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 25960
June 2019, Revised January 2020
JEL No. G30,G32,G34,O3,O34

                                         ABSTRACT

Existing standards prohibit disclosures of internally created intangible capital to firm balance
sheets, resulting in a downward bias of reported assets. To characterize off-balance sheet
intangible assets, we use transaction prices to estimate this missing intangible capital. On
average, our new measure of intangible capital is 10% smaller than prior estimates, while varying
more by industry. These estimates better explain market values, increase HML portfolio returns,
act as a better proxy for human capital and brand rankings, and exhibit a strong association with
patent values.

Michael Ewens                                   Sean Wang
California Institute of Technology              Southern Methodist University
MC 228-77                                       6425 Boaz Lane
1200 East California Avenue                     Dallas, TX 75205
Pasadena, CA 91125                              seanwang@mail.smu.edu
and NBER
mewens@caltech.edu

Ryan H. Peters
Tulane University
7 McAlister Dr Suite 365
New Orleans, LA 70118
rpeters4@tulane.edu




A appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25960
       In the early days of Microsoft, I felt like I was explaining something completely for-
       eign to people. Our business plan involved a different way of looking at assets than
       investors were used to. They couldn't imagine what returns we would generate over
       the long term. The idea today that anyone would need to be pitched on why software
       is a legitimate investment seems unimaginable, but a lot has changed since the 1980s.
       It's time the way we think about the economy does, too.

       - Bill Gates (2018)1


    Corporate investment has changed significantly over the last few decades, with U.S.
firms spending less on tangible assets and more on intangibles related to knowledge and
organizational capacity (Figure 1). This reduction in tangible capital investment, along with
the weaker connection between investment and firm valuation, is described as a "broader
investment puzzle" by Guti´
                          errez and Philippon (2017) and Crouzet and Eberly (2019). A
shared conclusion of both papers is that standard investment measures fail to capture the
growing importance of intangible assets, resulting in a downward bias in the recorded book
values of invested capital. This bias has grown over time, as evidenced by the dramatic
upward trend in market-to-book (Figure 2). This paper proposes new measures for intangible
investment and its accumulation that are central to capital stock adjustments.
    Beyond academia, reliable measures of intangible capital are important for capital mar-
kets and financial managers. For instance, numerous studies have provided evidence of
mispriced equity for firms with higher levels of intangible capital, which could lead to sub-
optimal allocations of resources.2 In debt markets, research has documented that banks are
less willing to lend to firms with higher information asymmetry and less certain liquidation
value, two primary characteristics of intangible intensive firms.3 In corporate finance, fi-
   1
      http://bit.ly/2Xk8qEU
   2
      A partial list of these studies includes Daniel and Titman (2006); Eberhart, Maxwell, and Siddique
(2004); Aksoy, Cooil, Groening, Keiningham, and Yal¸   cin (2008); Edmans (2011); Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou
(2013).
    3
      Williamson (1988); Shleifer and Vishny (1992); Loumioti (2012); Mann (2018)

                                                    1
nancial managers making capital budgeting decisions must accurately estimate book values
of intangible capital in order to calculate returns to intangible capital (Hall, Mairesse, and
Mohnen, 2010).
    Accounting rules for intangibles originated in 1974 at a time when intangible investments
were only a small proportion of the economy, and they have not changed, despite a paradigm
shift towards intangibles as economic value drivers. Specifically, a firm's internal Research
and Development (R&D) costs and Selling, General, and Administrative (SG&A) activities
are immediately recorded as expenses and thus do not appear on its balance sheet. This lack
of capitalization reduces the informativeness of accounting book values in explaining market
values (e.g., Lev and Zarowin, 1999). In an attempt to resolve this problem, researchers in
economics and finance estimate the off-balance sheet intangible capital with accumulated
flows of R&D (Bernstein and Nadiri, 1988; Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis, 2001; Hir-
shleifer, Hsu, and Li, 2013), SG&A (Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou, 2013, 2014; Belo, Lin, and
Vitorino, 2014), or both (Falato, Kadyrzhanova, and Sim, 2013; Peters and Taylor, 2017).
Capitalizing in this way requires assumptions about the capital accumulation process, such
as intangible depreciation rates and the fraction of SG&A to be capitalized. Unfortunately,
as Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) highlight, "relatively little is known about deprecia-
tion rates for intangibles" (pp 674). The most commonly used rates for knowledge capital
originate from Li and Hall (2016) who use BEA data,4 while Hulten and Hao (2008) provide
the main parameter for organizational capital (hereafter, "BEA-HH"). These measures of
depreciation rates, however, are limited by gaps in industry coverage or rely on modeling
assumptions due to the lack of market prices.5
   4
    This paper first circulated in 2010.
   5
    Less than 15% of 4-digit SIC codes have depreciation rates for knowledge capital. Organizational capital
parameters have only been estimated in the pharmaceutical industry.



                                                     2
    In this paper, we estimate capitalization parameters for intangible capital and use these
estimates to impute values of off-balance sheet intangible capital. We add these values
to existing book values of invested capital, thereby creating more accurate capital stock
measures for the Compustat universe of firms. Then, in a series of validation tests, we show
that these estimates perform at least as well or better than existing parameter estimates.
    Our parameter estimation exploits prices paid for intangible assets in acquisitions. Ac-
quisitions provide an excellent setting to price intangibles because the SEC and GAAP
mandate the allocation of the purchase price paid for the target's net assets across tangi-
ble assets, liabilities, identifiable intangible assets (IIA), and goodwill (GW). Given that
tangible assets are marked to market (i.e. stand-alone fair value) in the purchase price allo-
cation, the sum of IIA and GW represents the total price paid for intangible capital in an
acquisition. One can view the sum of IIA and GW as the residual after the auditor assigns
market values of net tangible assets, which is likely an easier task. Thus, unbiased estimates
of total intangible assets follow from unbiased market values of net tangible assets. Our
acquisition sample spans the years 1996­2017 and comprises a substantial fraction of U.S.
publicly-traded acquirer-target pairs found in SDC's M&A database.
    We hand-collect the market prices of identifiable intangible assets and goodwill from
over 1,500 acquisition events.6 We then match these prices to ten years of the target firm's
past spending on R&D and SG&A to estimate parameters of a capitalization model used
in Corrado and Hulten (2014) and Peters and Taylor (2017). Specifically, we estimate the
   6
     Data requirements restrict us to using public-to-public acquisition events. There are just over 2,000
such acquisitions, but many lacked information, generally from acquirer 10-K or 8-K filings, for inclusion
into the final sample. Using similar data, Li, Li, Wang, and Zhang (2018) study the acquisition of a
target's organizational capital in acquisitions, using the existing depreciation parameters. Potepa and Welch
(2018) use the acquired intangibles from M&A to revisit some of the questions about the informativeness of
innovation proxies. To our knowledge, we are the first to use these market prices to estimate capitalization
parameters.



                                                     3
R&D depreciation rate and the fraction of SG&A that represents an investment.
   Our parameter estimates imply an average 33% annual depreciation rate for R&D,7 more
than double the 15% rate commonly used in the literature.8 Our estimates for R&D depre-
ciation rates are comparable to those from Li and Hall (2016) who use a limited subsample
of firms and SIC codes. Our 27% estimate of the fraction of SG&A that represents invested
organizational capital is similar to that used in earlier work. However, while prior studies
have assumed this ratio to be constant across industries, we find that it varies dramatically
across industries, from 19% (consumer) to 49% (healthcare).
   We use these parameters to estimate the values of knowledge and organizational capital
for Compustat firms from 1975-2016.9 Under these new parameter estimates, the fraction
of firms' total capital stock that is intangible has increased from 37% of total capital in
1975 to 60% by 2016. At the extremes, over 80% of healthcare firms' assets are intangible
in 2016, versus 40% for firms in manufacturing. The impact of adjusting the book value
of assets for intangibles has a dramatic effect on the time series of average market-to-book.
Figure 2 shows that adjusting the denominator for both intangible capital types reduces the
magnitude of the upward trend by 70%.
   Relative to previous methods, the new parameter estimates imply smaller stocks of in-
tangible capital for firms in the consumer and manufacturing industries and larger stocks in
high tech and health industries. We validate these differences in five settings: market enter-
prise valuations, asset pricing factors, human capital, brand rankings, and patent valuations.
The results show that our new parameters perform significantly better than those commonly
   7
     Note that these are average depreciation rates, including successful and failed projects.
   8
     Griliches and Mairesse (1984); Bernstein and Mamuneas (2006); Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009);
Huang and Diewert (2007)
   9
     Parameter estimates and firm-year-level measures of intangible capital are available online: http:
//bit.ly/intan_cap



                                                  4
used in prior work. This relative improvement likely stems from our new industry-level
organizational capital investment rate and broader industry coverage in knowledge capital.
   The first validation test asks whether the incorporation of our intangible capital esti-
mates improves the explanatory power of book capital stock values on market enterprise
values. We compare the market enterprise value explained by book values adjusted with our
intangible capital estimates with that book values adjusted by BEA-HH intangible capital
estimates. Our measures improve the R2 in the cross-section in all years from 1986 to 2016;
this additional power is statistically significant in all years after 1995.
   Next, we test whether the inclusion of estimated intangible capital in book equity affects
the portfolio returns from the HML factor of Fama and French (1992, 1993). After this
adjustment, the value premium (HML) exhibits returns that are 54% larger and a have
smaller standard deviation than when constructed using book equity alone, leading to an
87% increase in the Sharpe ratio. This result suggests that our measure of intangible capital
has significant implications for empirical asset pricing.
   The next two tests verify whether our estimates of organizational capital are better at
capturing differences in human capital and brand value versus current measures. We follow
Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) in examining whether firms with high organizational capital
are more likely to disclose risks regarding the potential loss of key talent in their 10-K filings.
To do so, we analyze text from management discussions about risk in over one hundred
thousand 10-K filings from 2002­2017 and identify whether the firm mentions "personnel" or
"key talent." Our measure of organizational capital stock outperforms the existing measure
in all years: firms in the top quintile of organizational capital stock are significantly more
likely to mention these human capital risks than those in the bottom quintile. In contrast,
the current method of capitalizing SG&A only produces significant differences across firms in


                                                5
35% of the sample years. A similar exercise using firms' brand ranking shows that firms in the
top (bottom) quintile have higher (lower) brand ranking when using the new organizational
capital stock to sort firms.
   The final validation asks whether our new estimates of intangible capital can explain
previously established measures of patent values. Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoff-
man (2017) provide a measure of patent valuations from market reactions to patent grants.
Regressions of these values on our measures of knowledge and organizational capital sig-
nificantly increase within-firm R2 , while the estimates imply that an additional dollar of
knowledge capital increases patent values 16%. Because these regressions include both firm
and year fixed effects, there is little scope for our measure to improve upon earlier estimates.
Still, to our knowledge, we offer one of the first direct measurements of returns to intangible
investments.
   Two concerns related to our acquisition setting are worth acknowledging: sample se-
lection and noisy goodwill. We address each in turn. First, although acquisitions provide
market prices of a target firm's intangibles, these targets may not be representative of the full
population of firms. For example, acquisition targets may have more successful prior intan-
gible investments. To address this concern, in all results summarized above, we supplement
our acquisitions sample with a set of 479 bankruptcy events of publicly-traded companies
over the sample period. We use firm-level bankruptcy recovery data (or industry-level aver-
ages if unavailable) to allocate a fraction of this total to all priced intangibles. Robustness
checks reveal that including these events is important for the new measure's out-performance
described above.
   Second, the raw price of intangibles may be confounded by merger pair-specific values
(i.e., synergies) and over/underpayment by the acquirer. These factors would contaminate


                                               6
goodwill, which is our proxy for unidentifiable intangible assets. To directly address this,
we adjust for both synergy and over/underpayment using the change in the target's mar-
ket valuations around the acquisition announcement along with the probability completion.
Together, these adjustments lower the price of target-firm intangibles by an average of 34%.
These adjustments are significant to the estimation and important for the improvements
discussed above.
   One advantage of our approach is that any potential measurement error in the identifica-
tion of intangible assets is ameliorated by the inclusion of adjusted goodwill, which captures
unidentified intangible capital. We alleviate concerns pertaining to acquired intangible prices
by repeating the same estimation methodology on the full Compustat sample, replacing ac-
quired intangible prices with market enterprise values less net tangible assets (see Section 7
below). While the resulting parameters are similar to those using acquisition prices, they do
not outperform our parameters based on the acquisition sample on the validation tests de-
scribed above. Finally, we address concerns about time-varying market prices by estimating
the model over rolling 10-year observation periods, with no major change in conclusions.
   We contribute to three broad literatures. First, we provide parameter estimates to cor-
porate finance researchers that rely on estimates of intangible capital as an input to examine
real outcomes in firms (Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou, 2013; Gourio and Rudanko, 2014; Sun and
Zhang, 2018). Second, we contribute to a long-standing literature on growth economics that
attempts to measure the value of knowledge in the economy. Specifically, our work both re-
estimates the knowledge capital accumulation process using market prices and extends these
estimates to organizational capital for the first time (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2009;
Corrado and Hulten, 2010; Acemoglu, Akcigit, Alp, Bloom, and Kerr, 2013; Hall, Mairesse,
and Mohnen, 2010). Finally, we contribute to an active debate surrounding off-balance sheet


                                              7
intangible capital. Lev (2018) suggests that standard-setters' resistance to recognizing intan-
gibles on firm balance sheets has substantial costs to both firms and the broader economy.
In addition to confirming the value-relevance of currently included intangible assets such as
goodwill, we provide evidence that estimating the value of internally generated intangible
capital is feasible and provides meaningful information to financial statement users.



1        Accounting for intangibles

We exploit information about prices paid for intangible assets of U.S.-based public acquisition
targets to estimate parameters that allow us to recover off-balance sheet intangible capital.
Below, we discuss the disclosure setting regarding intangibles. Internet Appendix Section
IA1 provides a history of the accounting rules surrounding the acquisition of tangible and
intangible assets.


1.1      Intangibles accounting

For nearly all internally generated intangible assets, such as knowledge and organizational
capital, accounting methods differ significantly from tangible assets.10 While a firm's capital
expenditures on tangible assets such as plant, property, and equipment are recorded on
the balance sheet at its purchase price and depreciated over its estimated useful life, a
firm's R&D, advertising or employee training expenditures are fully expensed in the period
incurred.11 Although these intangible expenditures may fulfill GAAP's primary criterion for
    10
      U.S. GAAP treats the development of computer software differently from other R&D costs. Following
ASC 985 (formerly FAS 2), once a software developer has reached "technological feasibility," the developer
must capitalize and amortize all development costs until the product is available for general release to
consumers. https://asc.fasb.org/link&sourceid=SL2313776-111772&objid=6503587
   11
      For example, although The Coca-Cola Company spends several billion dollars each year to maintain
and promote its products, and brand names such as Coca-Cola®and Dasani®are assets to the firm that


                                                    8
asset recognition,12 GAAP's justification for not capitalizing and amortizing these intangibles
stems from uncertainty in measuring their value and estimated useful lives.13
    In contrast, intangibles acquired via the purchase of a target firm are recorded as either
identifiable intangible assets (IIA) or goodwill (GW) and added to the acquirer's balance
sheet, following guidance from ASC 350 (formerly FAS 142). If the target's internally cre-
ated intangible expenditures meet specified criteria, they will be capitalized onto the balance
sheet of the acquiring firm at fair market value.14 The criteria for capitalization of intangi-
bles documented in ASC 805 notes that an intangible asset is identifiable if it meets either
the separability criterion, meaning it can be separated from the entity and sold, or the
contractual-legal criterion, meaning that the control of the future economic benefits arising
from the intangible is warranted by contractual or legal rights.15 Simply, IIA prices reflect
fair or public value, rather than value specific to the post-acquisition firm. Some examples of
these identifiable intangible assets include brand names, customer lists, trademarks, Internet
domain names, royalty agreements, patented technologies, and trade secrets. Other intan-
gibles with a non-zero market value, such as corporate culture, advertising effectiveness, or
management quality, that fail to meet these criteria for identification are captured in the
goodwill accounts of the acquirer's balance sheet. The following figure shows an example
create future benefits in the form of higher margins and increased sales volume, The Coca-Cola Company is
not permitted to recognize these assets to the balance sheet.
   12
      Asset recognition requires that the expenditure in the current period provides economic benefits to the
firm in future periods (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2009, 2005).
   13
      https://asc.fasb.org/section&trid=2127268#topic-730-10-05-subsect-01-108369
   14
      The approach by which intangibles are marked to fair value at the time of acquisition follows ASC 820
(formerly FAS 157). The firm's choice of method is disclosed in the appraisal notes for intangibles in the
acquirer's financial statements. Firms have the option to appraise the value of intangibles by either: (1)
estimating the replacement cost of the asset, (2) comparing the asset to a similar asset whose price trades
on the open market, or (3) using discounted cash-flow valuation models where earnings or free cash flows are
discounted by an appropriate discount rate. Because of the unique nature of intangibles, firms frequently
use the DCF approach when appraising these assets.
   15
      https://asc.fasb.org/link&sourceid=SL4564427-128468&objid=99405171



                                                     9
purchase price allocation, details of which are discussed in the Internet Appendix.




          Example purchase price allocation: HP acquires Electronic Data Services


   In summary, the purchase and acquisition methods of GAAP accounting require that
the target's net assets be marked to market at the time of the acquisition. During this
process, any internally developed intangibles by the target firm that meet specified criteria
are identified, appraised, and brought onto the acquirer's balance sheet at fair market value.
Internally generated intangibles that do not meet such criteria, but are still valued by the
acquirer, are not separately identified and are instead recorded as a goodwill asset for the
acquirer.16
  16
    Figures IA1 and IA2 in the Internet Appendix provide basic examples of the differences between the
purchase and pooling method. Section IA3 provides several real-world examples found in our data.




                                                 10
2        Literature

Prior research17 that estimates intangible capital uses the perpetual inventory method, which
aggregates net investment flows over the life of the firm. This can be estimated by adding
the value of the intangible asset at the beginning of the period, adding any other intangible
investment flows and subtracting any depreciation to the beginning of period intangible
capital stock as shown below in (1), for capital stock X at the end of year t:


                                        Xt = Xt-1 + Zt - Dt                                         (1)

     Zt represents periodic investment, and Dt represents depreciation during period t of
existing stock Xt-1 . Assuming that X depreciates geometrically at the rate of  , we have:


                                       Xt = Xt-1 (1 -  ) + Zt                                       (2)

     Through iterative substitution, the intangible capital stock becomes the total sum of all
undepreciated intangible investments throughout the firm's existence.

                                                
                                        Xt =          (1 -  )i Zt-i                                 (3)
                                                i=0

     Due to data limitations on intangible expenditures prior to the firm being publicly-traded,
(3) is modified as follows:

                                                           k
                                            k
                              Xt = (1 -  ) Xt-k +                (1 -  )k-i Zt-i                    (4)
                                                           i=0

    17
     e.g., Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009); Corrado and Hulten (2014); Cockburn and Griliches (1988);
Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013, 2014); Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen (2010); Hulten and Hao (2008)



                                                      11
    Thus, to estimate a firm's stock of intangible capital via (4), we need periodic measures
of investment in knowledge and organizational capital, Z , over k periods, the value of the
initial stock Xt-k , and the depreciation rate,  .
    The consensus proxy for knowledge capital flows is the firm's annual R&D activities.18
The proxy for organizational capital, however, is less clear. While R&D is directly defined
as a proxy for knowledge capital, recent research capitalizes Sales, General, and Adminis-
trative Expenses (SG&A) as a proxy for the firm's organizational capital flows using logical
deduction. SG&A is defined by GAAP as a firm's operating expenses unrelated to the cost
of goods sold. Some examples include advertising and marketing expenses, provisions for
employee bonuses, and bad debt expenses. Because SG&A aggregates items which should
be classified as periodic expenses with items that are long-lived assets, this creates an ad-
ditional parameter to be estimated,  , which is the fraction of SG&A that represents an
organizational capital investment.19
    To the best of our knowledge, the only estimate of  comes from Hulten and Hao (2008),
who estimate  = 0.3, based on data from six pharmaceutical firms in 2006. Conversely, there
have been a number of attempts to estimate  for R&D investments. The main challenges in
estimating  , as stated by Griliches (1996) and Li and Hall (2016), stem from the fact that
the majority of firms conduct R&D activities for use within the firm, and thus market prices
do not exist for most R&D assets. Thus, most models that estimate R&D depreciation often
   18
      ASC 730 (formerly FAS 2) define R&D activities as "the translation of research findings or other
knowledge into a plan or design for a new product or process".
   19
      For example, in 2017 Coca-Cola Company reports $12.5 billion in SG&A expenditures. Footnotes reveal
that $4 billion of these costs are incurred to support the advertising and media expenses, while $1.1 billion
of these SG&A costs are related to shipping and handling costs incurred to move furnished goods from
sales distribution centers to customer locations. Assuming that advertising expenses incurred in 2017 will
continue to enhance the firm's brand equity in future periods, these expenditures represent organizational
capital. Conversely, the shipping costs only support operations in the current period, and therefore should
be immediately expensed.



                                                     12
require strong identifying assumptions.20
     Given the lack of estimates for  , and the wide range of  , there is little consensus re-
garding the parameters that are needed to measure intangible capital. For example, Eisfeldt
and Papanikolaou (2013) and Li, Qiu, and Shen (2018) estimate organizational capital, and
assume  to be 1 and 0.3, and  to be 0.15 and 0.2, respectively. Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel
(2009) allow  on R&D investments to vary by industry and assume values between 0.2 and
0.6. Falato, Kadyrzhanova, and Sim (2013) assume  on R&D equals 0.15, and both  and
 on SG&A to be 0.20.



3        Data

Data for our public acquisitions comes from Thomson's SDC Merger & Acquisition database.
Sample construction starts with all U.S. public acquirer and public targets for deals that
closed between 1996 and 2017 with a reported deal size. Our sample begins in 1996 because
we require financial statements from the SEC's EDGAR website. We drop deals where the
acquirer or target has a financial services, resources, real estate or utility SIC code.21 As
    20
      For example, Pakes and Schankerman (1984) develop a model by which they infer  of R&D by examining
the decline in patent renewals over time. This assumes that valuable R&D must result in patents and that
the value of R&D is directly inferable from patent renewal prices. Pakes and Shankerman estimate  = 0.25.
Lev and Sougiannis (1996) use an amortization model in which firms' current period operating income is
regressed on lagged values of R&D expenditures and find  varies between 0.11 and 0.20. They assume that
the amortization of R&D capital is responsible for generating earnings, which fully captures the benefits of
R&D investments, where R&D investments may benefit the firm's cost of equity or provide strategic real
option value. Li and Hall (2016) use a forward-looking profit model approach to estimate R&D depreciation
with NSF-BEA data. Their model assumes a concave profit function for R&D investment and that the firm
invests optimally in R&D capital to maximize the net present value of its investment. Unlike tangible assets,
the model assumes that R&D capital depreciates solely because its contribution to the firm's profit declines
over time. Under these conditions, their model produces  of R&D between 0.12 and 0.38. Their estimates
cover 10.5% of 4-digit SIC codes and 28% of firm-year in Compustat, thus requiring other assumptions for
firms in SIC codes outside of these estimations.
   21
      The excluded SICs are 6000 to 6399, 6700 to 6799, 4900 to 4999, 1000 to 1499.




                                                     13
discussed in Section 1, we exclude all deals that use the pooling method pre-2001.22 This
leaves us with a set of 2,109 acquisitions.
    We also require data availability of the acquirer's purchase price allocation of the target's
assets in order to collect the prices paid for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets (IIA).
When available, these purchase price allocations were found in the acquirer's subsequent 10-
K, 10-Q, 8-K or S-4 filing. We found information on the purchase price allocation for 81%
(1,719) of all candidate acquisitions.23 In the final step, we merge the target and acquirer
firms to Compustat and CRSP. For each target firm merged to Compustat, we gather up
to 10 years of the firm's past R&D and SG&A expenditures along with any pre-acquisition
acquired intangibles on its balance sheet.24,25 The final sample includes 1,521 events (70%).
Below we describe how these deals differ from those lost in the data collection process.


3.1     Sample selection

Acquisitions are non-random and often depend on the quality of both the acquirer and the
target firm (e.g., Maksimovic and Phillips, 2001) and the innovation needs of the acquirer
(e.g., Phillips and Zhdanov, 2013; Bena and Li, 2014)), as well as whether the acquisitions
can be predicted by the relative market-to-books of acquirers and potential targets (e.g.,
Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan, 2005).26 Relatedly, the acquisitions in our sam-
   22
      The results presented below for all deals from 1996­2017 are robust to exclusion of pre-2002 deals (see
Panel A of Table 8).
   23
      Some filings lacked the footnote for the acquisition (e.g., the acquisition was immaterial) or we could
not identify any filing for the acquiring firm (e.g., the firm has a unique registration type with the SEC).
   24
      If Compustat has less than 10 years of data and the firm is older than 10 years old, then we impute
any missing R&D and SG&A using observed growth rates for the same age firms with non-missing data. All
results are robust to excluding these imputed data.
   25
      We also lose acquisitions because we either failed to find a Compustat identifier or the firm did not have
stock price data in CRSP (e.g., it was traded on the OTC markets).
   26
      See Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2008) for a survey of the major empirical results in the corporate
takeover literature.


                                                      14
ple naturally exclude another exit for target: failures.
    Our first attempt to address potential selection issues is to supplement our acquisition
sample with other, presumably worse, exit events. We add to the sample 479 CRSP delistings
from 1996­2017, which come from a combination of liquidations and bankruptcies.27 Given
the absence of purchase price allocations for these events, we estimate the sum of IIA and
goodwill as the percentage of assets recovered during the bankruptcy event,28,29 multiplied
by the ratio of IIA and goodwill to total deal size for the same 4-digit SIC code in the
non-bankruptcy acquisitions.30
    Any remaining selection issues after incorporating bankruptcies take one of two forms.
If most acquisition targets are low productivity innovators (e.g., Bena and Li (2014)), then
we may estimate too high a depreciation rate and too low a value of  . Alternatively,
acquired firms may on average represent firms with successful innovation projects or that
are purchased at the peak of their innovative productivity. In this case, we would estimate too
low a depreciation rate and/or too high a fraction of organizational capital investment ( ). It
is not clear which source of selection issues dominate, so we use the well-identified parameter
estimates from Li and Hall (2016) to help judge our estimates. Since their estimation of
depreciation parameters for R&D is derived from a representative set of firms (from a small
   27
      CRSP delisting codes of 2 and 3.
   28
      Ma, Tong, and Wang (2019) show that assuming a value of zero for intangibles is incorrect because
innovation is a crucial asset class in asset allocation in bankruptcy.
   29
      We obtain recovery rates via the "Ultimate Recovery" file from Moody's Default and Recovery database.
This file covers fully-resolved large public U.S. corporate defaults between 1987 and 2019, and includes the
final recovery of total debt, based on 10-K, 10-Q's, press releases and other legal filings. The data field named
"FAMILY RECOVERY" provides the dollar-weighted proportion of debt recovered, after discounting for lost
interest. We find exact matches with our sample of CRSP delistings for 95 of 478 events. We use industry
(Fama-French five industries) average recovery rates from the same database for the remaining firms (49%
across all firms). This recovery rate multiplied by outstanding debt forms our "deal value" for this sample
of exit firms.
   30
      All results below are robust to setting the fraction to one-half or one-quarter of the acquisition sample
fraction.



                                                       15
set of industries), a lack of systematic differences with our estimates would indicate that our
sample selection is not severe.31


3.2     Synergy and overpayment: adjusting goodwill

Acquisitions may be motivated by pair-specific synergy values, and prior research has doc-
umented that managers may overpay for a target due to agency frictions or hubris (e.g.,
Roll (1986)). These issues could potentially affect the representativeness of our imputed
parameter estimates when applied to the full population of firms. Extending our parameter
estimates to all publicly listed firms requires that the prices paid for intangible capital in
our sample represent a public or market value. Fortunately, the purchase price allocation
process directly separates intangible assets that can be identified via either a separability
criterion or previously established contractual legal criterion. Thus, pair-wise values arising
from the acquisition ­ synergies ­ will be recorded as goodwill. Because we are interested in
the stand-alone value of assets, our analyses adjust goodwill accordingly.
    To make these adjustments, we apply the market's assessment of synergy value and
under/overpayment of the target firm by using changes in the target and acquirer's market
valuation around the acquisition event date. We follow the Bhagat, Dong, Hirshleifer, and
Noah (2005) framework for estimation merger value creation as an adjustment to goodwill.
Specifically, using this probability scaling method for announcement day returns, we estimate
the synergy and over-payment component of the acquisition value and then remove this
estimate from goodwill valuations from the purchase price allocation.32 This estimate is
removed from goodwill valuations from the purchase price allocation.33
  31
      For robustness, we later run all analyses with and without the bankrupt firms and show that the
estimates change as predicted.
   32
      We cannot easily implement the second "intervention method" with our relatively small sample size.
   33
      In cases where the adjustment exceeds goodwill (less than 15% of deals), the remainder is removed from

                                                    16
    For each acquisition event, we first calculate the [-5, 5] day change cumulative abnormal
return for both the target and acquirer.34 Multiplying by the pre-deal (t = -6) market value
of each gives the abnormal change in market valuation at deal announcement. Next, as the
market's response incorporates expectations about merger failures, we weight them by the
inverse of the probability of acquisition success implied by the end-of-period market price of
the target compared to the offer price in the deal.35 The sum of the target and acquirer's
changes ­ the expected synergy ­ is subtracted from goodwill.36 We remove the acquirer's
change in valuation as it incorporates under/overpayment. Here, a decline in the acquirer's
market value would signal overpayment for the target, leading to goodwill that is abnormally
large when compared to payment at fair market value; as such, this overpayment must be
removed from goodwill. We find that the goodwill adjustments to be substantial, with the
average (median) deal adjustment resulting in a 34% (21%) decline in goodwill.37


3.3     Main variables

Figure 3 (a) shows the prevalence of goodwill and IIA for our acquisition sample. It reports
the percentage of all deals that have some amount of either asset in the purchase price
allocation. We observe an upward trend in these components since the mid-1990s, with over
85% of deals containing goodwill or IIA since 2004. To ensure that our observations are
the IIA valuation.
   34
      The estimates below are robust to 2, 4 and 30 day event windows.
                                                               1 -P0
   35
      That is, the probability of a successful merger is PP  offer -P0
                                                                       , where P1 is the end-of-day target share
price, P0 is the pre-announcement share price and Poffer is the original offer price. For example, if the
pre-announcement price is 100 and the tender offer is 200, an end-of-day share price of 170 implies a 70%
probability of deal completion. When this is unavailable or outside the unit interval, we use the observed
success rate in SDC over our sample period (78%).
   36
      If the result is negative, then the remainder is subtracted from the identifiable intangible assets.
   37
      Internet Appendix Figure IA4 reports the percentage of acquisition deal size allocated to goodwill and
IIA after these adjustments. The prevalence of goodwill in deal size falls in all years (see the green arrows),
which has an impact on the total intangible value in acquisitions.


                                                      17
not driven by smaller acquisitions, Figure 3 (b) repeats the analysis but replaces the y-axis
with a dollar-weighted measure, which is the sum of all IIA and goodwill in the sample,
scaled by the sum of all acquisition deal sizes in the sample. The patterns remain. Figure
4 asks how much of the total enterprise value is comprised of goodwill and IIA. The latter
represents 25% of total transaction value over the sample period, while the former accounts
for approximately 35% of the typical deal size over the full sample period. This suggests
that intangibles play a major role in the U.S. acquisition market.


3.4     Summary statistics

Panel A of Table 1 presents summary statistics on deals and the parties. All dollar values are
in 2012 dollars. The average deal year is 2005 with an average (median) deal size of $2.3b
($426m). Deal size as measured by enterprise value (thus including assumed liabilities)
averages $2.5b. We assign firm industries using the Fama-French 5 industry classification.
Consumer firms represent 18% of targets, while the average target has an EBITDA of $142m.
Over one-quarter of the acquirers are headquartered in California, which is slightly above the
rate for all public firms. This is likely a consequence of both our focus on acquisitions and
our requirements for observability of the purchase price allocation for intangibles. We also
see that goodwill is on average $1.1b with a much lower median of $159m.38 IIA comprises
38% of total intangible capital (goodwill plus IIA) on average. Finally, total intangibles
represent 75% of enterprise deal size on average. In 281 acquisitions, the total intangible
   38
     In a few of our observations, total intangibles (identifiable intangible assets and goodwill) is negative.
These instances, while rare, occur because goodwill can take on negative values and in these cases, the
negative value is larger than the value of identifiable intangible assets. Since goodwill is the plug variable
that equates the balance sheet, negative goodwill occurs when the acquirer is able to purchase the target at
a price that is below the fair value of net tangible assets that is measured during the due diligence appraisal.
This negative goodwill is immediately recorded to the income statement as an extraordinary gain. See Figure
IA3 in the Internet Appendix for an example. We allow goodwill to be negative, but because the estimation
is done in logs we bottom code total intangibles to zero.

                                                      18
capital exceeds the enterprise value of the firm. We randomly checked 20 acquisitions in this
subsample and verified that this is a result of the target's net tangible assets being less than
zero. Correspondingly, we found that these targets tended to be high-tech or healthcare
targets with very high R&D and SG&A expenditures and very low levels of PP&E on their
balance sheets.
   Panel B of Table 1 summarizes the acquisitions in the bankrupt firm sample. The average
failure date in our sample is earlier than the acquisition date (2002 vs. 2004). In fact, over
a quarter of the delistings in our sample occur in years 2000 and 2001, the burst of the
e-commerce dot-com bubble. In contrast to acquired firms, These firms are more to be in
the consumer industry (34% vs. 18%). Not surprisingly, the average failed firm tends to
be small and unprofitable with an average asset size of $252m and net loss of $80m. Total
intangibles ­ which are estimated as a function of the "deal size" defined in the previous
section ­ are small with an average of $35m, keeping in mind that we make no assumption
about the breakdown of goodwill or identifiable intangibles, only the total.


3.5    Selection of acquisitions

Our final acquisition sample (excluding delistings from bankruptcies) excludes 588 deals
in which an extensive search failed to find the purchase price allocation. Thus, inferences
derived using this final acquisition sample should address these potential sample selection
issues. Fortunately, Table 2 shows that our sample of acquisitions is reasonably similar
to those excluded. The right-most columns present the excluded acquisitions. These ac-
quisitions occurred earlier in the sample, are less likely to be in manufacturing, and have
a smaller median deal size ($177 vs. $385m). The smaller size implies these acquisitions
are more likely to be immaterial to the acquirer and, consequently, to not have a purchase


                                              19
price allocation in their filings. Reassuringly, the targets are not significantly smaller in
the excluded group when measured by pre-acquisition assets or net sales. Overall, Table 2
shows that our acquisition sample likely tilts toward larger deals and more recent events.
The inclusion of delisted firms ­ with low assumed "acquisition" values and no time period
constraints ­ helps to balance many of these differences out.



4        Parameter estimation

We measure the value of the target's intangible capital as the sum of externally acquired
and internally generated intangible capital. The target's externally purchased intangibles,
Iit , are disclosed on the asset side of its balance sheet (Compustat item intan ). Building on
a large empirical literature,39 we measure the value of internally generated intangible capital
as the sum of knowledge and organizational capital over the previous ten years,


                                             int
                                            Kit  = Git + Sit


where Git is the value of knowledge capital, and Sit is the value of organizational capital for
firm i in year t.
     We estimate these capital stocks by accumulating past spending in R&D and a fraction
 of past spending on SG&A40 using the perpetual inventory method:


                                    Git = (1 - G )Gi,t-1 + R&Dit                                       (5)
    39
      Corrado and Hulten (2010, 2014), Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009), Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013,
2014), Falato, Kadyrzhanova, and Sim (2013), Lev and Radhakrishnan (2005), Zhang (2014) and Peters and
Taylor (2017).
   40
      We measure SG&A net of R&D expense (xrd ) and Research and Development in Process (rdip ).




                                                    20
and
                                  Sit = (1 - S )Si,t-1 + SG&Ait .                                    (6)

       For each acquisition, we construct trailing 12-month measures for these two expenditures
using the Compustat quarterly database.41 Therefore, the fully specified capitalization model
is:


                    int
                   Kit  = (1 - G )Gi,t-1 + R&Dit + (1 - S )Si,t-1 + SG&Ait                           (7)

       Our ultimate goal is to estimate the structural parameters of the perpetual inventory
equation (7), G and  , by comparing the log of the intangible capital to the log of the
                                                                        I
allocated market price paid to acquire the firm's intangible capital, Pit .
                                              I
       The baseline specification estimates Pit as the sum of identified intangible assets (IIA)
and adjusted goodwill (GW) reported in the acquirer's post-acquisition financial statements.
Recall from Section 3.2 that adjusted goodwill is the goodwill in the purchase price allocation
after removing the inferred synergies and over-(under) payment from market responses to
the deal announcement, weighted by the implied probability of deal completion.
       We estimate an equation of the form


                                           I             int
                                         Pit = f (Iit , Kit  ; it )                                  (8)


where it is a parameter vector that includes  ,  , and a general formulation of the market-
to-book for intangibles. We start by assuming that the function f is linear and that the
market-to-book enters as a multiplicative factor it  (0, ):
      41
     This approach ensures that we have financial data on target firms in the quarter immediately before
the acquisition. Using annual Compustat data often results in large gaps between financial report and the
deal dates.


                                                    21
                                            I              int
                                          Pit = it (Iit + Kit  )                                         (9)

                                                                                               P
Rearranging (9) shows that it is the intangible market-to-book ratio  =                     I +K int
                                                                                                       . Our
objective of estimating the book value of intangibles Iit + K int requires an assumption about
it . Theories of firm dynamic investment such as Hayashi (1982) predict that it is one on
average. Implementing this requires additional assumptions. In the extreme, we would let
it be a firm fixed effect constrained to be one on average across all firms. Our cross-sectional
data makes this infeasible. Instead, we let it be a function of time through a modified year
fixed effect which is assumed to be one on average over time:42


                                                  it = t


where t is the year of the acquisition or delisting. Estimating (9) proceeds in several steps.
    First, to avoid overweighting large firms in our sample, and without an obvious scaling
variable, we first take the natural logarithm of each side of equation (9). We add 1 to both
sides to avoid dropping acquisitions without any recognized intangibles:


                                        I                            int
                             log (1 + Pit ) = log (t ) + log (Iit + Kit  + 1)                           (10)

    Next, due to the nature of SG&A spending, in particular that it is very stable within
firms over time, the parameters  and S in the Sit term are not separately identifiable.43 We
  42
        It is important to average the year fixed effect over time, rather than across observations, because
acquisition and failure events tend to cluster in economic booms and busts, respectively. Averaging the fixed
effects in the standard way, across observations, would cause the estimation to overweight these time periods
in estimation of the fixed effects. Fortunately our non-linear least squares estimation is flexible enough to
easily accommodate this.
    43
       To see this, consider the perpetual inventory equation for a firm i: Sit = k SG&Ai,t-k (1 - S )k . If
SG&Ait is constant for firm i, SG&Ait = SG&A, we have


                                                     22
address this issue by estimating the parameter  and taking the depreciation of organizational
capital S as the standard 20% from the literature. We explore the implications of this
assumption in Section 5 and the Internet Appendix. Finally, substituting for the G and S
in equation (10), we estimate the structural parameters by minimizing the sum of squared
errors of the non-linear equation:



                                          10                           10
            I
 log (1 + Pit ) = log (t ) + log (Iit +         (1 - G )k R&Di,t-k +         (1 - 0.2)k  SG&Ai,t-k + 1) (11)
                                          k=1                          k=1



4.1     Estimation details

We highlight a few important features of the estimation procedure here. The acquisitions in
                                            I
bankruptcy observations ­ where we impute Pit from debt recovery and intangible asset rate
assumptions ­ are weighted to match the unconditional relative frequency of acquisitions
and delistings found in Compustat-CRSP. Since the model is in logs, model fit is assessed
by comparing the exponent of the root mean standard error generated by the model to
the exponentiated root mean squared error of a model that contains only a constant in the
estimation. Also, because our model does not contain a constant, a negative pseudo R2 is
possible. We estimate standard errors by bootstrapping, i.e. re-drawing acquisition events
and, thus, the full time-series of target investments, with replacement.44
                                                                      
  St = k SG&A(1 - S )k = SG&A 1-(11                            1
                                              -S ) = SG&A S = S SG&A
                                               
  In this case we can only identify the ratio S . A similar result holds if SG&A has a constant growth rate.
   44
      We run bootstraps with 1,000 replications, re-drawing across all events before weighting to match the
unconditional relative frequency of event types.




                                                       23
5        Results

We first estimate the parameters used to accumulate intangible capital for our acquisition
sample using the estimation described above, then apply those parameters to a broader
universe of firms to investigate the external validity and implications of our parameters.


5.1      Estimating the capital accumulation process

Results from the estimation of equation (11) are reported in Table 3. The "All" row rep-
resents the full sample while the other rows show industry estimates using Fama French 5
classifications.45 The column "¯BEA " reports the depreciation rate of knowledge capital for
                                G

the subset of industries used in Li and Hall (2016), averaged within our industry categories.
These estimates cover 10.5% of SIC codes and roughly 50% of Compustat firms with R&D,
but exploit non-selected data. The column "¯lit " reports the average depreciation rates where
                                            G

any gaps in Li and Hall (2016) are filled with 0.15.
     Based on organizational capital depreciation rates commonly used in the literature (Eis-
feldt and Papanikolaou, 2014; Falato, Kadyrzhanova, and Sim, 2013; Peters and Taylor,
2017) of SG&A = 0.2,46 we find that a significant portion of SG&A represents a long-lived
capital investment,  = 27%.47 This is only slightly less than the commonly used 30%, and
to our knowledge is the first direct confirmation of the  estimate used in the literature.
While we report a similar mean estimate of  , this parameter varies significantly across
industries. The fraction of SG&A spending that represents an investment is lowest in the
    45
      We make two changes to the FF5 industries, reclassifying SIC codes 8000-8099 (Health Services) as
Consumer and Radio/TV broadcasters are Consumer (from High-tech).
   46
      Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) use a value of .15.
   47
      In robustness analyses, we examine the sensitivity of our S = 0.2 assumption. Figure 11a (discussed
below) shows no major changes in results presented here for S between [.1, .3]. We thus maintain the
assumption of .2 throughout.



                                                   24
consumer industry at 19%. This is consistent with selling expenses being a large fraction of
SG&A for the retail industry, which tends to have less innovation. On the other extreme, the
parameter estimate of 0.44 and 0.49 in the high tech and health sectors imply that almost
half of SG&A spending in these industries represents an investment. These relatively higher
levels of investments in SG&A for high tech and health firms is consistent with their higher
levels of employee training, database usage and branding.
   The estimates also provide novel insights on knowledge capital depreciation. Table 3
shows an R&D depreciation rate G across all firms of 33% per year, which is significantly
greater than the 15% commonly used in the empirical literature on R&D (Griliches and
Mairesse, 1984; Bernstein and Mamuneas, 2006; Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2009; Hall,
Mairesse, and Mohnen, 2010; Huang and Diewert, 2007; Warusawitharana, 2010). The cross-
sectional variation of G is substantial, ranging from a low of 0.30 in the "other" industry to a
high of 0.46 in high-tech firms. The second to last column in each panel reports the average
knowledge capital depreciation from the Li and Hall (2016) estimates. Recall that their
estimates likely suffer from no sample selection issues and thus represent a benchmark for
such concerns in our analysis. Reassuringly, for the "All", consumer and high-tech samples,
we cannot reject the null that our estimated G differ from those of Li and Hall (where there
is overlap in estimation). Moreover, the relative estimated parameters across industries are
similar in both estimations. In contrast, our estimates differ significantly from those used in
the broader literature (the final column). The differences suggest that the assumption of .15
for any gaps in Li and Hall (2016) may be incorrect.
   Patterns in the industry-level parameters reassuringly match some expected features of
intangible investments, while revealing whether certain selection concerns discussed earlier
emerge. First, Table 3 shows that R&D depreciation is highest in the high tech industry


                                              25
(46%), which is also the largest in the BEA estimates (though a smaller 32%). These results
confirm that the value of knowledge gained in this industry is short-lived, despite the fact
that around 82% of high tech targets report R&D expenditures. The estimates of R&D de-
preciation rates exceed those currently used in the literature. That these differences suggest
positive selection issues ­ e.g., acquisitions are more likely to be successful innovation projects
­ is not a first-order concern. We discuss any impacts of selection and non-representative
pricing in the analysis of intangible capital stocks below.
    How do these estimated depreciation rates translate into useful lives often used in straight-
line depreciation models? In Figure 5, we report the estimated useful life of knowledge capital
for a firm whose G varies between 0.1 and 0.9. Because the time series of perpetual inventory
depreciation is a geometric sequence, the initial gross R&D investment will never converge
to zero; thus we estimate the useful life by imputing the number of years to depreciate the
initial R&D investment to 10% of its gross value, then impose straight-line depreciation for
the remaining 10%.48 Figure 5 shows that knowledge capital investments generally have an
implied useful life between 4.1 and 6.4 years, considerably smaller than the implied useful life
for a firm's average PP&E investment.49 The figure also shows that the literature's assumed
average depreciation rate of 16.4% for knowledge capital translates to 14.2 years of useful
life, much closer to that found for tangible assets.
    As noted in Section 4, our estimation includes year fixed effects. These fixed effects act
to connect our estimated book value of intangibles to the market values observed in the
acquisition. The exponentiated estimated fixed effects (log(t )) are shown in Internet Ap-
  48
      e.g., a firm with G of 0.22 will have depreciated away 90% of its initial R&D investment over a 10-year
period, thus resulting in an estimated useful life of 11 years.
   49
      As a comparison, we estimated the implied useful life of firms in the DJIA 30 as of December 2018 by
the firm's gross PP&E by its annual depreciation expense. On average, the implied useful life was 17.0 years,
ranging between 8 (Microsoft = 8.49 years; Apple = 8.29 years) and 20+ years (McDonald's = 28.5 years;
Exxon Mobil = 25.5 years).


                                                     26
pendix Figure IA5, along with deviations from trend of the S&P 500 index. The fixed effects
can be interpreted as the average market-to-book of intangibles in acquisitions, relative to
the market-to-book in the average year. One should expect the market-to-book of acquisi-
tion targets to fluctuate with average market prices, which Figure IA5 demonstrates. The
correlation coefficient between these two series is 0.61.


5.2     From parameter estimates to intangible capital stocks

We next apply parameter estimates from our base specification in Table 3 to the intangible
capital accumulation process (Equation 7) to the broader CRSP-Compustat universe of
firms.50 The knowledge capital stock accumulates R&D spending following (5), while the
organizational capital stock represents the accumulation of SG&A following (6). Both sets of
intangible capital stocks use our industry-level estimates of  and G . Total intangible stock
is the sum of knowledge capital, organizational capital and externally acquired intangibles
on the balance sheet Iit (Compustat intan ).


5.2.1    Intangible capital stocks by industry and time

The growing importance of disclosing capitalized intangibles to firms' balance sheets is based
on the idea that such intangibles are becoming an increasingly important component of how
today's firms create economic value. Figure 6a presents time series trends of intangible
capital for the four industries. Each series plots intangible intensity, calculated as the average
ratio of intangible capital K int (Sit + Git + Iit ) to total assets, e.g., intangible and tangible
assets (Compustat ppegt ). As expected, intangible intensities are lowest in consumer and
manufacturing industries. Firms in these industries have experienced an increase in the role
  50
     We follow Peters and Taylor (2017) in the details of the capital accumulation process such as capital
stock initialization. For details see Appendix B2 of their paper.

                                                   27
of intangibles in their total assets since only the late 1990s. In contrast, healthcare and high-
tech firms have higher intangible intensities that have each grown continually since the 1970s.
The patterns in Figure 6a conform to basic predictions about differences across industries
and time and provide the first validation that our estimates measure real economic assets.
   Figure 6b explores the relative importance of knowledge versus organizational capital
by plotting the ratio of the former to total intangibles K int . Healthcare has the highest
intensity of knowledge capital (and thus the lowest organizational capital intensity). Both
healthcare and high-tech firms experienced increases in knowledge capital stocks from 1977
­ 1996. Since 1996, growth has either stalled (Healthcare) or the levels have fallen back to
1970's levels.51
   Next, we re-examine the time series behavior of market-to-book ratios with these new
capital stocks and compare them with the time series behavior of unadjusted market-to-
book ratios. We calculate the average market equity value to book value from the period
1997­2017 for both sets of capital stocks, and run a simple linear regression of


                                     M
                                        = 0 + 1 Yeart +       t
                                     Bt

   Figure 2 reports two time-series plots with best-fit lines for the standard ratio and that
adjusted using our stocks. Each series excludes our sample of acquirers and targets. Unad-
justed (i.e. internal intangibles excluded from assets), the slope coefficient of 0.041, indicates
that, on average, the Market-to-Book ratio is drifting upwards by 0.041 per year. After our
adjustments for intangible capital, we find the slope coefficient to be 0.012, a decrease in the
upward trend of 70%. We view this basic result as a validation that our measure is able to
  51
    One possible (yet to be explored) explanation are changes in R&D tax credits (Bloom, Schankerman,
and Van Reenen (2013)). Many of these originated in 1981 (a period of increase in Figure 6b).



                                                 28
significantly attenuate the increasing downward bias that results from increasing intangible
investments over time.


5.2.2   Comparison to existing methods

To explore how our parameters differ from those commonly used in the literature, we first
construct the intangible capital stocks ­ knowledge, organizational and existing intangibles
on the balance sheet ­ using the BEA R&D depreciation estimates from Li and Hall (2016)
and the literature's accepted parameters for organizational capital accumulation ( = 0.3,
S = 0.2). Recall that for organizational capital we only estimate  (not S ) and thus
have one mechanism for estimates of organizational capital to differ. Since we compare our
parameters to those commonly used in the literature, it is worth noting that the BEA R&D
depreciation rates cover only 10.5% of 4-digit SIC codes and 28% of firm-years in Compustat.
The literature commonly assumes a depreciation rate of 15% for non-covered firms, which
are the vast majority. At the firm level, for firms covered by the BEA data, the correlation
between our estimates and those of Li and Hall (2016) is 0.44.
   Figure 7 presents the difference between our estimates ("EPW") and the current methods
("Current"), scaled by the latter. All parameters are time-invariant, so time-series variation
stems from changes in the relative use of R&D and SG&A. The differences in our estimated
intangible capital stocks relative to those from the literature vary across industries. The
"All" line in the figure shows that the new estimate is approximately 10% smaller across all
firm-years. Our intangible capital stocks are smaller than commonly assumed in both the
consumer and manufacturing industries.
   In contrast, our intangible stocks are larger in all years for hi-tech firms and half the years
for healthcare. In both cases, higher estimates of G , which imply smaller knowledge capital


                                               29
stocks, are outweighed by larger implied organizational capital investments. Given the larger
estimated depreciation of R&D for healthcare (34% vs. 17%), the relatively smaller stocks in
healthcare in the 2000s reflect firms' shift from organizational capital to knowledge capital
investments. Overall, we find economically meaningful differences in implied stocks compared
to existing methods. Next, we validate whether the differences improve the informativeness
of capital stock book values.



6        Validation of parameter estimation

We now perform several cross-sectional analyses that can reveal whether the new stocks of
intangible capital proposed here provide additional explanatory power over current methods.
Note that our estimation of time-invariant, industry-level parameters limits the set of analy-
ses where our estimates offer improvement in this way.52 The results below demonstrate that
the new estimates behave as expected and in many situations out-perform current methods.


6.1      Explaining public firm valuations

Connections between a firm's book value of capital stock and market valuations is closely
tied to the large investment-q literature and asset pricing. One explanation for a separation
between market and book values is measurement error in the latter, particularly missing
intangibles. Our intangible stocks provide an alternative adjustment to book values and an
    52
     For example, Table IA2 in the Internet Appendix reports a replication of the "Total Q" investment
regressions from Peters and Taylor (2017). The even columns report the same regressions with our new esti-
mated intangible stocks. Given the firm fixed effect specification, this is not an ideal setting for validation or
performance improvement since the firm fixed effects absorb all of the cross-sectional differences in intangible
capital stocks induced by our parameter estimates. We find that the new stocks explain slightly more of the
within-firm investment variation in R&D, while the results are slightly worse for SG&A in healthcare and
high-tech.



                                                       30
opportunity to directly compare the current capitalization approach to ours. Our first test
for any improvements investigates the relative explanatory power of book value of capital
stock for firm's market valuations. This regression typically uses the standard capital stock
variable (total assets):


                                     Mit = 0 + 1 Kit + t +         it



   where Mit is end of fiscal year market capitalization of firm i, Kit is the standard book
value of capital stock and t are year fixed effects. Running this regression for the full 1986­
2016 Compustat sample results in a R2 of 84.4%.53 If intangibles are capitalized as proposed,
then the asset side of the balance sheet should be adjusted, improving the explanatory power
                                                                    int
of these regression. Here we simply replace Kit with our new Kit + Kit  . Using the existing
                      int
BEA-HH estimates for Kit  increases the R2 to 85.6%. Reassuringly, the R2 increases slightly
more ­ to 86.1% ­ when we use our imputed intangible stocks.
   Figure 8 presents a reinterpreted version of these results when the regressions are run on
an annual basis. Here we estimate the model without capitalized intangibles ("None"), with
the BEA-HH and our stock estimates ("EPW") each year, reporting the additional amount
of explanatory power as the percent reduction in the residual sum of squares between the
                                                   RSS -RSS EP W
two models. The top panel reports the ratio            RSS 
                                                                   , where RSS  is the residual sum
of squares from either the BEA-HH approach or of ignoring off-balance sheet intangibles
("none"). A value greater than zero indicates improved fit.
   In every year of our sample, the new measure outperforms the existing BEA-HH ap-
proach (red dashed line), with our estimated capital stock adjustments leaving 1-3% less
  53
     The regression considers the shorter sample period because the R&D data is imperfect for years prior
to 1975 (e.g. Nix and Nix (1992)). Starting in 1986 ensures that we have stocks computed using post-FAS
2 passage R&D.


                                                   31
residual variance unexplained. When comparing our estimated capital stocks to firm capital
without any capitalization of intangibles we find an upward trend in the relative explanatory
power since 1994. This trend is consistent with the fact that intangible capital has become
increasingly important in explaining market values as our economy has become more reliant
on organizational and knowledge capital when generating economic value. For years after
2006 we find that our adjustments for intangibles to existing book values of capital stock
leave 13-23% less unexplained variance in firm values.
   The second panel of Figure 8 presents the formal test statistic for the null hypothesis that
the R2 from EPW and BEA-HH are identical. The solid blue line shows that incorporating
our estimate has a statistically significant improvement in the R2 since 1994 when compared
to the baseline. When comparing the explanatory power of our estimated intangible capital
stocks to those calculated using the BEA-HH approach (dashed red) the t-statistic in all
years since 1992 excluding 1999 is greater than two, suggesting that the improvements are
statistically meaningful. In no years does the current capitalization method exhibit more
explanatory power. Overall, these results demonstrate that the capitalized intangibles us-
ing the parameter estimates from Table 3 have the most predictive power for explaining
enterprise value.


6.2    Asset pricing implications

The multi-factor Fama-French model (e.g., Fama and French, 1992, 1993) is a well-established
method used in both academia and industry to calculate expected returns. One key compo-
nent in the Fama-French model is HML (high-minus-low), the realized returns to a portfolio
that is long (short) high (low) book equity-to-market equity firms. Given the potential bias
in reported book equity from missing intangible capital, we examine whether our intangible


                                              32
adjustments improve the relation between HML and realized returns.
   We adjust GAAP reported book equity values with both our intangible stocks (EPW)
and those following the BEA-HH parameters. Table 4 compares the summary statistics of
the HML pricing factor using these adjustments with traditional HML summary statistics
(without adjustments). The table shows that HML returns adjusted for BEA-HH or EPW
intangibles are larger in total magnitude, while exhibiting smaller standard deviations than
the unadjusted HML portfolio. The unadjusted HML portfolio has an average (monthly)
return of 0.28%, while the BEA-HH and EPW-augmented portfolios have monthly returns
of 0.38% and 0.43%, respectively. Only the EPW-augmented portfolio's return is signifi-
cantly larger at conventional thresholds (column 3). The HML portfolio adjusted for EPW
intangible capital has a Sharpe ratio of 0.6, 87% higher than the traditional HML portfolio's
Sharpe ratio of 0.32.
   While the conclusive mechanism for why HML is associated with future returns is beyond
the scope of our paper, at least two potential explanations appear consistent with our finding
that intangible capital adjustments increase HML portfolio returns. The first explanation is
that firms with larger proportions of intangible capital have greater distress risk (Korteweg,
2010) and the second is that the stock market underreacts more to firms with higher levels
of intangible capital (Edmans, 2011). Regardless of the exact mechanism, our intangible
adjustments to book equity result in changes to construction of the HML portfolio, pushing
firms with higher (lower) intangible firms into the long (short) side of the portfolio and
thereby increase the return spreads to the HML factor.




                                             33
6.3     Organizational capital and personnel risk

We next test our measure of organizational capital stocks. Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013)
propose a similar capitalization of SG&A used in other earlier work and validate it using
textual analysis on 100 10-K filings' "Managerial Discussion" (MD&A) sections. They seek
out references for personnel risk in these filings and argue that any firm sorting by a measure
of organizational capital should correlate with such mentions. We follow a similar approach,
using over 120,000 10-K filings from 2002­2016.54 We calculate the fraction of words in the
MD&A statement that reference risk of personnel loss (keywords: "personnel" or "talented
employee" or "key talent"). Firms are split into quintiles based on their organizational
capital stock scaled by assets in each year using our measure and the current approach (i.e.
 = .3, S = .2).
    A time-series comparison of the existence of these words between these two quintiles
reveals that our measure of organizational capital stock outperforms prior parameters. First,
the fraction with some reference of personnel risk in the top quintile versus the bottom is
66% and 52%, respectively across all years. This compares to 58% vs. 52% for the quintiles
sorted using the current measures. Figure 9 reports the t-statistic for the difference in means
of personnel risk mentions between the top and bottom quintile of organizational capital
stock. In all years of the sample period, the difference between top and bottom quintile is
significant. In contrast, in only six of fifteen years is the difference significant for the current
stock measure (BEA-HH). We conclude that our new measure of organizational capital stock
provides more predictive power for firm's assessment of the risks to their human capital.55
  54
      See https://github.com/apodobytko/10K-MDA-Section for the code to run this search.
  55
      Reassuringly, sorting firms by our organizational capital stocks (by year) results in similar patterns
of firm productivity, size and executive characteristics as found in Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) (see
Internet Appendix Table IA1).




                                                    34
6.4     Organizational capital as brand and employee satisfaction

Our next exercise asks whether our organizational capital stocks exhibit stronger correlations
with firm brand quality and employee satisfaction than existing measures. For the former,
we collect the top 100 global brands according to Interbrand, a brand consultancy, from
2000 to 2018.56 We extract the ranking and merge each company (or brand) to U.S. public
firms in Compustat.57 As above, we rank firms by our measure of organizational capital
stock and the stock currently used in the literature. An improvement in the capital stock
measure will manifest itself into a sharper separation of brand ranks when we compare the
top and bottom quintiles of each sort. This is indeed what we find: firms in the top (bottom)
quintiles of our organizational capital stock have a higher (lower) rank in brand than the
sort using the current methods.
   Next, we collect employee satisfaction data from the online firm Glassdoor. The com-
pany reports the "Best Places to Work"58 using reviews posted by current employees. Their
coverage includes public and private firms, with data going back to 2014. We merge the an-
nual rankings collected from their website to Compustat and correlate these firms' estimated
organizational capital stock with their ranking. The pairwise correlation is 9.9% using our
estimated stock versus 6.7% for the existing methods. Although neither correlation is statis-
tically significant (there are only 84 firms over the 2014-2019 sample), the larger correlation
for our new estimated stocks may suggest that it better captures features of organizational
capital.
  56
      See https://www.interbrand.com/best-brands/best-global-brands/previous-years/2000/ for
the raw data.
   57
      If two brands from the same firm are on the list, we take the average rank within-firm.
   58
      For    example,     see   their    2019     ranking     here    https://www.glassdoor.com/Award/
Best-Places-to-Work-LST_KQ0,19.htm.




                                                 35
6.5    Patent valuations and the returns to knowledge capital

An important and relevant class of identifiable intangible capital is patents, in part because
the production of patents requires investments in both knowledge and organizational capital.
Thus, if our measures of S and G capture intangible investments, then they should correlate
with patent valuations and patent quality. Moreover, connecting capital stocks to patent
valuations can reveal the private returns to investments in knowledge capital that has thus
far been difficult to estimate. What has historically been missing is the same thing that was
missing in our setting of intangible capital stocks: prices. Fortunately, Kogan, Papanikolaou,
Seru, and Stoffman (2017) provide a new measure of patents valuation from market reactions
to patent grants that can be connected to knowledge and organizational capital stocks.
   Table 5 presents a regression analysis relating two measures of patent values ­ market-
based and citation-based ­ with our disaggregated intangible stocks Git and Sit . For all
Compustat-CRSP firms that pass the traditional filters, we calculate intangible capital stocks
and merge on the Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2017) measures. Only firm-
years with patents are available, and all right-hand side variables are lagged one year. Con-
trols include firm and year fixed effects and all variables are scaled by lagged total assets (not
including intangibles) and logged. We are thus asking whether changes in intangible capital
stocks correlate with above average changes in firm's patent values. Interestingly, one can
also interpret the coefficients as estimates of private returns to investments in knowledge or
organizational capital.
   Several patterns from the results in Table 5 lead us to conclude that our intangible
capital stocks are economically meaningful. Column (1) shows the baseline specification
with a traditional size control of log sales. Column (2) adds in our knowledge capital stock.
The positive and significant loading is consistent with R&D spending being an important


                                               36
part of patent production. The within-R2 nearly doubles from (1) to (2), suggesting that
knowledge capital stocks can explain changes in firm patent valuations. Column (3) considers
organizational capital in isolation. The loading is smaller and R2 is essentially unchanged.
The full specification in column (4) demonstrates that the relationship between intangible
stocks and patent value (in dollars) comes primarily through the stock of knowledge capital.
    The coefficient estimates from column (4) suggest that a 1% increase in knowledge capital
results in a .16% increase in patent valuations. To our knowledge, this is one of the first
direct measurements of intangible investment returns and is an interesting area of future
research.
    The last four columns repeat this exercise with the more traditional citation-weighted
patent value (e.g., Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2005)). The measure of patent value is only
weakly correlated with the market measure (.38) and represents value not completely owned
by the firm. The results here are different. First, both stocks G and S have meaningful
explanatory power as demonstrated in the increased R2 in (2) and (3). Moreover, the
last column shows that both intangible capital stocks load and explain variation in citation-
weighted patent value. This result could be explained by the nature of organizational capital
investments as modeled in Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2014), where such capital is only
"partly firm specific" and tied to key employees.



7     Alternative intangible asset prices: market valua-

      tions

We have argued that the revealed prices of intangible assets found in acquisitions provide an
excellent setting for us to estimate the capitalization parameters for R&D and SG&A. We


                                             37
now explore an alternative setting for estimating the market value of a firm's intangibles,
one that is not limited to acquisition targets.59 The potential benefit of this method is that
it does not rely on a potentially selected sample of acquired firms. The trade-off, however,
is that the market value of intangible assets used in the estimation is measured with error
when the market value of tangible assets is mis-measured. We estimate parameters in this
setting and compare the explanatory power of these intangible stocks with our acquisition
sample.
    Hall (2001) and Guti´
                        errez and Philippon (2017) interpret the difference between a firm's
market value of total assets and book value of tangible assets as unmeasured intangible
assets. Implicitly, this assumes that the book value of tangible assets approaches the market
value of tangible assets, and thus:


                                M VIntangibles = M VAssets - M VTangible                               (12)

    Therefore, it is possible to estimate intangible market prices from firms that are not
acquisition targets. Because accounting data primarily records tangible assets at historical
cost, we must assume a markup of tangible assets that converts book to market values.
    For publicly traded firms, we can observe market values of equity, but only book values
of the following: total liabilities (L), preferred stock (PS), and total assets (A). We assume
that book liabilities and book preferred stock trade at par values and, thus, that book values
reflect market values. We estimate the market value of total assets as:
  59
      We are also aware of an alternate setting where countries that report their accounting standards under
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) capitalize the development portion of R&D expendi-
tures. However, we refrain from performing alternate validation for G for firms in the IFRS regime because
cross-country variation in investor protection may affect intangible depreciation rates and because the ma-
jority of firms in the Compustat sample do not disclose the breakdown of research versus development
expenses.




                                                    38
                      M VAssets = M VEquity + M VLiabilities + M VPreferred

Then, the difference between the market value of the firm and these market values of balance
sheet items approximate the market value intangible assets:


                     M VIntangibles = (M VEquity + L + P S ) - M VTangible               (13)


   With these imputed intangible prices, we can re-estimate our model in (11) where
M VIntangibles replaces IIA + GW as the price of intangible assets. The limitation, how-
ever, is that we do not directly observe M VTangible , only book values recorded at historical
cost. This approach highlights the primary advantage of our acquisition setting ­ we ob-
serve the allocation of prices paid for tangible and intangible assets and market values and
thus do not have to make assumptions about asset markups. In contrast, (13) forces us to
estimate a markup that converts book assets, A, to market value, M VTangible . To the extent
that our estimated markup of book assets contains error, this error transfers to our imputed
intangible prices. We consider three approaches to estimating the markup of tangible assets.
   The first assumption is that the markup on the book value of assets is zero, i.e., that
gross assets less depreciation are reflective of current market values. Thus, we have:


                      M VIntangibles = (M VEquity + L + P S ) - BVTangible


The second approach exploits the data in our acquisition sample on the purchase price of
tangible assets. We observe targets' pre-acquisition book value of tangible assets and the
price paid. From this, we can estimate an average (5% tail winsorized) markup from 1997­



                                               39
2016 of tangible assets of 25% (the median is 41%). Equation (13) becomes


      M VIntangibles = (M VEquity + L + P S ) - [(P P Enet × 1.25)] - CA - IN - OA           (14)


Here, we markup the net PPE and leave current assets (CA), acquired intangibles (IN) and
other assets (OA) at book. The third approach assumes that the tangible assets on a firm's
balance sheet are valued at the halfway point between gross (i.e., historical) and net values.
This is on average a 50% markup over net tangible assets, as the average firm-year has a
ratio of gross to net PPE of approximately two. This approach allows the tangible markup
to be firm-specific:


M VIntangibles = (M VEquity + L + P S ) - [(P P Enet + (P P Egross - P P Enet )/2)] - CA - IN - OA
                                                                                             (15)
Finally, as in our main analysis, our parameter estimates require ten years of past R&D
and SG&A spending, backfilling where needed. To avoid overlapping time series from a
full Compustat estimation (excluding our acquirer-target deal-years), we randomly sample
each firm once over its lifetime (after three years of trading) for 1986­2017. We repeat this
exercise with several random samples, and the results are robust.
   Our first objective is to determine whether sample selection or contaminated prices from
acquisitions lead to fundamentally different parameter estimates when compared to this
alternative approach. The results in Table 6 suggest not. The table presents the parameter
estimates for intangible values (13)-(15) along with our baseline estimates in the first row.
The estimates for the "No markup" method exhibit large gammas and in turn imply large
investments in organizational capital. As we introduce markups to the tangible assets, these
gammas fall without a major change in the depreciation estimate for knowledge capital. The

                                               40
final row, which presents the firm-level markup assumptions, exhibits parameters estimates
that are quite close to that from the acquisition methods and for G , are very close to the BEA
estimate. We believe that these estimates demonstrate the importance of the purchase price
allocation is for our proposed method of retrieving depreciation parameters. The assumptions
about markups on tangible assets are ad-hoc and have real impacts on estimates. The largest
mark-up assumption gets closest to those from the acquisition approach. Also, our ability to
get relatively close to the acquisition method's estimates with these readily-available public
valuations is a validation for the method itself.
   As in Section 5, we take these estimated parameters from the above and calculate intangi-
ble stocks for all Compustat firms. We ask whether this alternative approach for estimating
intangible asset stocks improves the informativeness of book values in explaining market
values.60 Figure 10 presents the relative differences in R2 for the alternative stocks and our
acquisition-based stocks. Intangible stocks developed by our parameter estimates from the
acquisition sample outperform the three alternatives that use a broader sample of publicly-
traded companies (i.e., the higher the line, the better). Other analyses (untabulated) show
similar results. These analyses find that intangible stocks implied by the acquisition sample
outperform the public market valuations in the human capital and brand ranking tests, while
showing similar performance in the HML predictability and employee satisfaction tests.
   Overall, the collective sum of our validation tests that compare the efficacy of acquisition
price estimates versus a broader sample (Compustat) and public market-based estimates
finds that acquisition-based price estimates perform better. These results are consistent
with the additional precision gained from directly observing intangible asset allocations out-
weighing any potential selection issues. Owing to these analyses, we conclude that selection
  60
     Note that the alternative method effectively minimizes the distance between the sum of all types of
assets and market valuations, so it has an advantage for this test.


                                                  41
issues are unlikely to be a first-order concern when using acquisition-based parameters in
the estimation of intangible capital.



8        Assumption validation and robustness

We perform several robustness analyses, beyond those discussed throughout the results
above.


8.1      Inclusion of acquisitions in bankruptcy

Panel A of Table 7 reports the main estimation including only the 1521 non-bankruptcy
acquisitions. As expected, excluding failed firms from the analysis raises the average fraction
( ) of SG&A that represents an investment in long-lived organizational capital from 0.27 to
0.43, an increase of 59%. The point estimates for G are lower than those in Table 3, with
the full sample implying an average depreciation rate of knowledge capital of 27% per year.61
     Panel B of Table 7 summarizes the validation tests detailed above when using the stocks
implied by the non-bankruptcy sample in Panel A. We compare these stocks to our main
specification and BEA-HH. Overall, the original stocks imputed by estimated parameters
that include bankruptcies ("Baseline") have a higher R2 in the model estimation, explain
more of firm enterprise value in the cross-section, are better able to capture firms with high
personnel risk, have a stronger statistical difference with the traditional HML factor and
higher R2 in the patent valuation regressions. The only case where the sample excluding
bankruptcies performs better is in the brand ranking test; however, we cannot reject the
null that the rankings are different from the baseline. Overall, the parameters from the full
    61
    The negative depreciation for "Other" is mainly driven by one acquisition where the target had less
than $30m in annual R&D and had acquired intangibles of over $2b (after adjustments).


                                                  42
sample of acquisitions (Table 3) outperforms those of the non-bankruptcy sample.


8.2      Other robustness

Table 8 presents the main specification under alternative sample or methodological assump-
tions. First, we use the purchase price allocation information made universally available after
2001 with a change in accounting rules. Acquisitions in the earlier years represent a subset
of deals that did not use the pooling of interest method. Panel A estimates the model on the
post-2001 sample. The "All" rows exhibits little difference with the main results in Table
3. There are some differences in the knowledge capital depreciation rate for the consumer
industry, as well as in the fraction of SG&A that is investment for healthcare. Reassuringly,
in unreported results, the estimates in Panel A under-perform all the validations presented
above.
    Panel B repeats the estimation without the adjustment to goodwill discussed in Section
3.2. As expected, the adjustments to goodwill have a large impact on estimates. R&D
depreciation rates are 50% higher and the percentage of SG&A that is investment is 37%
lower with the adjusted goodwill. These changes demonstrate that our adjustments are
controlling for a large part of the synergies and over-payment found in raw goodwill.62
    The final panel of Table 8 addresses concerns that firms missing R&D in Compustat
should not be treated as zero (Koh and Reeb, 2015), or that R&D is strategically allocated
to other expense accounts. Panel C removes firms with zero and missing R&D and considers
only the subset of targets in the main sample with at least one year of positive reported
R&D in Compustat. Estimates in Panel C find that G , on average, increases from 0.33 to
0.37, and that  increases from 0.27 to 0.34. These overall changes to parameter estimates
  62
     These estimates change relatively little between Table 3, which includes all targets and failures, and an
estimation which includes only firms which report positive R&D (see Panel C of Table 8 for these results).

                                                     43
are consistent with the removal of firms who may be shifting R&D expenses into SG&A.
Untabulated, we compare the stocks of firms using Table 3 coefficients and Table 8, Panel C
coefficients and find the correlation between the two sets of stocks to be 92%, reassuring us
that any potential bias in reported R&D is unlikely to affect our broader results.


8.3    Parameter choices

Given the inherent difficulties in separately identifying both the fraction of SG&A that
is investment and the rate of depreciation (footnote 42). Figure 11a presents the main
estimation under alternative assumptions about the rate of organization capital depreciation
rates. We consider a range of [.1, .3] for the S and re-estimate equation 11, reporting both
the new parameter estimates for  and G along with the R2 . We find that Figure 11a shows
little variation in the estimate of G . As we increase the S from 0.1 to 0.3, the estimated 
increases from .2 to .4. The R2 from the model estimation (right axis) remains nearly static
across these dynamics, varying by only 2%. We conclude two things from this exercise: (1)
that our assumed S = .2 is not driving any of our results, and (2) that the pair of (, S ) is
the key assumption for measuring organization capital.


8.4    Estimation within time-period subsamples

We next analyze whether the baseline parameter estimates vary significantly over time. We
estimate  and G for each year using a ten year rolling window. This allows us to investigate
the validity of our assumption that  and G are constant over time, in addition to whether
business cycles or merger waves confound our estimates. The estimation is the same as in
Section 4 with one exception: rather than estimate year fixed effects within each time-period,
the year fixed effects are instead taken from the full sample estimation, reported in Figure

                                             44
IA5, and imposed within the non-linear least squares estimation.63
     Figure 11b reports time varying coefficients:  (blue solid line) and G (red dashed line).
Also reported are full-sample estimates of  (horizontal blue line) and G (horizontal red
line). Parameter estimates are static across subsamples with any time-series variation in
 and G being insignificantly different from their full-sample counterparts. In addition
to having only small fluctuations over time,  and G estimates strongly co-move together
(,G = 0.81, p < 0.001). Because higher levels of  (G ) increase (decrease) the accumulation
of intangible capital,  and G variation will offset each other and total intangible stocks
will be even less sensitive to any time-series variation. These results complement a similar
exercise in Li and Hall (2016), who present some evidence for declining R&D depreciation
rates between 1987 and 2007. The results here do not exhibit such trends, consistent with
our baseline assumptions about static depreciation and capitalization parameters over time.



9        Conclusion

We use market valuations of acquired intangible assets from 1996 to 2017 to validate param-
eter estimates of (1) the depreciation parameters for knowledge capital based on prior R&D
spending, and (2) the fraction of SG&A capital that represents investment into long-lived
organizational capital.64 The resulting parameter estimates imply significant cross-sectional
variation in capitalization parameters and we show that our new industry-level variation
and price data result in a better measure of intangible stocks when compared to existing
approaches. The improvements manifest themselves in the stocks' ability to explain market
    63
     This leaves in place the identifying assumption from the main estimation that the time-series average
market-to-book of intangibles is unity over the entire sample, 1995­2017, rather than within each 10-year
window.
  64
     Implied stocks and estimation parameters are available for public download and usage at http://bit.
ly/intan_cap.

                                                   45
enterprise values, expected returns, human capital and brand rankings.




                                           46
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, Nicholas Bloom, and William R Kerr, 2013, Innovation,
  reallocation and growth, Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Aksoy, Lerzan, Bruce Cooil, Christopher Groening, Timothy L Keiningham, and Atakan Yal¸
                                                                                      cin,
  2008, The long-term stock market valuation of customer satisfaction, Journal of Marketing 72,
  105­122.

Ayers, Benjamin C, Craig E Lefanowicz, and John R Robinson, 2000, The financial statement effects
  of eliminating the pooling-of-interests method of acquisition accounting, Accounting Horizons 14,
  1­19.

Belo, Frederico, Xiaoji Lin, and Maria Ana Vitorino, 2014, Brand capital and firm value, Review
  of Economic Dynamics 17, 150­169.

Bena, Jan, and Kai Li, 2014, Corporate innovations and mergers and acquisitions, The Journal of
  Finance 69, 1923­1960.

Bernstein, Jeffrey I, and Theofanis P Mamuneas, 2006, R&D depreciation, stocks, user costs and
  productivity growth for U.S. R&D intensive industries, Structural Change and Economic Dy-
  namics 17, 70­98.

Bernstein, Jeffrey I, and M Ishaq Nadiri, 1988, Interindustry r&d spillovers, rates of return, and
  production in high-tech industries, The American Economic Review 78, 429­434.

Betton, Sandra, B Espen Eckbo, and Karin S Thorburn, 2008, Corporate takeovers, in Handbook
  of empirical corporate finance . pp. 291­429 (Elsevier).

Bhagat, Sanjai, Ming Dong, David Hirshleifer, and Robert Noah, 2005, Do tender offers create
  value? New methods and evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 76, 3­60.

Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen, 2013, Identifying technology spillovers
  and product market rivalry, Econometrica 81, 1347­1393.

Chan, Louis KC, Josef Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis, 2001, The stock market valuation of
  research and development expenditures, The Journal of Finance 56, 2431­2456.




                                                47
Cockburn, Iain, and Zvi Griliches, 1988, The estimation and measurement of spillover effects of
  R&D investment-industry effects and appropriability measures in the stock market's valuation
  of R&D and patents, The American Economic Review 78, 419­423.

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, 2005, Measuring capital and technology: An
  expanded framework, in Measuring capital in the new economy . pp. 11­46 (University of Chicago
  Press).

         , 2009, Intangible capital and US economic growth, Review of income and wealth 55, 661­
  685.

Corrado, Carol A, and Charles R Hulten, 2010, How do you measure a "technological revolution"?,
  American Economic Review 100, 99­104.

         , 2014, Innovation accounting, in Measuring Economic Sustainability and Progress . pp.
  595­628 (University of Chicago Press).

Crouzet, Nicolas, and Janice C Eberly, 2019, Understanding weak capital investment: the role
  of market concentration and intangibles, Working Paper 25869 National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Market reactions to tangible and intangible information,
  The Journal of Finance 61, 1605­1643.

Eberhart, Allan C, William F Maxwell, and Akhtar R Siddique, 2004, An examination of long-
  term abnormal stock returns and operating performance following R&D increases, The Journal
  of Finance 59, 623­650.

Edmans, Alex, 2011, Does the stock market fully value intangibles? employee satisfaction and
  equity prices, Journal of Financial economics 101, 621­640.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L, and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2013, Organization capital and the cross-section of
  expected returns, The Journal of Finance 68, 1365­1406.

         , 2014, The value and ownership of intangible capital, American Economic Review 104,
  189­94.

Falato, Antonio, Dalida Kadyrzhanova, and Jae Sim, 2013, Rising intangible capital, shrinking
  debt capacity, and the US corporate savings glut, Working paper.

                                               48
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns, the
  Journal of Finance 47, 427­465.

       , 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of financial
  economics 33, 3­56.

Gourio, Francois, and Leena Rudanko, 2014, Customer capital, Review of Economic Studies 81,
  1102­1136.

Griliches, Zvi, 1996, R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence (Chicago University Press).

       , and Jacques Mairesse, 1984, Productivity and R&D at the firm level, in R&D, patents,
  and productivity . pp. 339­374 (University of Chicago Press).

Guti´
    errez, Germ´
               an, and Thomas Philippon, 2017, Investmentless growth: An empirical investiga-
  tion, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity p. 89.

Hall, Bronwyn H, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2005, Market value and patent citations,
  RAND Journal of economics pp. 16­38.

Hall, Bronwyn H, Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen, 2010, Measuring the returns to r&d, in
  Handbook of the Economics of Innovation vol. 2 . pp. 1033­1082 (Elsevier).

Hall, Robert E, 2001, The stock market and capital accumulation, American Economic Review 91,
  1185­1202.

Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin's marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation, Economet-
  rica 50, 213­224.

Hirshleifer, David, Po-Hsuan Hsu, and Dongmei Li, 2013, Innovative efficiency and stock returns,
  Journal of Financial Economics 107, 632­654.

Huang, N, and E Diewert, 2007, Estimation of R&D depreciation rates for the US manufacturing
  and four knowledge intensive industries, in Sixth Annual Ottawa Productivity Workshop Held at
  the Bank of Canada.

Hulten, Charles R, and Xiaohui Hao, 2008, What is a company really worth? Intangible capital and
  the "Market to book value" puzzle, Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                               49
Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman, 2017, Technological inno-
  vation, resource allocation, and growth, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 665­712.

Koh, Ping-Sheng, and David M Reeb, 2015, Missing R&D, Journal of Accounting and Economics
  60, 73­94.

Korteweg, Arthur, 2010, The net benefits to leverage, The Journal of Finance 65, 2137­2170.

Lev, Baruch, 2018, Ending the accounting-for-intangibles status quo, European Accounting Review
  forthcoming.

       , and Suresh Radhakrishnan, 2005, The valuation of organization capital, in Measuring
  capital in the new economy . pp. 73­110 (University of Chicago Press).

Lev, Baruch, and Theodore Sougiannis, 1996, The capitalization, amortization, and value-relevance
  of R&D, Journal of Accounting and Economics 21, 107­138.

Lev, Baruch, and Paul Zarowin, 1999, The boundaries of financial reporting and how to extend
  them, Journal of Accounting research 37, 353­385.

Li, Kai, Buhui Qiu, and Rui Shen, 2018, Organization capital and mergers and acquisitions, Journal
  of Financial and Quantitative Analysis pp. 1­39.

Li, Peixin, Frank Weikai Li, Baolian Wang, and Zilong Zhang, 2018, Acquiring organizational
  capital, Finance Research Letters 25, 30­35.

Li, Wendy CY, and Bronwyn H Hall, 2016, Depreciation of business r&d capital, Review of Income
  and Wealth.

Loumioti, Maria, 2012, The use of intangible assets as loan collateral, Available at SSRN 1748675.

Ma, Song, Joy Tianjiao Tong, and Wei Wang, 2019, Selling innovation in bankruptcy, Working
  paper.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2001, The market for corporate assets: Who engages
  in mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains?, The Journal of Finance 56, 2019­2065.

Mann, William, 2018, Creditor rights and innovation: Evidence from patent collateral, Journal of
  Financial Economics 130, 25­47.



                                                 50
Nix, Paul E, and David E Nix, 1992, A historical review of the accounting treatment of research
  and development costs, Accounting Historians Journal 19, 51­78.

Pakes, Ariel, and Mark Schankerman, 1984, The rate of obsolescence of patents, research gestation
  lags, and the private rate of return to research resources, in R&D, patents, and productivity . pp.
  73­88 (University of Chicago Press).

Peters, Ryan H, and Lucian A Taylor, 2017, Intangible capital and the investment-q relation,
  Journal of Financial Economics 123, 251­272.

Phillips, Gordon M, and Alexei Zhdanov, 2013, R&D and the incentives from merger and acquisition
  activity, The Review of Financial Studies 26, 34­78.

Potepa, James, and Kyle T Welch, 2018, Calibrating innovation proxies with an accurate Tobin's
  Q and appraised innovation value, Working paper.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, David T Robinson, and Sean Viswanathan, 2005, Valuation waves and
  merger activity: The empirical evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 561­603.

Robinson, John R, and Philip B Shane, 1990, Acquisition accounting method and bid premia for
  target firms, Accounting Review pp. 25­48.

Roll, Richard, 1986, The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers, Journal of business pp. 197­216.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
  equilibrium approach, The Journal of Finance 47, 1343­1366.

Sun, Qi, and Mindy X Zhang, 2018, Financing intangible capital, Journal of Financial Economics
  forthcoming.

Warusawitharana, Missaka, 2010, The return to R&D, Discussion paper, Federal Reserve Board
  Working Paper.

Williamson, Oliver E, 1988, Corporate finance and corporate governance, The journal of finance
  43, 567­591.

Zhang, Xiaolan, 2014, Who bears firm-level risk? Implications for cash flow volatility, in 2014
  Meeting Papers no. 184. Society for Economic Dynamics.



                                                51
10     Figures and tables

                Figure 1: Capital expenditures, R&D and SG&A: 1977­2017

     The figure reports the sum of capital expenditures (`capex'), R&D (`xrd') and SG&A (`xsga')
     for Compustat firms outside of finance, mining, real estate and utilities, scaled by the total
     sales in the year (2012 dollars).




                                                  52
       Figure 2: Market-to-book with and without intangibles: 1977­2017

The figure reports the average (2.5% tail winsorized) market-to-book for Compustat firms
outside of financials, mining, real estate, utilities and all acquiring firms in our sample. The
numerator in both series is the sum of market value of equity at the end of the fiscal year, total
liabilities and book preferred stock. For the blue circle series, the denominator is total assets
(including acquired intangibles). For the green diamond series, the denominator also includes
the knowledge and organizational capital stocks estimated using the parameters in Table 3.
The two dotted red lines present the simple linear fit of each series.




                                               53
Figure 3: Percentage of acquisition deals with non-zero intangible assets or goodwill

  The figure in Panel A reports the percentage of all acquisitions in the sample (see Section 3)
  that have non-zero intangible assets or goodwill acquired. The deals included are those where
  we could find a purchase price allocation in the target's 10-K, 10-Q, S-4 or 8-K. Panel B reports
  the percentage of all deal dollars in our sample of acquisitions (see Section 3) associated with
  deals that have non-zero goodwill or intangible assets acquired. So the "Goodwill" figure is
  the annual sum of transactions with some positive goodwill divided by the total amount of
  transaction dollars in that year.

                              (a) Prevalence of IIA and goodwill




                                        (b) Deal-weighted




                                                 54
         Figure 4: Percentage of acquisition deal size for intangible assets

The figure reports the average percentage of an acquisition deal size (i.e., enterprise value of the
deal) attributed to goodwill, intangible assets (IIA) and their sum. The sample is the subset
of acquisitions (see Section 3) associated with deals that have non-zero goodwill or intangible
assets acquired.




                                                55
       Figure 5: Implied useful lives: knowledge capital depreciation rates

The figure reports the implied useful life based on G estimates in Table 3. The implied useful
life is estimated by imputing the number of years to depreciate the initial R&D investment to
10% of its gross value, then assuming straight-line depreciation at a rate equal to the average
depreciation rate used over the initial 90% of the firm's depreciation. Industry classifications
are identical to those used in Table 3. "Literature" represents the useful life for G = 0.164,
the average of all parameter assumptions used in most prior studies.




                                              56
                              Figure 6: Intangible assets intensities
                                     (a) Intangible asset intensity

The figure reports the ratio of total intangibles ­ capitalized using our method and those on the balance sheet
                                                          K int
­ scaled by total capital stock (PPE + intangibles): K int  +K phy
                                                                   . across all (mean) firms within each industry-
year. K int is the sum of knowledge and organizational capital using the estimates from Table 3 and a firm's
previous 10 years of R&D and SG&A expenditures and its externally acquired goodwill and intangibles. K phy
is the firm's PPE (gross). The "All" line reports the mean across all firms. The "Other" industry is not reported
separated, but included in the "All" series.




                (b) Knowledge capital as a fraction of total intangible capital

The figure reports of the ratio of knowledge capital ­ the accumulated R&D using the estimates from Panel A
of Table 3 ­ to total intangibles (sum of knowledge and organizational capital) averaged across all firms in each
industry-year.




                                                       57
Figure 7: Comparing intangible stocks: new methods versus existing BEA-HH/Literature

    The figure reports percent difference between the stocks constructed using the current cap-
    italization method (i.e., BEA-HH and existing literature) and that proposed in this paper
    ("EPW"). A positive percentage difference implies that the proposed alternative implies a
    larger intangible capital stock than current methods. Averages by year and within-industry
    are reported.




                                                58
       Figure 8: Comparing model fit of intangible capital stock measures

The figure reports the additional explanatory power of the estimated capital stock over other
commonly used capital stocks in annual regressions of the log firm enterprise value (market
capitalization plus debt) on the log of capital stock, calculated as

                                       RSS  -RSS EP W
                                           RSS 
where RSS represents the residual sum of squares from the regression models. The underlying
regression is:
                                Mit = 0 + 1 Kit + t + it

where Mit is end of fiscal year market capitalization of firm i,Kit is the standard book value of
capital stock and t are year fixed effects. The sample excludes all company-years associated
with the acquisitions or bankruptcies in the estimation.
Capital stocks for "none" use the traditional total asset measure (Compustat `at'). The "EPW"
model adds to this asset the intangible stocks using our parameter estimates. The "BEA-HH"
model uses the existing estimates of intangible stocks and the Hulten and Hao (2008)  of 0.3.
A number greater than zero indicates that estimated capital stocks have stronger explanatory
power. The solid line compares the EPW model to the model without capitalized intangibles.
The dashed line compares our method to that of using the existing BEA estimates. The second
panel reports the t-statistics from the test of the hypothesis that the R2 using EPW is the same
as the R2 from BEA-HH. The test statistic uses the influence function method to compare the
two separate model statistics. In the second panel, the horizontal lines represent t-statistics of
1.96 and -1.96.




                                               59
Figure 9: Testing differences in rates of 10-K mentions of "personnel" or "key talent"

  In each fiscal year, we sort firms into quintiles based on their organizational capital stock using
  our depreciation rates (see Table 3) and those currently ("Current") used in the literature
  ( = .3 and S = .2). In each year, consider the firm-level variable that is one if the firm's 10-K
  mentions "personnel", "key talent" or "talented employee," zero otherwise. The figure report
  the t-statistics (each year) for the difference in mean test for the top vs. bottom quintiles.
  "EPW" are the t-statistics from our measure and "Current" are from the sorts using existing
  depreciation rates. The red horizontal line is at t = 1.96.




                                                  60
       Figure 10: Comparison to an estimation using public market prices

The figure reports the additional explanatory power of the estimated capital stock using our
measure ("EPW") over those from the estimation using the public market estimation detailed
in Section 7. The difference is calculated as
                                      RSS  -RSS EP W
                                          RSS 
where RSS represents the residual sum of squares from the regression models. The underlying
regression is:
                                Mit = 0 + 1 Kit + t + it

where Mit is end of fiscal year market capitalization of firm i, Kit is the standard book value
of capital stock and t are year fixed effects. Capital stocks for "none" use the traditional
total asset measure (Compustat `at'). "EPW vs. No markup" compares our measure to the
intangible asset value implied by assets without markup. "EPW vs. 25% markup (mean acq.)"
reports the same but after marking up tangible assets 25% for the public market estimation.
"EPW vs. firm-level markup" uses tangible asset markets that are the average of a firm's
current year gross vs. net PPE. A number greater than zero implies that EPW explains more
of the variation in market valuations in the year.




                                              61
Figure 11: Robustness: organizational stock assumption and time-varying parameters
 (a) Estimation sensitivity under different organizational stock depreciation assumptions
  The figure reports the results of re-estimating the main model for different values of the organizational stock
  depreciation parameter S . Recall that our main results assume that S = .2. Here we vary this parameter and
  present the estimated  (fraction of SG&A that is investment), G (the knowledge capital depreciation rate)
  and the R2 from the estimation. The vertical red line indicates the main model assumption. The left y-axis
  reports the parameter estimates and the right y-axis reports the R2 .




                (b) Rolling Estimates of Parameter Values in 10-Year Windows
  The figure reports estimates of  (the fraction of SG&A which represents investment in long-lived organizational
  capital; blue, solid line) and G (the depreciation rate of knowledge capital; red, dashed line) from the non-
  linear least squares estimation of equation (11) run on rolling 10-year windows of events. The horizontal axis
  reports the first year of the subsample window. The blue and red horizontal lines represent the full-sample
  point estimates of  and G , respectively, from Table 3.




                                                       62
                    Table 1: Summary statistics for sample of found deals in model estimation.

     Summary statistics for observable characteristics of deals, targets and acquirers for the sample of acquisitions in the
     main estimation. Panel A reports the characteristics of the acquisition sample and Panel B reports the characteristics
     of the failure sample. Variable definitions found in Appendix Table A1.


                                                                Panel A: Deals in model sample (acquisitions)
                                                      Obs        Mean         Min.       Median        Max        Std dev
      Deal effective year                             1,521     2005.02      1996.00     2004.00     2017.00        6.02
      Year announced                                  1,521     2004.72      1995.00     2004.00      2017.00       6.02
      Manufacturing firm (target)                     1,521       0.11          0.00       0.00        1.00         0.31
      Consumer firm (target)                          1,521       0.23          0.00       0.00        1.00         0.42
      High-tech firm (target)                         1,521       0.40          0.00       0.00        1.00         0.49
      Enterprise value of transaction (mil)           1,521     2522.25         0.80     444.28     235456.36     9583.32
      Value of Transaction (mil)                      1,521     2145.85         0.59      385.22    213641.79     8329.79
      Target EBITDA LTM (mil)                         1,457      142.92     -7430.77      13.78      14080.53      718.85
      Target Total Assets (mil)                       1,503     1205.32         0.43      200.76     66446.13     4359.60
      Target Net Sales LTM (mil)                      1,489     1113.10       -35.17     193.75     67343.40      3763.57
      CA HQ (target)                                  1,521       0.28          0.00       0.00        1.00         0.45
      NY HQ (target)                                  1,521       0.06          0.00       0.00         1.00        0.24




63
      CA HQ (acq.)                                    1,521       0.24          0.00       0.00         1.00        0.43
      NY HQ (acq.)                                    1,521       0.10          0.00       0.00         1.00        0.29
      Goodwill (mil)                                  1,521     1119.79        -5.54      161.11     52730.25     3479.91
      Adjusted goodwill (mil)                         1,521      772.04     -2985.72      67.21     36460.48      2807.19
      Total intangibles (IIA + GW, mil)               1,521     2035.27        -5.54     272.78     170875.33     7999.14
      Total intangibles (IIA + Adj. HW, mil)          1,521     1687.52     -1231.19     175.81     167889.61     7527.35
      IIA / IIA + GW (if positive)                    1,466       0.38         0.00        0.34        1.00         0.32
      Total intangibles / Total deal size (all)       1,521       1.31         -0.11       0.85       411.69       11.09
      Total intangibles / Total deal size (< 1)       1,051       0.64         -0.11       0.72         1.00        0.29
      Total intangibles / Total ent. value (all)      1,521       0.75         -0.10       0.77        35.41        0.96
      Total intangibles / Total ent. value (< 1)      1,244       0.63         -0.10       0.70         1.00        0.28
                                                            Panel B: Deals in model sample (failures)
                                       Obs          Mean             Min.            Median         Max           Std dev
      Year failed                      479         2002.99          1996.00          2001.00       2017.00          5.50
      Manufacturing firm               479            0.10           0.00               0.00          1.00          0.30
      Consumer firm                    479            0.37           0.00               0.00          1.00          0.48
      High-tech firm                   479            0.22           0.00               0.00          1.00          0.41
      Total assets (2012 USD)          469         253.29            0.31              67.28       6562.80         628.68
      Net income (2012 USD)            444          -80.64         -9919.58           -10.49         95.52         537.74
      Total intangibles                452           19.75           0.00              1.57         661.05         58.26
                   Table 2: Summary statistics for sample of acquisitions in and out of sample.

     Summary statistics of deal characteristics of deals in our main sample and those that were excluded. Excluded deals are
     described in Section 3 and are generally those acquisitions where we could not find the purchase price allocation in the
     acquirer's financial statements. The starting sample of potential acquisitions were all U.S.-based public firm acquisitions
     or public targets outside of finance, mining, real estate and utilities from 1996­2017 where we could match both firm's
     to Compustat.


                                                         Included acquisitions                  Excluded acquisitions
                                                 Obs      Mean      Median     Std dev    Obs     Mean      Median    Std dev
      Deal effective year                        1,521   2005.02    2004.00      6.02     588    2002.63   2001.00      5.62




64
      Year announced                             1,521   2004.72    2004.00      6.02     588    2002.30   2001.00      5.66
      Manufacturing firm (target)                1,521     0.11       0.00       0.31     588      0.12      0.00       0.33
      Consumer firm (target)                     1,521     0.23       0.00       0.42     588      0.28      0.00       0.45
      High-tech firm (target)                    1,521     0.40       0.00       0.49     588      0.33      0.00      0.47
      Enterprise value of transaction (mil)      1,521   2522.25    444.28     9583.32    588    1941.54   226.19     6838.77
      Value of Transaction (mil)                 1,521   2145.85     385.22    8329.79    588    1586.12    177.82    6013.43
      Target EBITDA LTM (mil)                    1,457    142.92     13.78      718.85    526     207.39    10.12     1602.82
      Target Total Assets (mil)                  1,503   1205.32     200.76    4359.60    555    1246.84    148.93    4199.13
      Target Net Sales LTM (mil)                 1,489   1113.10    193.75     3763.57    542    1012.73    124.34    3513.33
      CA HQ (target)                             1,521     0.28       0.00       0.45     588      0.21      0.00       0.41
      NY HQ (target)                             1,521     0.06       0.00       0.24     588      0.09      0.00       0.28
      CA HQ (acq.)                               1,521     0.24       0.00       0.43     588      0.16      0.00       0.37
      NY HQ (acq.)                               1,521     0.10       0.00       0.29     588      0.13      0.00       0.33
     Table 3: Parameter Estimates from Non-linear Least Squares Estimation

Parameter estimates are based on non-linear least squares regressions of the price of intangible target firm
assets, as reported on acquiring firm financial disclosures, on cumulated intangible assets:

                                                   10                          10
                    I
          log (1 + Pit ) = log (t ) + log (Iit +        (1 - G )k R&Di,t-k +        (1 - 0.2)k  SG&Ai,t-k + 1)
                                                   k=1                         k=1


where PitI is the price paid for IIA and goodwill (adjusted) and I are the target's pre-acquisition balance sheet
                                                                    it
intangibles. Th year fixed effects (t ) are constrained to an average of 0 (log of 1) across all years. In the case
of firm failures, acquisition prices are the average debt-holder recovery from bankruptcy available from Moody's
analytics or the average recovery by four-digit SIC code where using the book value of debt prior to the failure.
To get total intangibles for failures, we use the average fraction of acquired intangibles to total deal size in the
same industry from the acquisition sample.
The first column reports the estimates of  , the fraction of SG&A that is investment. The S is assumed to be
0.2 (i.e., not estimated). The G column reports the estimate of R&D depreciation rate. Pseudo R2 estimates
are calculated as the percent improvement in the exponentiated root mean squared error relative to a model
which includes only a constant. As a comparison, the column with the header "     ¯BEA " reports the average R&D
                                                                                   G
depreciation rates from Li and Hall (2016) for SIC codes in each of the major industry groups (one obs. per
SIC). The column "   ¯lit " reports the same average where we follow the literature and replace missing parameters
                      G
with 0.15. Bootstrapped (1000 replications at the firm-level) standard errors reported in parentheses. N reports
the number of unique firms in the estimation. Firms can have up to ten years of financial data. The "All"
row reports the pooled sample estimates, while all other rows are separate estimations for the Fama-French 5
industry classifications adjusted as discussed in Section 5 (code available http://bit.ly/intan_cap).


                             Estimates              Previous estimates
                                 S       G      N   ¯BEA
                                                                ¯lit
                                                     G           G
        All            0.27    0.20     0.33  2000 0.28       0.164
                      (0.024)        (0.037)
        Consumer       0.19    0.20     0.33   511  0.31      0.153
                      (0.026)          (0.29)
        Manufacturing  0.22    0.20     0.42   233  0.25      0.156
                      (0.056)        (0.168)
        High Tech      0.44    0.20     0.46   715 0.315      0.255
                      (0.055)        (0.072)
        Health          0.49   0.20     0.34   245 0.181      0.172
                      (0.135)        (0.065)
        Other           0.34   0.20     0.30   296 N/A         0.15
                      (0.064)        (0.195)
                                   Pseudo-R2 : .515




                                                             65
             Table 4: The value premium: including intangibles in book value

    The table reports summary statistics for HML portfolio returns for three measures of book equity from 1976
    through 2017. The Fama-French HML is constructed as in Fama and French (1992). The BEA-HH HML
    is similarly constructed, but augmented with the BEA-HH measure of internally generated intangible assets.
    The EPW HML is instead augmented with the intangible capital stocks implied by the parameters in table 3.
    Returns are reported in percentage points per month. The column "P(=FF)" reports the p-value of the t-test
    with the null hypothesis that the mean of the monthly returns is equal to that of the traditional HML measure.
    The Sharpe ratio is annualized.


                   HML                  Obs      Mean       P(=FF)          St. Dev.      Sharpe
                   Fama-French          498      0.28                         2.96         0.32
                   BEA-HH               498      0.38          0.12           2.46         0.53
                   EPW                  498      0.43          0.05           2.49         0.60


    Table 5: Relationship between firm patent valuations and firm intangible assets

    The table reports regressions of patent value from Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2017) using two
    alternative measures. A unit of observation is a firm-year where the patent valuation variables are available
    (i.e., the firm had a granted patent(s) to measure). The columns headed "Market-weighted" use the log of
    market valuation of granted patents in the firm-year, while the columns under the "Citation-weighted" present
    values of patents measured as the log ((sum of citations received in that year scaled by citations received by
    patents in the same industry-year)/(lagged total assets)). The control "Log knowledge K" is the log (plus 1)
    of the estimated knowledge capital from the parameter estimates in Table 3 concerning R&D (e.g. G ). The
    control "Log org. K" presents the same measure, but using past SG&A and the parameters  and .2 in Table
    3. The variable "Balance sheet intan." is the total identifiable intangibles (including goodwill) on the firm's
    balance sheet. All measures are scaled by previous year total assets (Compustat "at") and all balance sheet
    items are lagged one year. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects.


                              (1)          (2)        (3)             (4)         (5)           (6)      (7)            (8)
                                          Market-weighted                                   Citation-weighted
Log knowledge K                          0.17                      0.16                      0.39                      0.34
                                         (0.019)                   (0.022)                   (0.026)                   (0.026)
Log org. K                                        0.061             0.010                             0.29             0.19
                                                   (0.022)         (0.024)                            (0.031)          (0.028)
Balance sheet intan.      -0.00099       -0.0040 -0.0021           -0.0045     0.037        0.030 0.034               0.029
                          (0.0074)      (0.0074) (0.0074)         (0.0074)     (0.0071)     (0.0068) (0.0072)         (0.0069)
Log sales                  0.25          0.19      0.21            0.19         0.34         0.20     0.16             0.10
                           (0.021)       (0.021) (0.024)           (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024) (0.028)           (0.025)
Observations                39848         39848     39675           39675        39848        39848    39675            39675
R2                           0.76          0.76      0.76            0.76         0.82         0.84     0.83             0.84
Within-R2                   0.013         0.025     0.014           0.025        0.028         0.10    0.063             0.11
Firm FE?                      Y             Y          Y              Y            Y             Y        Y               Y
Year FE?                      Y             Y          Y              Y            Y             Y        Y               Y




                                                         66
                Table 6: Parameter Estimates: Public market valuations

The table reports the parameter estimates for the alternative model using public market valuations of Compustat
firms for intangible assets. The first row "Baseline" reports the original estimates using acquired intangible
valuations from Table 3. The last three rows present the estimates for three different markup assumption for
tangible assets when computing the implied intangible values from traded firms. See Section 7 for details.


                                    S    G     N                                ¯BEA
                                                                                           ¯lit
                                                                                 G          G
            Baseline          0.27 0.20 0.33 2000                               0.28      0.164
            No Markup         0.53 0.20 0.24 15,054                             0.28      0.164
            25% markup        0.45 0.20 0.23 15,054                             0.28      0.164
            Firm-level markup 0.39 0.20 0.27 15,054                             0.28      0.164




                                                     67
Table 7: Parameter estimates and validation tests: excluding acquisitions in bankruptcy

    The table reports the main estimation found in Table 3 after excluding the sample of acquisitions in bankruptcy.
    Panel A reports the parameter estimates and bootstrap standard errors. Panel B summarizes the validation or
    fit tests. "Pseudo-R2 from estimation" is the fit statistic from the model estimation. For the BEA-HH column,
    we report the fit from the estimation where we plug in the BEA-HH parameters and use the estimated fixed
    effects from the main specification. "Market reg. RSS increase vs. BEA" reports the average increase (or
    decrease) in the additional explanatory power in the regression presented in Figure 8 compared to the BEA-HH
    parameters. "Personnel risk" reports the fraction of years from 2002­2018 where the t-statistic from the test
    of organizational stock sorts for personnel risk (see Section 6.3). "Adjusting book value" reports the p-value of
    the t-test with the null hypothesis that the mean of the monthly returns is equal to that of the traditional HML
    measure. "Market value of patent regression R2 " is the within-R2 from column 4 of Table 5. "Brand ranking"
    reports the average brand ranking for firms in the top vs. bottom quartile of firms sorted by the estimated
    organizational capital stocks (scaled by total assets).


                          Panel A: Excluding acquisitions through bankruptcies
                                                      S         G        N
                          All              0.43      0.20     0.27     1521
                                          (0.039)            (0.041)
                          Consumer         0.38      0.20     0.31      335
                                          (0.061)            (0.331)
                          Manufacturing    0.24      0.20     0.23      186
                                          (0.074)            (0.194)
                          High Tech        0.58      0.20     0.39      612
                                          (0.073)            (0.067)
                          Health            0.62     0.20      0.23     218
                                          (0.204)            (0.081)
                          Other            0.52      0.20     -0.14     170
                                          (0.119)            (0.221)
                                          Pseudo-R2 : .423

                                  Panel B: Comparing results
                     Test / Validation              Exc. bank.                       Baseline       BEA-HH
        Pseudo-R2 from estimation                      .423                           .515            .48

        Market reg. RSS increase vs. BEA (Figure                        -.097           .025          N/A
        8, Panel A)
        Personnel risk: % years with org. stock sort                    86%            100%           53%
        t-statistic > 1.96
        Adjusting book value: H0 : monthly ret. dif-                     .08             .05           .12
        ferent from FF (Table 4 column 3, p-value)
        Market value of patent regression R2 (Table                      .02            .025          .023
        5, column 4)
        Brand ranking: top quartile vs. bottom                       34 vs. 52       36 vs. 51     42 vs. 49
        quartile rank


                                                          68
                     Table 8: Parameter Estimates: Robustness tests

Panel A of the table reports the parameter estimates as found in Table 3 for the set of companies acquired
after 2001. Panel B of the table reports the parameter estimates as found in Table 3 where we do not adjust
the goodwill for synergies and over-payment (see Section 3.2). Panel C reports the parameter estimates after
excluding all targets with zero R&D over their pre-acquisition period.


                                 Panel A: Post-2001 deals
                                                S      G   N
                          All            0.25 0.20 0.31 1152
                          Consumer       0.13 0.20 0.07 217
                          Manufacturing 0.20 0.20 0.41 122
                          High Tech      0.46 0.20 0.49 450
                          Health         0.80 0.20 0.38 181
                                         Pseudo-R2 : 0.632




                            Panel B: Unadjusted goodwill prices
                                                S     G       N
                          All            0.43 0.20 0.22 2000
                          Consumer       0.27 0.20 0.05 511
                          Manufacturing 0.46 0.20 0.31 233
                          High Tech      0.71 0.20 0.38 715
                          Health         0.71 0.20 0.21 245
                                          Pseudo-R2 : 0.53




                            Panel C: Targets with positive R&D
                                                 S      G     N
                          All             0.34 0.20 0.37 1208
                          Consumer        0.29 0.20 0.46     96
                          Manufacturing 0.22 0.20 0.38 170
                          High Tech       0.39 0.20 0.45 641
                          Health          0.57 0.20 0.35 239
                                          Pseudo-R2 : 0.533




                                                    69
Appendix

                          Table A1: Variables and definitions of terms
    The table presents variable and term definitions used throughout the paper.

Variable/Term                  Definition
Deal effective year            Year the acquisition was completed.
Year announced                 The year that the acquisition was announced to the public.
Services firm (target)         An indicator equal to one if the acquisition target is in the services sector.
Value of transaction (mil)     The total value of the acquisitions (in 2012, USD millions) as reported
                               in SDC.
Target Net Sales LTM (mil)     The last twelve month net sales for the target firm at the time of acqui-
                               sition (2012 USD).
Target EBITDA LTM (mil)        The last twelve month EBITDA for the target firm at the time of acqui-
                               sition (2012 USD).
Target total assets            Total assets of the acquired firm at the time of acquisition (2012 USD).
CA HQ (acq.)                   An indicator variable that is equal to one if the firm is headquartered in
                               California.
NY HQ                          An indicator variable that is equal to one if the firm is headquartered in
                               New York state.
Intangible assets (IIA)        The total identified intangible assets from the acquisition revealed
                               through the purchase price allocation. Reported in millions (2012 USD).
Goodwill (mil)                 The total goodwill allocated in the acquisition (2012 USD).
Goodwill (adj., mil)           The total goodwill net of an estimate of synergy and any over/under-
                               payment of the target by the acquirer. The former is approximated by
                               the sum of the product of 2-day window cumulative abnormal (CAR) and
                               pre-deal market value for both target and acquirer, while the latter is the
                               negative of the acquirer's CAR times the pre-deal market valuation.
All stock                      An indicator variable equal to one if the acquisition was an all-stock deal.
All cash                       An indicator variable equal to one if the acquisition was an all-cash deal.
Balance sheet intan.           The total intangible assets already on the balance sheet of the firm,
                               typically from past acquisitions of intangibles and goodwill.
Organizational capital         The capitalization of some fraction  of SG&A expenditures by a firm.
                               It is meant to capture the knowledge used to combine human skills and
                               tangible capital into systems for producing and delivering want-satisfying
                               products. See Section 2 for a collection of papers with related definitions.
Knowledge capital              The consensus proxy for the flows of a firm's knowledge capital in the in-
                               tangibles literature is its periodic disclosure of research and development
                               expenditures.
BEA-HH                         The acronym for the depreciation parameter assumptions from Li and
                               Hall (2016) for knowledge capital and the fraction of SG&A that is in-
                               vestment from Hulten and Hao (2008).


                                                 70
