                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHEN BEHAVIORAL BARRIERS ARE TOO HIGH OR LOW ­ HOW TIMING MATTERS
                  FOR PARENTING INTERVENTIONS

                                        Kalena E. Cortes
                                        Hans D.U. Fricke
                                         Susanna Loeb
                                         David S. Song
                                        Benjamin N. York

                                       Working Paper 25964
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25964


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We thank Hoyt Bleakley, Susan Dynarski, Brian Jacob, Lori T. Taylor, Christina Weiland, and
seminar and conference participants at the University of Michigan and the Association for
Education Finance and Policy for helpful feedback. This research was supported by the Spencer
Foundation. Erika Byun and J.B. Horsley provided outstanding research assistance. Any errors
are attributable to the authors. Institutional support from Brown University, Stanford University,
Stanford's Center for Education Policy Analysis (CEPA) Labs, and Texas A&M University are
also gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25964.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Kalena E. Cortes, Hans D.U. Fricke, Susanna Loeb, David S. Song, and Benjamin N.
York. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Behavioral Barriers are Too High or Low ­ How Timing Matters for Parenting Interventions
Kalena E. Cortes, Hans D.U. Fricke, Susanna Loeb, David S. Song, and Benjamin N. York NBER
Working Paper No. 25964
June 2019
JEL No. I21,I24,J18

                                           ABSTRACT

The time children spend with their parents affects their development. Parenting programs can help
parents use that time more effectively. Text-messaged-based parenting curricula have proven an
effective means of supporting positive parenting practices by providing easy and fun activities that
reduce informational and behavioral barriers. These programs may be more effective if delivered
during times when parents are particularly in need of support or alternatively when parents have
more time to interact with their child. This study compares the effects of an early childhood text-
messaging program sent during the weekend to the same program sent on weekdays. We find that
sending the texts on the weekend is, on average, more beneficial to children's literacy and math
development. This effect is particularly strong for initially lower achieving children, while the
weekday texts show some benefits for higher achieving children on higher order skills. Results are
consistent with the hypothesis that the parents of lower achieving students, on average, face such
high barriers during weekdays that supports are not enough to overcome these barriers, while for
parents of higher achieving students, weekday texts are more effective because weekdays are more
challenging, but not so difficult as to be untenable for positive parenting.

Kalena E. Cortes                                 David S. Song
The Bush School                                  Graduate School of Education
Texas A&M University                             Center for Education Policy Analysis
4220 TAMU                                        Stanford University
1049 Allen Building                              520 Galvez Mall
College Station, TX 77843                        Stanford, CA 94305
and IZA                                          dssong09@stanford.edu
and also NBER
kcortes@tamu.edu                                 Benjamin N. York
                                                 ParentPowered Technologies
Hans D.U. Fricke                                 10 Mulberry Ct. #3
Graduate School of Education                     Belmont, CA 94002
Center for Education Policy Analysis             ben.york@parentpowered.com
Stanford University
520 Galvez Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and IZA
hfricke@stanford.edu

Susanna Loeb
Annenberg Institute for School Reform
Brown University
Box 1985
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
susanna_loeb@brown.edu
INTRODUCTION
 
       Parental time investments impact children's development (Greenman, Bodovski, and Reed,

2011; Del Boca, Flinn, and Wiswall, 2014; Thomsen, 2015; Del Bono, Francesconi, Kelly, and

Sacker, 2017). These time investments likely vary across time, not only year to year but also month

to month, week to week, and day to day within weeks. Since most parents work outside of the

home, time spent with their children is limited to non-work hours and to the days they are not

working (Bianchi, 2000; Stewart, 2010; Fox, Han, Ruhm, and Waldfogel, 2013; Heiland, Price,

and Wilson, 2017). Responsibilities of work, household, and finances also create cognitive

demands that may affect parenting practices and may vary day to day. As a result, parenting

effectiveness may differ by day, and parents may systematically benefit more from parenting

supports on some days than on others. On some days, parents have greater needs for suggestions

of what to do with their children because they are facing greater barriers; yet, on some days, these

barriers may be so great that supports are not enough to affect parent-child interactions. In this

study, we test whether the effects of a text-messaged based parenting program differ depending on

the days of week it is offered, and our findings show that they do.

       Parents face a number of barriers that hinder their ability to provide beneficial home

learning environments for their children. Working during their children's waking hour is clearly

one barrier. Information about how to create supportive environments may be another. On top of

these difficulties, behavioral barriers can be strong. For instance, demands of parenting can create

a heavy cognitive load. Parents need to make many choices each day about what questions to ask

their children, what to feed them, and how to respond to their questions, requests and behaviors.

These day-to-day decision alone can burden parents with a heavy cognitive load, and parents may

default to doing what their parents did, what their friends do, or nothing at all, leading parents to



                                                 2
 
interact sub-optimally with their children.1 Similarly, some of the gratifying aspects of parenting

occur in the future and delayed gratification can cause suboptimal behavior such as

underinvestment of time and effort in parenting. Parents may achieve more immediate rewards

from activities such as doing the dishes or talking with friends, than from interacting in

educationally positive ways with their children.2 Moreover, strong cognitive demands can increase

self-control problems when individuals make less mindful choices because of distractions (Shiv

and Fedorikhin, 1999). Hence, parents may not engage in skill-building activities that are rewarded

in the long-term on days with high barriers.3 Finally, day-to-day tasks may distract parents from

more distant goals and cause parents to pay limited attention to beneficial parenting practices.4

              These information, time, and behavioral constraints may be more detrimental for parents

from lower socio-economic backgrounds. Wealthier parents often have jobs with more flexibility,

as well as greater access to child care (Galinsky, Sakai, and Wington, 2011), while parents in

poorer families often have more restrictive work hours (Williams and Boushey, 2010; Bianchi,

2011). Moreover, the strains of poverty itself limit cognitive capacity for complex tasks (Shah,

Mullainathan, and Shafir, 2012; Mani, Mullainathan, Shafir, and Zhao, 2013). Parents with low

incomes may use more of their cognitive capacity on daily financial challenges aggravating the

behavioral barriers to parenting. In part as a result, college-educated parents spend more time with

their children (Sayer, Gauthier, and Furtsenberg, 2004; Guryan, Hurst, Kearny, 2008) and are able

to engage more in educational activities (Hsin and Felfe, 2014). Furthermore, the default activities


                                                            
1
  See Ivengar and Lepper (2000), and Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos, and Sanbonmatsu (2012) for more discussion on
cognitive load.
2
  See Thaler and Sunstein (2008) and DellaVigna (2009) for more discussion on delayed gratification.
3
  Mayer, Kalil, Oreopoulos, and Gallegos (2018) show that interventions that regiment reading practices according to
a long-term schedule of concrete goals and rewards lead to substantial increases in time parents spend reading with
their children.
4
  See Gabraix (2017) and Karlan, McConnell, Mullainathan, and Zinman (2010) for more discussion on limited
attention.

                                                               3
 
for parents who themselves were raised in highly educated families may be more helpful to

children than the default behaviors of other parents, even if both groups face the same behavioral

challenges.

              Programs aimed at improving parenting practices may be most effective if targeted at times

during which parents can engage in parenting activities and interact with their children. Given that

parents have the time to spend with their children, supports for spending that time well may be

more effective when parents have need for support (i.e., when barriers are present) but also have a

possibility of engaging (i.e., when barriers are not insurmountable). Most parenting programs are

not flexible enough to accommodate timing nuances because they provide support in a

concentrated manner ­ usually large amounts of information at a preset time, such as during an

evening class. Many of these programs have shown only limited success, perhaps because they

focus on information barriers and tend not to address the behavioral barriers of parenting (Aos,

Lieb, Mayfield, Miller, and Pennucci, 2004; Duncan, Ludwig, and Magnusson, 2010; Karoly,

Greenwood, Everingham, Houbé, Rydell, et al., 1998). More recently, text-messaging

interventions have emerged as a promising alternative or supplement due to their low cost, the

widespread use of mobile phones, and their ease of scalability. These interventions have been

shown to positively influence both student and parent outcomes in a wide array of educational

settings.5 Text messaging interventions can readily target particular times and days when advice

may be more useful for parents.



                                                            
5
  Such interventions have been demonstrated to positively affect school and class attendance of students (Bergman
and Chan, 2017; Groot, Sander, Rogers, and Bloomenthal, 2017, Robinson, Lee, Dearing, and Rogers, 2017; Rogers
and Feller, 2018), the number of course credits earned in high school (Kraft and Rogers, 2015), FASFA completion
(Page, Castleman, and Meyer, 2018), chronic absenteeism and parental engagement (Smythe-Leistico and Page,
2018), and college enrollment rates (Castleman and Page, 2015, 2016). Moreover, these interventions have been
particularly effective for children and parents from low-income backgrounds (Bergman, 2015; Castleman and Page,
2015, 2016; Bergman and Chan, 2017).

                                                               4
 
              This study asks whether the effectiveness of text-messaged-based parenting support

depends on when the support is provided. Specifically, it compares the effects of an early

childhood text-messaging program sent during the weekend to those of the same program sent on

weekdays. The text-messaging program was developed at Stanford University and has shown

positive effects on parental engagement and children's literacy development (Doss, Fahle, Loeb,

and York, in press; York, Loeb, and Doss, in press). This intervention breaks down the

complexities of parenting by providing a combination of general information about important

literacy skills and parent-child activities (i.e., "FACT" text messages), actionable advice with

specific examples of parent-child literacy activities (i.e., "TIP" text messages), and

encouragement/reinforcement (i.e., "GROWTH" text messages).6 Starting from the hypothesis

that most parents face greater distractions from positive parenting during weeknights than on

weekends, if the program is more effective during the week, then the mechanism is likely through

reducing barriers that are higher, while if it is more effective on the weekend, then the mechanism

is likely through reducing barriers that are not so high as to be insurmountable. We expect effect

heterogeneity given that some parents may face higher barriers and have less strong defaults.

              We randomly assign parents of pre-kindergarten children into three groups. The first group

of parents receives the original program, that is, a "FACT" message on Monday, a "TIP" message

on Wednesday, and a "GROWTH" message on Friday, henceforth the Weekday program. The

second group received the "FACT", "TIP", and "GROWTH" messages on Friday, Saturday, and

Sunday, respectively, henceforth Weekend program. The Weekend program differs from the

original program (i.e., Weekday program) in that it sends the text messages on different days but


                                                            
6
 The "GROWTH" text message specifically aims to provide immediate, short-term gratification to parents in the form
of written encouragement. Such stimuli represent self-affirmation, which has been found to be effective in the
behavioral science literature (Cohen and Sherman, 2014; Hall, Zhao, and Shafir, 2014; Sweeney and Moyer, 2015).

                                                               5
 
also in that these days are consecutive. Therefore, a third group of parents receives the "FACT",

"TIP", and "GROWTH" message on a Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, respectively, to parse

out the spacing effect from the weekend effect. This program henceforth will be called MidWeek

program.

         Three prior studies have evaluated the effectiveness of the Weekday program. The first

study, York et al. (in press), compared this program to a control group and found substantial

improvements of self-reported parent engagement and child literacy assessment scores. The effects

were much more pronounced for children who began the school year in the bottom half of the

literacy skill distribution. The second study, Doss et al. (in press), tested whether these

improvements where driven by the content of the text messages or simply by the texts serving as

reminders, or nudges. To do so, the authors compared the original Weekday program to a Weekday

program in which they tailored the text content to the skill level of the children. The program that

targeted skill levels had a greater effect that was driven by children at the bottom and top of the

literacy distribution, providing evidence that the content, not just the reminders, caused the effects.

The third study, Cortes, Fricke, Loeb, and Song (2018), assessed the frequency of the text messages

by comparing the original three-times-per-week Weekday program to a program with only one

"TIP" on Wednesday and to a program that added two additional "TIP" messages on Tuesday and

Thursday for a total of five texts per week. The findings demonstrated that text messaging

programs can supply too little or too much information. Parents prefer three times per week to the

other options and children in the bottom quarter of the pre-intervention literacy distribution

benefited from receiving three texts per week compared to one but did not show further

improvements when receiving five texts per week.7

                                                            
7
  Fricke, Kalogrides, and Loeb (2018) investigate parental opt out in these texting interventions. They find that parents
who are more likely to benefit from interventions are less likely to opt out. Moreover, context and encouragement

                                                           6
 
              These studies provide evidence that content as well as frequency matter for the

effectiveness of the texting programs. Yet we do not know whether the timing of the text messages

matter. That is, when do parents interact with their children, have the bandwidth to implement

advice on beneficial parenting practices, and have the potential to benefit from that advice?

Understanding these parenting dynamics can guide program design.

              We find that sending text messages with parenting support on weekends is more beneficial

to children's development, on average, than sending texts on weekdays. Moreover, we find effect

heterogeneity. The benefits of the weekend program were particularly pronounced for children

who started pre-Kindergarten in the lower half of the baseline skill distribution on easier sub-

components, such as rapid letter naming, rote counting, and shape naming, while the weekday

program was somewhat more beneficial for the initially higher achieving children. These results

are consistent with the hypothesis that the parents of lower achieving students, on average, face

such high barriers during weekdays that supports are not enough to overcome these barriers, while

for parents of higher achieving students, weekday texts are more effective because weekdays are

more challenging but still not so difficult as to impede positive parenting. In sum, the findings

suggest that parenting support works best when parents have time, attention, and need.


THE INTERVENTION

               The text-messaging programs are designed to support parenting practices of parents' four-

year-old pre-Kindergarten children over the course of eight months. ParentPowered

(parentpowered.com) developed and delivered the texts based on the original Weekday program



                                                            
along with activities reduce opt out compared to activities alone. A high quantity of texts and more complex texts also
increase opt out.



                                                               7
 
created at Stanford and first used in the San Francisco Unified School District in the 2013-14

school year (York et al., in press). The Weekend, the MidWeek, and the Weekend programs are

identical with the exception of the days of delivery.

              We use the "FACT", "TIP", and "GROWTH" text message approach to help parents

overcome barriers that might limit parental engagement with their children.8 First, the "FACT"

text messages intend to solve imperfect information by providing general information about child

literacy development and best parenting practices.9 Second, activities in the "TIP" and

"GROWTH" messages aim at alleviating the cognitive load of parenting by presenting concrete

examples of parent-child literacy activities that are easy to implement and fun. Third, the

"GROWTH" text messages aim to overcome the problem of delayed gratification and inconsistent

time preferences. With praise and encouragement, such as "You're doing a good job preparing

your child for kindergarten", the messages provide immediate gratification for skill building and

school readiness activities that otherwise would be only be rewarded in the long-term. Finally, the

weekly frequency of the text messages reminds parents to engage in beneficial activities with their

child and solves the potential problem of limited attention. Examples of each text message type

include:10

                FACT: "Children need to know letters to learn how to read & write. Research
                shows that kids with good letter knowledge become good readers."

                TIP: "Point out the first letter in your child's name in magazines, on signs & at
                the store. Have your child try. Make it a game. Who can find the most?"

                GROWTH: "Keep pointing out letters. You're preparing your child 4K! Point
                out each of the letters in your child's name. Ask: What sound does it make?"

                                                            
8
  See a more in-depth discussion of how the programs aim to overcome these barriers in York et al. (in press).
9
  See Avery and Kane (2004), Grodsky and Jones (2007), Hastings and Weinstein (2008), Valant and Loeb (2014),
Kraft and Rogers (2015), Rogers and Feller (2016), and Fricke, Grogger, and Steinmayr (2018) for more discussion
on imperfect information. This literature has produced mixed results about the effect of improved information on
educational outcomes and choices.
10
   More examples can be found in York et al. (in press) and in Doss et al. (in press).

                                                               8
 
              We developed the content of the text messages so that they provide enjoyable and easy-to-

implement activities for parent-child interactions that would help build literacy skills and more

general positive parenting practices.11 The text messages cover a broad range of skills, including

letter recognition, rhyming, reading comprehension, vocabulary, parent-child language

interactions, and parent-child reading activities.12 We structured the texting program as a spiral

curriculum, such that the program begins with simple information and advice, and becomes

progressively more advanced over the eight months of intervention, while also reintroducing topics

for reinforcement. Most of the activities build on existing family routines and activities to

minimize costs of adopting beneficial behavior. For instance, some texts leverage bath time,

commuting and travel, or meals.

              We conducted this randomized control trial with the parents of four-year-old pre-

kindergarten students in the Dallas Independent School District (DISD) in Texas during the 2016-

17 academic year.13 We recruited parents through DISD's existing registration process for pre-

kindergarten enrollment. As all parents in DISD must use this process to enroll in pre-kindergarten,

all parents received the invitation, which was available in both English and Spanish. Parents could

choose to receive text messages in either English or Spanish and had the option to withdraw from

the study at any time during the school year.14 Parents who chose to participate received one of the

three text messaging programs from the end of September through the beginning of June.




                                                            
11
   See Webster-Stratton (1992), Patterson, Reid, Dishion (1992), Sanders, Markie-Dadds, Tully, and Bor (2000), Van
Zeijl, Mesman, Van Ijzendoorn, Bakermans-Kranenburg, Juffer et al. (2006), and Gardner, Burton, Klimes (2006) for
details.
12
   See Lonigan and Shanahan (2009) for more discussion on literacy development research; Reese, Sparks, and Leyva
(2010) on parenting practice; and Abbot, Lundin, and Ong (2008) and Texas Education Agency (2015) on behavior
change strategies.
13
   We used a blocked randomization design within pre-school site and preferred texting language.
14
   York et al. (in press) shows that 90 percent of economically disadvantaged families had unlimited text messaging
plans.

                                                               9
 
    DATA

              DISD is the second-largest public-school district in the state and the 14th-largest public-

school district in the United States,15 serving approximately 150,000 students from kindergarten to

the twelfth grade across 224 schools. Approximately 12,000 pre-kindergarten students are enrolled

in 132 preschools in the DISD district.

              DISD pre-kindergarten serves students with limited English proficiency and National

School Lunch Program eligibility, a diverse and low-income student population. Twenty-seven

percent of the students are identified as black, 68 percent as Hispanic, and two percent as white,

with the remaining three percent as Asian, American Indian, Hawaiian, multi-racial, or without a

reported ethnicity. Fifty-three percent of these students are classified as limited English

proficiency, and 93 percent are classified as economically disadvantaged.16

              Data Sources: We use information about DISD pre-kindergarten students, their teachers,

and their parents. Student data come from DISD administrative student records, which include

demographic information such as age, gender, race and ethnicity, and whether the child comes

from an economically disadvantaged family. Our main outcomes are literacy and mathematics

scores of the Circle Assessment System (henceforth Circle), which is a one-on-one assessment and

is available in English- and Spanish-language versions.

              Circle evaluates children's early language and literacy skills through three primary

components: rapid letter naming (a one-minute timed assessment task that evaluates the child's

alphabet knowledge), rapid vocabulary (a one-minute timed assessment task that evaluates the


                                                            
15
   The Dallas ISD encompasses the cities of Dallas, Cockrell Hill, Seagoville, Addison, and Wilmer, and parts of
Carrollton, Cedar Hill, DeSoto, Duncanville, Farmers Branch, Garland, Grand Prairie, Highland Park, Hutchins,
Lancaster and Mesquite.
16
     Numbers are based on official DISD enrollment statistics as of June 2018. See
https://mydata.dallasisd.org/SL/SD/ENROLLMENT/Enrollment.jsp for more information.

                                                               10
 
child's ability to name common objects), and phonological awareness (five-minute assessment that

evaluates the child's understanding of sounds, including rhyming, alliteration, syllabication, and

onset-rime).17 For the math outcomes, Circle evaluates children's math skills through seven

components: rote counting, shape naming, number discrimination, number naming, shape

discrimination, counting, and operations.

              DISD implements the Circle assessments three times per year: in the beginning of the

school year (September and October 2016), mid-school year (January and February 2017), and at

the end of the school year (April and May 2017). Hereafter, we refer to the beginning and the end

of the school year Circle assessments as Circle-1 and Circle-3, respectively. Because Circle-1 data

collection preceded the beginning of the text messaging program, we use its literacy and math

measures as covariates in our regression models to increase precision and to check the balance in

observed child characteristics. Circle-3 is our main outcome.

              Data about teachers comes from DISD administrative records that includes gender, race

and ethnicity, years of experience, days absent from work during the school year. As each child

can have multiple teachers, for each student we use mean characteristics of all their teachers during

the school year. Lastly, we obtain data on parents from the enrollment forms, which provide

information on their preferred texting language and highest educational attainment. We use data

on teacher and parent characteristics as covariates in our regression models to improve precision.

              Descriptive Statistics: Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics based on two samples:

the randomization sample (N=4,419) and the analytic sample (N=3,664), which includes all

observations that do not have missing literacy and math outcomes in both Circle-1 and Circle-3

assessments. As shown in Table 1 (panel A), most of the children in the randomization sample are

                                                            
17
  In the Spanish-language version of the Circle literacy test, the assessment for phonological awareness does not
include onset-rime.

                                                               11
 
Hispanic (78 percent) followed by black (18 percent), two percent are white, and one percent are

Asian. Ninety-five percent of the randomization sample is economically disadvantaged, and the

average age among children is 4.56 years. These demographic characteristics are similar to those

of the population of DISD pre-kindergarten students, except that Hispanic children are slightly

overrepresented, and black and white children are slightly underrepresented.

              Table 1 also shows the raw Circle-1 literacy and math test scores, which we standardize

for the analysis. On average, children name 6.03 letters in one minute of the rapid letter naming

assessment, identify 10.68 objects in one minute of the rapid vocabulary assessment, and correctly

answer 10.39 items in the phonological awareness assessment. For reference, the maximum score

in the rapid letter naming assessment is 52 (i.e., the 26 lower-case and 26 upper-case letters in the

alphabet); in the rapid vocabulary assessment the maximum score is 55 objects named with

vocabulary; and in the phonological awareness assessment the maximum score is 28 points across

the four subtasks (i.e., nine in rhyming, seven in alliteration, seven in syllabication, and five in

onset-rime). The children in our sample had rapid letter naming and rapid vocabulary scores lower

than age-appropriate standards, and phonological awareness scores higher than age-appropriate

standards.18 For the math test scores, on average, children in our sample score: 0.61 points on rote

counting, 3.12 points on shape naming, 1.43 points on number discrimination, 1.43 points on

number naming, 4.48 points on shape discrimination, 2.70 points on counting, and 0.91 points on

operations. These scores are consistently lower than age-appropriate standards.19

                                                            
18
   According to the CIRCLE user guide of 2016-17, the benchmarks for English-speaking children between ages four
and 4.5 are 8 letters for rapid letter naming, 16 items for rapid vocabulary, and 8 points for phonological awareness;
for their Spanish-speaking counterparts, the benchmarks are 6 letters, 12 items, and 5 points, respectively. See
Children's Learning Institute. (2016). CIRCLE progress monitoring: User guide 2016-17. Houston, TX: Children's
Learning                 Institute.              Retrieved                from:               https://cliengage.org/user-
guides/CIRCLE_Progress_Monitoring_User_Guide_91416.pdf.
19
   According to the CIRCLE user guide of 2016-17, the benchmarks for both English and Spanish-speaking children
between ages four and 4.5 are 2 points for rote counting, 4 points for shape naming, 2 points for number discrimination,
3 points for number naming, 5 points for shape discrimination, 4 points for counting, and 3 points for operations.

                                                               12
 
        Panels B and C of Table 1 show parent and teacher characteristics, respectively. On

average, parents tend to have relatively low levels of educational attainment. In the randomization

sample, 32 percent of parents have less than a high school degree, 32 percent have a high school

degree, and only 28 percent have completed at least some college. Fifty-seven percent of parents

chose to receive text messages in English and the remaining 43 percent chose to receive them in

Spanish. Three-quarters of the teachers are female, with an average teaching experience in the

district of 7.79 years. The racial and ethnic demographics of teachers differ from their students: 43

percent are black, 22 percent are Hispanic, and 32 percent are non-Hispanic white.


EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

        We estimate the treatment effect of the MidWeek and Weekend programs compared to the

control Weekday program using the following model specification:

                                                                                           (1)

where     is the outcome of interest of child i in randomization block . The outcomes are Circle-

3 literacy and mathematics outcomes. We standardize both overall scores and individual

components (e.g., rapid letter naming, shape discrimination, etc.) to have a standard deviation of

one and a mean of zero. We standardize the literacy assessments within assessment language

because of language specific assessment differences. The variables                  and

are binary indicators for whether a parent received the MidWeek or the Weekend programs,

respectively, in comparison to the original Weekday program.          is a vector of covariates that

includes the child, parent, and teacher characteristics. These covariates include: the child's age,

gender, race and ethnicity, whether they are economically disadvantaged, and their Circle-1

literacy and mathematics outcomes, which were measured before the text messaging programs

began; the parents' highest educational attainment; and the averaged characteristics of a child's

                                                 13
 
teachers, including their gender, race and ethnicity, and days absent from work during the school

year.     indicates randomization block fixed effects and         is a child-level error-term. We cluster

standard errors at the randomization block level.

          The coefficients of interest are    and        as they measure the causal effects of receiving

the MidWeek or the Weekend programs compared to the original Weekday program. To explore

heterogeneity of these treatment effects, we also estimate equation (1) in the lower half and upper

half of the respective Circle-1 distribution. For literacy outcomes, we split the sample based on the

distribution of overall literacy score, and for math outcomes, we split the sample based on the

distribution of the overall math score.

          Randomization Checks: In a randomized control trial, the characteristics of the treatment

groups should not differ systematically. Systematic differences among the treatment groups could

potentially bias the estimated treatment effects. Therefore, we conduct a series of randomization

checks for all covariates to evaluate covariate balance. That is, we estimate the following

randomization block fixed effect models for each of our child, parent, and teacher covariates:

                                                                                           (2).

          Small and statistically insignificant values for the coefficients of the treatment indicators

    and      would indicate a successful randomization. We present results of the randomization

checks in Table 2 separately for the randomization sample and the analytic sample. The results

provide evidence that the randomization was successful. Of the 84 point estimates using the

randomization sample, only three coefficients are significant at the five percent level or less, and

two coefficients are significant at the ten percent level or less. Of the 64 point estimates using the

analytic sample, one coefficient is significant at the five percent level or less, and three coefficients

are significant at the ten percent level or less. This number of statistically significant point


                                                    14
 
estimates can be expected to be produced by chance. Moreover, tests for joint significance using

seemingly unrelated regressions, as shown in the bottom of Panel C of Table 2, fail to reject the

null hypothesis that the coefficients of the treatments across the covariates are jointly equal to zero.

        Attrition Analysis: We restrict our analytic sample to include only the children that have

all Circle-1 and Circle-3 literacy and math components. If attrition is related to the treatment

conditions, the estimated effects would be biased. For example, if assessment completion is higher

for low-performing children whose parents received the Weekend program, compared to children

whose parents received the Weekday program, then the estimated effect of the Weekend program

compared to the Weekday program could be biased upward. To assess systematic attrition

differences between the programs, we use the following a randomization block fixed effects

regression model:

                                                                                        (3)

where      is a binary variable, which equals 1 if an observation is not included in the analytic

sample and 0 otherwise. Statistically insignificant values for the coefficients          and     would

indicate that neither treatment group is more likely to experience attrition. We also estimate this

model in the upper and lower halves of the Circle-1 literacy and mathematics distribution. Table

3 shows the estimates for this analysis. The results provide evidence that selective attrition is not

a problem in our study. None of the estimated coefficients of the MidWeek and Weekend programs

are statistically significant, nor are these coefficients significantly different from each other.


RESULTS

        Table 4 presents results for aggregate Circle-3 scores. Panel A reports the treatment effects

on literacy outcomes. Although we do not find statistically significant differences for the overall

sample, we do find that children who start the year in the lower half of literacy distribution benefit

                                                  15
 
more from the Weekend program. Initially lower-achieving children whose parents received the

text messages over the weekend (e.g., Friday, Saturday, and Sunday) scored, on average, 0.061

standard deviations (SDs) higher than similar children whose parents received the texts on

Monday, Thursday, and Friday. Since the coefficient of the Weekend program is also significantly

larger in magnitude than of the MidWeek program, this result shows that sending texts on the

weekend rather than on consecutive days is more beneficial to lower-skilled children.

       Panel B of Table 4 provides the results for the math assessment. In this case, the Weekend

program is significantly more effective than the original Weekday program for the full sample,

though the effect is again driven only by initially lower achieving children. Children whose parents

received text messages on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday scored, on average, 0.032 SDs higher on

the math assessment than children whose parents received texts during the week. Children who

were initially in the lower half of test scores showed a differential gain of 0.053 SDs in their math

score if their parents received texts on weekends, while children in the upper half of the distribution

showed no such differential improvements.

       To further explore the program effects, we assess the results for the literacy and math

assessment components. Table 5 reports the results for the three components of Circle-3 literacy:

rapid letter naming, rapid vocabulary, and phonological awareness. We find that the results for

literacy are mostly driven by improvements in rapid letter naming, the least advanced skill.

Overall, children whose parents received the Weekend program scored, on average, 0.112 SDs

higher in rapid letter naming than children whose parents received the Weekday program. These

gains in literacy are again more pronounced for children in the lower half of Circle-1 literacy

scores. Lower-skilled children's rapid letter naming scores, on average, increased by 0.167 SDs,

while the scores of children in the upper half only marginally increased by 0.073 SDs compared



                                                  16
 
to children in the Weekday program. Furthering evidence of heterogeneity, initially higher

performing children whose parents received the Weekend program scored lower in phonological

awareness, which is the more difficult skill, than children whose parents received the Weekday

program.20

              Table 6 presents results for the math components: rote counting, shape naming, number

discrimination, number naming, shape discrimination, counting, and operations. The results

provide evidence that rote counting and shape naming drive the overall math effects reported in

panel B of Table 4. Children whose parent received the Weekend program surpassed children

whose parents received the Weekday program by 0.069 SDs and 0.102 SDs, respectively. The

treatment effects are greater for children who started the school year in the lower half of Circle-1

overall math, as these children had math gains of 0.093 SDs in rote counting and 0.148 SDs in

shape naming. The MidWeek program has a significant positive effect on shape naming (0.060

SDs), which is largely driven by children in the lower half of the math baseline distribution (0.124

SDs). This suggests that spacing drives some of the weekend effects on the math components.

Finally, the Weekend and the MidWeek programs both appear to reduce math scores on operations

for children who started the school year in the upper half of the math skill baseline distribution by

0.080 and 0.099 SDs, respectively, compared to the Weekday program.

              Overall, these results suggest that sending text messages to parents during the weekend is

more beneficial to the skill development of their children than sending text messages during the

week, especially for initially lower performing students. However, our results also suggest that




                                                            
20
  Most of the sample of parents had a high school degree or less (69 percent of the sample). If we assess the effects
separately for this group relative to more educated parents, we find consistent though not as strong results. The point
estimates for the differential effects of weekend tests are 0.25 SDs for low educated parents and -0.50 SDs for higher
educated parents for literacy. The corresponding numbers for math are 0.02 SDs and 0.01 SDs.

                                                               17
 
weekend texts may not be as effective as weekday texts for children in upper half of the baseline

skill distribution and for some higher order skills, such as, phonological awareness and operations.


ROBUSTNESS CHECKS

       All results reported from Tables 4 through 6 use pre-school site fixed effects as well as

covariates that capture child, parent, and average teacher characteristics. However, in a

randomized control trial in which randomization has been successful, the characteristics of study

participants should not significantly differ between different treatment arms. In turn, this means

that we do not expect treatment effects to change when covariates are removed from the models

used for the above analysis. With this in mind, we report in Table A1 some robustness checks of

our main results reported in Table 4 by estimating two additional models without control variables

(shown in models 2 and 3). As observed in Table A1, the point estimates remain largely stable

across model specifications.


CONCLUSION

       This study addresses the question of when parenting support works best in an early

childhood text messaging experiment and speaks to the importance of behavioral barriers in

parenting. We compare three identical programs aiming to improve parent-child interactions that

are sent on different days of the week. The goal is to assess whether the messages provide better

supports on more challenging days, such as weekdays, or on days that parents are more likely to

be free, such as weekends. Our results suggest that sending the program on weekends increases

children's literacy and math development in comparison to the program during the week, driven

by the differential effects for initially lower performing students. We find some weaker evidence




                                                18
 
that the Weekend program may be less effective than the weekday program for initially higher

performing students.

        The results provide evidence that the timing of parenting support programs matters. Parents

may benefit more from supports when they have the time and other distractions are not so high

that they are insurmountable but are high enough that programs aimed to reduce the barriers have

leverage. While we were not able to categorize parents by their work hours and competing

demands, and while students initial test performance is likely only a weak or moderate proxy for

parenting practices, by separating the results based on the children's initial performance we were

able to provide some evidence that delivering parenting supports at times when parents have lighter

cognitive loads rather than when their needs are highest may be more beneficial especially for the

most challenged parents. For parents facing lesser challenges, this approach is not necessarily

better and targeting towards their more difficult times may show some benefits, but this differential

is not as strong.

        The importance of timing has implications for the design of parenting interventions.

Although concentrated parenting programs, such as home visiting programs and parenting courses,

can convey the same amount if not more information than text messaging programs, parents may

not be able to remember this advice in the moment they interact with their children or may struggle

to implement the advice due to behavioral constraints. Text messaging programs may help

overcome these constraints by providing recurring support in small doses and more closely

targeting times of parental engagement in skill building activities.

        As time use patterns depend on work and non-work demands, the optimal timing of

program delivery differs for different parents. Hence, our finding further highlights the benefits of

differentiating programs beyond individualizing the difficulty of activities (Doss et al., in press)



                                                 19
 
and provides additional evidence that flexible light-touch programs that can differentiate to

parental need and child skill level may be particularly promising avenues for program

improvement.




                                             20
 
References

Abbott, D., Lundin, J., and Ong, F. (Eds.) (2008). California preschool learning foundations (Vol.
1). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Education.

Aos, S., Lieb, R., Mayfield, J., Miller, M., and Pennucci, A. (2004). Benefits and costs of
prevention and early intervention programs for youth. Olympia, WA: Washington State Institute
for Public Policy.

Avery, C., and Kane, T.J. (2004). Student perceptions of college opportunities. The Boston
COACH Program. In Caroline Hoxby (ed.), College choices: The economics of where to go, when
to go, and how to pay for it, pp. 355-394, Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Bergman, P. (2015). Parent-child information frictions and human capital investment: Evidence
from a field experiment. CESifo Working Paper Series No. 5391. Retrieved from
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2622034.

Bergman, P., and Chan E.W. (2017). Leveraging parents through technology: the impact of high-
frequency information on student achievement. The Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.

Bettinger, E.P., Long, B.T., Oreopoulos, P., and Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). The role of application
assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA experiment.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), pp. 1205-1242.

Bianchi, S.M. (2000). Maternal employment and time with children: Dramatic change or
surprising continuity? Demography, 37(4), pp. 401-414.

Bianchi, S.M. (2011). Changing families, changing workplaces. the future of children. Future
Child, 21(2), pp. 15-36.

Castleman, B.L., and Page L.C. (2015). Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages and
peer mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high school graduates? Journal
of Economic Behavior & Organization, 115, pp. 144-160.

Castleman, B.L., and Page L.C. (2016). Freshman Year Financial Aid Nudges. The Journal of
Human Resources, 51(2), pp. 389-415.

Cohen, G. L., Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change: Self-affirmation and social
psychological intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, pp. 333-371.

Cortes, K., Fricke, H, Loeb, S, and Song, D. (2018). Too little or too much? Actionable advice in
an early-childhood text messaging experiment. NBER Working Paper No. 24827. Retrieved from
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24827.

Del Boca, D., Flinn C., Wiswall M. (2014). Household Choices and Child Development. The
Review of Economic Studies, 81(1), pp. 137-185.



                                               21
 
Del Bono, E., Francesconi, M., Kelly, Y., Sacker, A. (2016). Early maternal time investment and
early child outcomes. The Economic Journal, 126(596), pp. F96-F135

DellaVigna, S. (2009). Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field. Journal of Economic
Literature, 47(2), pp. 315-372.

Doss, C., Fahle, E., Loeb, S., and York, B. (in press). Supporting parenting through differentiated
and personalized text messaging: Testing effects on learning during kindergarten. The Journal of
Human Resources.

Duncan, G.J., Ludwig, J., and Magnuson, K.A. (2010). Child development. In Phillip B. Levine
and David J. Zimmerman (eds.), Targeting investments in children: Fighting poverty when
resources are limited, pp. 27-58. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Fox, L., Han, W.-J., Ruhm, C., and Waldfogel, J. (2013). Time for children: Trends in the
employment patterns of parents, 1967­2009. Demography, 50(1), pp. 25-49.

Fricke, H., Grogger, J., and Steinmayr, A. (2018). Exposure to academic fields and major choice.
Economics of Education Review, 64(June), pp. 199-213

Fricke, H., Kalogrides, D., and Loeb, S. (2018). It's too annoying: Who drops out of educational
text messaging programs and why. Economics Letters, 173, pp. 39-43.

Gabraix, X. (2017). Behavioral Inattention. NBER Working Paper No. 24096. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/w24096.pdf.

Galinsky, E., Sakai, K., and Wigton, T. (2011). Workplace flexibility: From research to action.
The Future of Children, 21(2), pp. 141-161.

Gardner, F., Burton, J., and Klimes, I. (2006). Randomized controlled trial of parenting
intervention in the voluntary sector for reducing child conduct problems: outcomes and
mechanisms of change. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47(11), pp. 1123-1132.

Greenman, E., Bodovski, K., and Reed, K. (2011). Neighborhood characteristics, parental
practices and children's math achievement in elementary school. Social Science Research, 40(5),
pp. 1434-44.

Grodsky, E., and Jones, M.T. (2007). Real and imagined barriers to college entry: Perceptions of
cost. Social Science Research, 36(2), pp. 745-766.

Groot, B., Sanders, M., Rogers, T., and Bloomenthal, E. (2017). I get by with a little help from my
friends: Two field experiments on social support and attendance in further education colleges in
the       UK.       The       Behavioral       Insights       Team.         Retrieved          from:
http://38r8om2xjhhl25mw24492dir.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/04/Study-Supporter-WP_April-2017.pdf

Guryan, J., Hurst E., and Kearney M. (2008). Parental education and parental time with children.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(3), pp. 23-46.

                                                22
 
Hall, C. C., Zhao, J., and Shafir, E. (2014). Self-affirmation among the poor: cognitive and
behavioral implications. Psychological Science, 25(2), pp. 619-625.

Hastings, J.S., and Weinstein, J.M. (2008). Information, school choice, and academic achievement:
Evidence from two experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), pp. 1373-1414.

Heiland, F., Price, J. and Wilson, R. (2014). Maternal employment and time investments in
children, Review of the Economics of the Household, 15(1), pp. 53-67.

Hsin, A., and Felfe, C. (2014). When does time matter? Maternal employment, children's time
with parents, and child development. Demography, 51(5), pp. 1867-1894.

Iyengar, S., and Lepper, M. (2000). When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too much of
a good thing? Personality & Social Psychology, 79(6), pp. 995-1006.

Karlan, D., McConnell, M., Mullainathan, S., and Zinman, J. (2016). Getting to the Top of Mind:
How Reminders Increase Saving. Management Science, 62(12), pp. 3393-3672.

Karoly, L.A., Greenwood, P.W., Everingham, S.S., Houbé, J., Rydell, C.P., and Chiesa, J. (1998).
Investing in our children: What we know and don't know about the costs and benefits of early
childhood interventions. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.

Kraft, M.A., and Rogers, T. (2015). The underutilized potential of teacher-to-parent
communication: Evidence from a field experiment. Economics of Education Review, 47(2015), pp.
49-63.

Lonigan, C.J., and Shanahan, T. (2009). Developing early literacy: Report of the National Early
Literacy Panel. National Institute for Literacy. Retrieved from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED508381.

Mani, A., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., and Zhao, J. (2013). Poverty Impedes Cognitive Function.
Science, 341(6149), pp. 976-980.

Mayer, S. E., Kalil, A., Oreopoulos, P., and Gallegos, S. (2019). Using behavioral insights to
increase parental engagement: The parents and children together intervention. The Journal of
Human Resources, forthcoming.

Page, L. C. and Castleman, B. and Meyer, K. (2018). Customized Nudging to Improve FAFSA
Completion       and     Income     Verification. Working     Paper.    Retrieved   from
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2854345.

Patterson, G.R., Reid, J.B., and Dishion, T.J. (1992). Antisocial boys: A social interactional
approach. Eugene, OR: Castalia.

Reese, E., Sparks, A., and Leyva, L. (2010). A review of parent interventions for preschool
children's language and emergent literacy. Journal of Early Childhood Literacy, 10(1), pp. 97-
117.



                                               23
 
Robinson, C. D., Lee, M. G., Dearing, E., and Rogers, T. (2018). Reducing student absenteeism in
the early grades by targeting parental beliefs. American Educational Research Journal. Retrieved
from http://journals.sagepub.com/toc/aer/0/0.

Rogers, T., and Feller, A. (2016). Reducing student absences at scale. Working Paper. Retrieved
from http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/todd_rogers/files/reducing.pdf.

Rogers, T., and Feller, A. (2018). Reducing student absences at scale by targeting parents'
misbeliefs. Nature: Human Behavior, 2(2018), pp. 335-342.

Sanders, M.R., Markie-Dadds, C., Tully, L.A., and Bor, W. (2000). The triple P-positive parenting
program: A comparison of enhanced, standard, and self-directed behavioral family intervention
for parents of children with early onset conduct problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 68(4), pp. 624-640.

Sayer L.C., Gauthier A.H., and Furstenberg F.F. Jr. (2004). Educational differences in parents'
time with children: Cross-national variations. Journal of Marriage and Family, 66(5), pp. 1152-
1169.

Shah, A., Mullainathan, S., and Shafir, E. (2012). The Consequences of Having Too Little."
Science, 338(6107), pp. 682-685.

Shiv, B. and Fedorikhin, A. (1999). Heart and Mind in Conflict: The Interplay of Affect and
Cognition in Consumer Decision Making. Journal of Consumer Research, 26(3), pp. 278-292.

Smythe-Leistico, K., and Page, L. C. (2018). Connect-text: leveraging text-message
communication to mitigate chronic absenteeism and improve parental engagement in the earliest
years of schooling. Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk, 23(1-2), pp. 139-152.

Stewart, J. (2010). The timing of maternal work and time with children. Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 64(1), pp. 181-200.

Sweeney, A. M., and Moyer, A. (2014). Self-affirmation and responses to health messages: A
meta-analysis on intentions and behavior. Health Psychology, 34(2), pp. 149-159.

Texas Education Agency. (2015). Texas Prekindergarten Guidelines. Retrieved from
https://tea.texas.gov/index2.aspx?id=2147495508.

Thaler, R.H., and Sunstein, C.R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and
happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Thomsen, M.K. 2015. Parental time investments in children: Evidence from Denmark. Acta
Sociologica, 58(3), pp. 249-263.

Valant, J., and Loeb, S. (2014). Information, choice, and decision-making: Field experiments with
adult and student school choosers. Working Paper.



                                               24
 
Van Zeijl, J., Mesman, J., Van Ijzendoorn, M.H., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M.J., Juffer, F., Stolk,
and Alink, L.R.A. (2006). Attachment-based intervention for enhancing sensitive discipline in
mothers of 1- to 3-year-old children at risk for externalizing behavior problems: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74(6), pp. 994-1005.

Webster-Stratton, C. (1992). The Incredible Years: Basic program manual. Seattle, WA: The
Incredible Years.

Williams, J. and Boushey, H. (2010). The three faces of work-family conflict: The poor, the
professionals,     and    the   missing    middle.    Working  Paper.    Retrieved    from
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2126314.

York, B.N., Loeb, S., and Doss, C. (in press). One step at a time: The effects of an early literacy
text messaging program for parents of preschoolers. The Journal of Human Resources.




                                                25
 
                   Table 1: Summary Statistics - Means and Standard Deviations
                                            Randomization Sample           Circle-3 Test Sample*
Panel A: Children Characteristics
Age (in years)                                        4.56                          4.57
                                                     (0.29)                        (0.29)
Female                                                0.50                          0.51
Race and ethnicity
   Black                                             0.18                           0.16
   Hispanic                                          0.78                           0.80
   Asian                                             0.01                           0.01
   White                                             0.02                           0.02
   Other**                                           0.01                           0.01
Low socioeconomic status                             0.95                           0.96
Circle-1 Literacy assessment scoresa
   Rapid Letter Naming                                6.03                          6.08
                                                     (8.49)                        (8.74)
   Missing Rapid Letter Naming                        0.06                          0.00
   Rapid Vocabulary                                  10.68                         10.63
                                                     (6.97)                        (7.22)
   Missing Rapid Vocabulary                           0.06                          0.00
   Phonetic Awareness                                10.39                         10.47
                                                     (5.54)                        (5.65)
   Missing Phonetic Awareness                         0.07                          0.00

Circle-1 Math assessment (raw) scoresa
    Rote Counting                                     0.61                          0.61
                                                     (0.64)                        (0.66)
   Missing Rote Counting                              0.07                          0.00
   Shape Naming                                       3.12                          3.15
                                                     (1.56)                        (1.61)
   Missing Shape Naming                               0.06                          0.00
   Number Discrimination                              1.43                          1.44
                                                     (0.73)                        (0.75)
   Missing Number Discrimination                      0.06                          0.00
   Number Naming                                      1.43                          1.44
                                                     (0.73)                        (0.75)
   Missing Number Naming                              0.06                          0.00
   Shape Discrimination                               4.48                          4.51
                                                     (1.58)                        (1.63)
   Missing Shape Discrimination                       0.07                          0.00
   Counting                                           2.70                          2.73
                                                     (1.55)                        (1.61)
   Missing Counting                                   0.07                          0.00
   Operations                                         0.91                          0.91
                                                     (1.03)                        (1.08)
   Missing Operations                                 0.08                          0.00

                                 Observations          4,419                        3,664
Notes: Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations for continuous variables. *Circle-3 test
sample is conditioned on having Circle-1 test scores. **Includes American Indian, Native American,
Pacific Islander, two or more races, or other race. aMissing data values imputed to be the mean.
b
  Missing data values set to zero.
               Table 1 (continued): Summary Statistics - Means and Standard Deviations
                                              Randomization Sample            Circle-3 Test Sample*
Panel B: Parental Characteristics
Highest education levelb
   Less than high school                               0.32                              0.33
   High school                                         0.32                              0.32
   Some college                                        0.19                              0.19
   Associate degree                                    0.04                              0.04
   Bachelor's degree                                   0.03                              0.03
   Graduate degree                                     0.02                              0.02
   Missing education                                   0.07                              0.08
Texting language
   English                                             0.57                              0.55
   Spanish                                             0.43                              0.45

Panel C: Teacher Characteristics
Average female                                         0.75                              0.75
Average race and ethnicity
   Black                                               0.43                            0.45
   Hispanic                                            0.22                            0.22
   White                                               0.32                            0.32
Average missing teacher demographics                   0.00                            0.00
Average experience (in years)                          7.79                            7.85
                                                      (5.92)                          (6.01)
Average days absent                                    9.39                            9.13
                                                      (9.16)                          (9.03)
Average missing absence information                    0.08                            0.07
                                                      (0.19)                          (0.17)
                                Observations            4,419                          3,664
Notes: Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations for continuous variables. *Circle-3 test sample
is conditioned on having Circle-1 test scores. **Includes American Indian, Native American, Pacific
Islander, two or more races, or other race. aMissing data values imputed to be the mean. bMissing data
values set to zero.
                                 Table 2: Randomization Checks - The Effect of Treatment Status on Pre-Treatment Covariates by the Randomization and Circle-3 Test Sample
Panel A: Regressions of Child Characteristics on Treatment Status (Weekday program is the omitted category in all regressions)
                                                                            Randomization Sample (N=4,419)                                   Circle-3 Test Sample* (N=3,664)
                                                                 MidWeek          Weekend        Weekend vs. MidWeek              MidWeek           Weekend        Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                                                 Program          Program           t-test (p-value)              Program           Program           t-test (p-value)
Age (in years)                                                     0.013            0.008                 0.642                     0.008             0.001                 0.568
                                                                  (0.012)          (0.011)                                         (0.013)           (0.012)
Female                                                             -0.003           -0.012                0.661                     -0.000            -0.001                0.971
                                                                  (0.019)          (0.020)                                         (0.021)           (0.022)
Black                                                              0.017            0.009                 0.400                    0.021*             0.014                 0.505
                                                                  (0.010)          (0.011)                                         (0.011)           (0.011)
Hispanic                                                           -0.015           -0.002                0.223                     -0.019            -0.009                0.373
                                                                  (0.012)          (0.012)                                         (0.013)           (0.013)
Asian                                                              -0.001           -0.005                0.286                     -0.004            -0.005                0.572
                                                                  (0.005)          (0.004)                                         (0.004)           (0.004)
White                                                              -0.006           -0.005                0.858                     -0.006            -0.006                0.918
                                                                  (0.005)          (0.005)                                         (0.006)           (0.006)
Other**                                                            0.001            0.000                 0.510                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                  (0.001)          (0.001)
Low socioeconomic status                                           0.002            0.013                 0.243                     0.003             0.002                 0.976
                                                                  (0.008)          (0.009)                                         (0.007)           (0.009)
                                 a,b
Rapid Letter Naming                                                0.348            0.021                 0.288                     0.404             0.108                 0.405
                                                                  (0.297)          (0.313)                                         (0.336)           (0.385)
                                                 c
Rapid Letter Naming missing                                        -0.003           -0.008                0.542                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                  (0.008)          (0.008)
Rapid Vocabularya,b                                                0.225            0.056                 0.524                     0.143             -0.008                0.602
                                                                  (0.265)          (0.249)                                         (0.295)           (0.292)
                                             c
Rapid Vocabulary missing                                           -0.004           0.001                 0.543                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                  (0.009)          (0.009)
Phonological Awarenessa,b                                          0.037            0.084                 0.811                     -0.050            0.006                 0.795
                                                                  (0.199)          (0.194)                                         (0.218)           (0.220)
                             c
Phonological Awareness missing                                     -0.001           0.003                 0.675                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                  (0.009)          (0.009)
                 a,b
Rote Counting                                                      0.002            -0.016                0.407                     0.001             -0.006                0.805
                                                                  (0.022)          (0.022)                                         (0.026)           (0.026)
                                   c
Rote Counting missing                                              -0.003           -0.006                0.734                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                  (0.008)          (0.009)
                 a,b
Shape Naming                                                     0.117**            0.042                 0.192                    0.122*             0.073                 0.463
                                                                 (0.059)           (0.058)                                         (0.068)           (0.072)
                                   c
Shape Naming missing                                              -0.005            -0.001                0.637                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                 (0.008)           (0.009)
                                       a,b
Number Discrimination                                            0.059**            0.025                 0.227                     0.043             0.009                 0.305
                                                                 (0.028)           (0.031)                                         (0.033)           (0.034)
                                                     c
Number Discrimination missing                                     -0.006            -0.000                0.546                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                 (0.008)           (0.009)
                       a,b
Number Naming                                                     0.098*            0.084                 0.792                    0.117*             0.089                 0.643
                                                                 (0.052)           (0.054)                                         (0.060)           (0.060)
                                         c
Number Naming missing                                             -0.001            -0.003                0.775                      ---               ---                     ---
                                                                 (0.008)           (0.009)
                    a,b
Shape Discrimination                                             0.109**            0.042                 0.279                     0.077             0.042                 0.629
                                                                 (0.054)           (0.063)                                         (0.063)           (0.076)
                                                 c
Shape Discrimination missing                                      -0.005            0.003                 0.433                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                 (0.008)           (0.009)
Countinga,b                                                        0.033            0.026                 0.909                     0.033             0.041                 0.911
                                                                  (0.054)          (0.054)                                         (0.063)           (0.064)
Counting missingc                                                  -0.006           0.004                 0.294                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                  (0.009)          (0.010)
           a,b
Operations                                                         0.020            -0.010                0.394                     0.031             0.001                 0.471
                                                                  (0.037)          (0.039)                                         (0.042)           (0.046)
                             c
Operations missing                                                 -0.005           -0.000                0.605                       ---               ---                    ---
                                                                  (0.009)          (0.010)

Notes: Each row represents a separate regression model (only the coefficients of the treatments status are reported). All regressions include pre-school site fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the randomization block site level. The omitted reference group in all regressions is the original texting program of Monday/Wednesday/Friday. *Circle-3 test
sample is conditioned on having Circle-1 and Circle-3 literacy and math test scores. **Includes American Indian, Native American, Pacific Islander, two or more races, or other race.
a
  Missing data values imputed to be the mean and all regressions include a dummy variable for categorical variables with missing values. bAll Circle-1 test score variables are in standard
                c
deviation units. No students included with missing information in Circle-3 test sample. Statistical significance levels: *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.
                    Table 2 (continued): Randomization Checks - The Effect of Treatment Status on Pre-Treatment Covariates by the Randomization and Circle-3 Test Sample
Panel B: Regressions of Parental Characteristics on Treatment Status (Weekday program is the omitted category in all regressions)
                                                   Randomization Sample (N=4,419)                                                        Circle-3 Test Sample* (N=3,664)
                                MidWeek              Weekend                Weekend vs. MidWeek                     MidWeek            Weekend                   Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                Program              Program                   t-test (p-value)                     Program            Program                      t-test (p-value)
Less than high school              0.007               0.021                         0.356                            0.003              0.024                           0.263
                                  (0.016)             (0.017)                                                        (0.018)            (0.018)
High school                       -0.007              -0.006                         0.947                            0.001             -0.004                           0.799
                                  (0.018)             (0.017)                                                        (0.020)            (0.019)
Some college                       0.006               0.005                         0.898                            0.000              0.013                           0.374
                                  (0.015)             (0.015)                                                        (0.017)            (0.017)
Associate degree                   0.003               0.002                         0.822                            0.002             -0.001                           0.706
                                  (0.007)             (0.007)                                                        (0.008)            (0.008)
Bachelor's degree                 -0.007              -0.010                         0.590                           -0.004            -0.013**                          0.177
                                  (0.007)             (0.006)                                                        (0.007)            (0.007)
Graduate degree                   -0.004              -0.007                         0.647                           -0.000             -0.008                           0.148
                                  (0.006)             (0.006)                                                        (0.007)            (0.006)
Missing education                  0.002              -0.004                         0.562                           -0.002             -0.011                           0.482
                                  (0.010)             (0.010)                                                        (0.012)            (0.011)
Notes: Each row represents a separate regression model (only the coefficients of the treatments status are reported). All regressions include randomization block fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the randomization block level. The omitted reference group in all regressions is the original texting program of Monday/Wednesday/Friday. *Circle-3 test sample is conditioned on
having Circle-1 and Circle-3 literacy and math test scores. Statistical significance levels: *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.
        Table 2 (continued): Randomization Checks - The Effect of Treatment Status on Pre-Treatment Covariates by the Randomization and Circle-3 Test Samples
Panel C: Regressions of Teacher Characteristics on Treatment Status (Weekday program is the omitted category in all regressions)
                                                            Randomization Sample (N=4,419)                                     Circle-3 Test Sample* (N=3,664)
                                                MidWeek          Weekend         Weekend vs. MidWeek                MidWeek          Weekend         Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                                 Program          Program             t-test (p-value)              Program           Program            t-test (p-value)
Ave. female                                        -0.001           0.000                   0.894                     -0.001            0.005                  0.370
                                                  (0.005)          (0.005)                                           (0.006)           (0.006)
Ave. black                                         -0.004           -0.007                 0.650                      -0.003            -0.004                0.916
                                                  (0.006)          (0.006)                                           (0.006)           (0.008)
Ave Hispanic                                       -0.004           0.003                  0.351                      -0.006            -0.006                0.931
                                                  (0.008)          (0.009)                                           (0.009)           (0.010)
Ave. white                                         0.008            0.007                  0.822                      0.009             0.012                 0.635
                                                  (0.006)          (0.008)                                           (0.007)           (0.007)
Ave. experience                                    0.121            0.068                  0.661                      0.182             0.096                 0.505
                                                  (0.109)          (0.130)                                           (0.120)           (0.143)
Ave. days absent                                   -0.068           -0.193                 0.623                      -0.186            -0.362                0.479
                                                  (0.198)          (0.288)                                           (0.212)           (0.316)
Ave. missing absence info.                       -0.008*            -0.003                 0.320                      -0.002            -0.003                0.754
                                                  (0.005)          (0.005)                                           (0.005)           (0.005)
SUR Joint t-test (p-value)a                       0.918            0.914                                              0.810            0.740
Notes: Each row represents a separate regression model (only the coefficients of the treatments status are reported). All regressions include pre-school site fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the randomization block level. The omitted reference group in all regressions is the original texting program of Monday/Wednesday/Friday.
*Circle-3 test sample is conditioned on having Circle-1 and Circle-3 literacy and math test scores. aSeemingly Unrelated Regression t-test of joint significance of treatments
on student, parent, and teacher characteristics. Statistical significance levels: *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.
                       Table 3: Treatment Effects on Attrition in Circle-3 Test Sample -
                      Whether any Circle-3 Test Outcomes (Literacy and Math) are Missing

                                  MidWeek           Weekend          Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                  Program           Program             t-test (p-value)         Adj. R2       N
Entire sample                       -0.009           -0.003                  0.519                0.56       4,419
                                   (0.010)          (0.010)
By Pre-Treatment Literacy Score:a
   Lower half                      0.002               0.001                  0.929                0.39      2,051
                                  (0.016)            (0.015)
   Upper half                      -0.011             -0.010                  0.978                0.40      1,991
                                  (0.012)            (0.013)
By Pre-Treatment Mathematics Score:a
   Lower half                   0.002                 -0.000                  0.872                0.10      2,170
                               (0.014)               (0.014)
   Upper half                   -0.012                -0.004                  0.489                0.09      1,818
                               (0.013)               (0.014)
Notes: Each row represents a separate regression model (only the coefficients of the treatments status are
reported). All regressions include controls for student characteristics (age, gender, race/ethnicity, low-SES
status, and Circle-1 test scores), parental characteristics (highest educational attainment), teacher characteristics
(gender, race/ethnicity, years of experience, days absent, and days missing) and randomization block fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization block level. The omitted reference group in all
regressions is the original texting program Monday/Wednesday/Friday. aRegressions in samples split at medians
are based on student's Circle-1 tests prior to the intervention. Statistical significance levels: *p<0.10; **p<0.05;
***p<0.01.
        Table 4: Treatment Effects on Overall Circle-3 Skills Assessment Test (standardized)

                   Panel A: Language and Literacy Skills Assessment Test Results
                   MidWeek           Weekend         Weekend vs. MidWeek
                   Program           Program            t-test (p-value)          Adj. R2        N
Entire sample       -0.006             0.026                  0.220                 0.52       3,664
                   (0.025)            (0.022)
By Pre-Treatment Literacy Score:a
   Lower half       -0.037            0.061*                  0.024                 0.44       1,828
                   (0.039)            (0.034)
   Upper half       0.041              -0.006                 0.116                 0.51       1,836
                   (0.033)            (0.031)

                         Panel B: Mathematics Skills Assessment Test Results
                   MidWeek           Weekend         Weekend vs. MidWeek
                   Program           Program            t-test (p-value)          Adj. R2        N
Entire sample      0.001         0.032**                      0.071                 0.47       3,664
                  (0.016)         (0.015)
By Pre-Treatment Mathematics Score:a
   Lower half      0.007         0.053**                      0.144                 0.41       1,970
                  (0.028)         (0.027)
   Upper half      -0.020          -0.008                     0.440                 0.39       1,694
                  (0.016)         (0.015)

Notes: Each row represents a separate regression model (only the coefficients of the treatments status
are reported). All regressions include controls for student characteristics (age, gender, race/ethnicity,
low-SES status, and Circle-1 test scores), parental characteristics (highest educational attainment),
teacher characteristics (gender, race/ethnicity, years of experience, days absent, and days missing)
and randomization block fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization level. The
omitted reference group in all regressions is the original texting program Monday/Wednesday/Friday.
a
 Regressions in samples split at medians are based on student's Circle-1 tests prior to the intervention.
Statistical significance levels: *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.
                        Table 5: Treatment Effects on Circle-3 Language
             and Literacy Skills Assessment Test by Specific Sub-tests (standardized)
                                  Panel A: Rapid Letter Naming
                     MidWeek        Weekend      Weekend vs. MidWeek
                     Program        Program         t-test (p-value)         Adj. R2       N
Entire sample          0.023        0.112***              0.009                0.44      3,664
                      (0.032)        (0.029)
Lower half             -0.009       0.167***              0.002                0.37      1,828
                      (0.050)        (0.047)
Upper half             0.068         0.073*               0.893                0.45      1,836
                      (0.044)        (0.043)

                                Panel B: Rapid Vocabulary Naming
                     MidWeek        Weekend      Weekend vs. MidWeek
                     Program        Program          t-test (p-value)        Adj. R2       N
Entire sample          0.003          0.023               0.572                0.44      3,664
                      (0.034)        (0.032)
Lower half             -0.046         0.072               0.040                0.38      1,828
                      (0.055)        (0.047)
Upper half             0.049          -0.023              0.114                0.45      1,836
                      (0.047)        (0.048)

                                Panel C: Phonological Awareness
                     MidWeek        Weekend      Weekend vs. MidWeek
                     Program        Program         t-test (p-value)         Adj. R2       N
Entire sample          -0.044       -0.057*               0.700                0.41      3,664
                      (0.032)       (0.030)
Lower half             -0.055         -0.055              0.993                0.34      1,828
                      (0.049)        (0.049)
Upper half             0.006        -0.069*               0.086                0.37      1,836
                      (0.044)       (0.041)

Notes: All regressions include controls for student characteristics (age, gender, race/ethnicity,
low-SES status, and Circle-1 test scores), parental characteristics (highest educational
attainment), teacher characteristics (gender, race/ethnicity, years of experience, days absent
and days missing) and randomization block fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
randomization block level. The omitted reference group in all regressions is the original
texting program Monday/Wednesday/Friday. Regressions in samples split at medians are
based on student's Circle-1 literacy tests prior to the intervention. Phonological awareness is a
composite score of the following assessments: rhyming, alliteration, and syllabication.
Statistical significance levels: *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.
                                Table 6: Treatment Effects on Circle-3 Mathematics Skills Assessment Test by Specific Sub-tests (standardized)
                     MidWeek         Weekend      Weekend vs. MidWeek                                 MidWeek       Weekend      Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                                                                    2
                      Program        Program         t-test (p-value)       Adj. R       N             Program      Program         t-test (p-value)    Adj. R2         N
                                    Panel A: Rote Counting                                                                Panel E: Shape Discrimination
Entire sample          0.030         0.069**               0.212             0.29       3,664           -0.002        0.037               0.323              0.17     3,664
                      (0.032)         (0.033)                                                           (0.040)      (0.037)
Lower half             0.054          0.093*               0.463             0.27       1,970           -0.032        0.025               0.437              0.17     1,970
                      (0.053)         (0.052)                                                           (0.068)      (0.062)
Upper half             0.010          0.026                0.643             0.18       1,694            0.013        0.031               0.662              0.14     1,694
                      (0.038)         (0.038)                                                           (0.049)      (0.047)
                                    Panel B: Shape Naming                                                                       Panel F: Counting
Entire sample          0.060*        0.102***              0.198             0.31       3,664           -0.005        0.042               0.174              0.29     3,664
                      (0.033)         (0.034)                                                           (0.032)      (0.033)
Lower half            0.124**        0.148**               0.679             0.30       1,970            0.003        0.087               0.146              0.29     1,970
                      (0.060)         (0.060)                                                           (0.057)      (0.057)
Upper half             -0.033         0.011                0.190             0.21       1,694           -0.018       -0.007               0.778              0.17     1,694
                      (0.031)         (0.031)                                                           (0.039)      (0.040)

                                Panel C: Number Discrimination                                                                 Panel G: Operations
Entire sample          -0.026         -0.006               0.600             0.09       3,664           -0.062*      -0.037               0.478              0.30     3,664
                      (0.038)         (0.041)                                                           (0.033)      (0.035)
Lower half             -0.033         -0.001               0.657             0.08       1,970           -0.050       -0.020               0.634              0.25     1,970
                      (0.070)         (0.076)                                                           (0.058)      (0.055)
Upper half             -0.038         -0.012               0.441             0.14       1,694          -0.099**      -0.080*              0.690              0.28     1,694
                      (0.037)         (0.029)                                                           (0.044)      (0.046)

                                   Panel D: Number Naming
Entire sample          0.006          0.047                0.177             0.39       3,664
                      (0.030)         (0.029)
Lower half             -0.004         0.083                0.098             0.31       1,970
                      (0.051)         (0.050)
Upper half             -0.019         -0.027               0.808             0.30       1,694
                      (0.039)         (0.037)
Notes: All regressions include controls for student characteristics (age, gender, race/ethnicity, low-SES status, and Circle-1 test scores), parental characteristics (highest
educational attainment), teacher characteristics (gender, race/ethnicity, years of experience, days absent and days missing) and randomization block fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the randomization block level. The omitted reference group in all regressions is the original texting program Monday/Wednesday/Friday. Regressions in
samples split at medians are based on student's Circle-1 tests prior to the intervention. Statistical significance levels: *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.
            Table A1: Robustness Checks for Table 4 Results - Comparison of Regression Models
    Comparison of Regression Models for Treatment Effects on Overall Circle-3 Test Results (standardized)

Model 1: Table 4 Results: Randomization block fixed effects with full set of control variables including initial
Circle-1 assessment scores.
Model 2: Randomization block fixed effects with full set of control variables excluding initial Circle-1 assessment
scores.
Model 3: Only randomization block fixed effects and no additional control variables.

                                    Panel A: Entire sample - Overall Literacy
                                       Model 1                         Model 2                     Model 3
MidWeek Program                          -0.006                          0.016                      0.024
                                        (0.025)                         (0.027)                    (0.028)
Weekend Program                          0.026                           0.038                      0.038
                                        (0.022)                         (0.029)                    (0.030)
Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                          0.220                          0.461                       0.625
t-test (p-value)

N                                         3,664                          3,664                       3,664
         2
Adj. R                                     0.52                           0.31                       0.25


                                  Panel B: Entire sample - Overall Mathematics
                                        Model 1                       Model 2                      Model 3
MidWeek Program                           0.001                         0.020                       0.026
                                         (0.016)                       (0.019)                     (0.020)
Weekend Program                          0.032**                      0.045**                      0.046**
                                         (0.015)                       (0.021)                     (0.021)
Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                          0.071                          0.216                       0.315
t-test (p-value)

N                                         3,664                          3,664                       3,664
         2
Adj. R                                     0.47                           0.21                       0.17

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the randomization block level. The omitted reference group in all
regressions is the original texting program Monday/Wednesday/Friday. Statistical significance levels: *p<0.10;
**p<0.05; ***p<0.01.
                              Table A1 (continuation): Robustness Checks for Table 4 Results -
             Comparison of Regression Models for Treatment Effects on Overall Circle-3 Test Results (standardized)
Model 1: Table 4 Results: Randomization block fixed effects with full set of control variables including initial Circle-1
assessment scores.
Model 2: Randomization block fixed effects with full set of control variables excluding initial Circle-1 assessment scores.
Model 3: Only randomization block fixed effects and no additional control variables.

                                      Panel C: Literacy - By Pre-Treatment Literacy Score
                                                                      Lower half
                                        Model 1                          Model 2                         Model 3
MidWeek Program                          -0.037                           -0.017                          -0.003
                                        (0.039)                          (0.041)                         (0.042)
Weekend Program                         0.061*                           0.084**                         0.096**
                                        (0.034)                          (0.039)                         (0.038)

Weekend vs. MidWeek                      0.024                            0.026                            0.032
t-test (p-value)

N                                        1,828                            1,828                            1,828
         2
Adj. R                                    0.44                             0.31                            0.29
                                                                      Upper half
                                        Model 1                         Model 2                          Model 3
MidWeek Program                           0.041                         0.078**                          0.078**
                                        (0.033)                         (0.036)                          (0.038)
Weekend Program                          -0.006                          -0.003                           -0.006
                                        (0.031)                         (0.037)                          (0.037)

Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                         0.116                            0.019                            0.014
t-test (p-value)

N                                        1,836                            1,836                            1,836
         2
Adj. R                                    0.51                             0.35                            0.33
                                 Panel D: Mathematics - By Pre-Treatment Mathematics Score
                                                                     Lower half
                                       Model 1                         Model 2                           Model 3
MidWeek Program                          0.007                          0.014                             0.022
                                        (0.028)                        (0.031)                           (0.032)
Weekend Program                        0.053**                         0.053*                            0.058*
                                        (0.027)                        (0.031)                           (0.031)

Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                         0.144                            0.235                            0.281
t-test (p-value)

N                                        1,970                            1,970                            1,970
         2
Adj. R                                    0.41                             0.24                            0.22
                                                                      Upper half
                                        Model 1                         Model 2                          Model 3
MidWeek Program                          -0.020                          -0.018                           -0.016
                                        (0.016)                         (0.016)                          (0.017)
Weekend Program                          -0.008                          -0.007                           -0.007
                                        (0.015)                         (0.017)                          (0.017)
Weekend vs. MidWeek
                                         0.440                            0.530                            0.613
t-test (p-value)

N                                        1,694                                 1,694                          1,694
       2
Adj. R                                    0.39                                  0.27                           0.26
Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the randomization block level. The omitted reference group in all regressions is the
original texting program Monday/Wednesday/Friday. aRegressions in samples split at medians are based on student's
Circle-1 literacy (or math) tests prior to the intervention. Statistical significance levels: *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.
