                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        SEARCH FOR YIELD IN LARGE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATE BONDS:
                 INVESTOR BEHAVIOR AND FIRM RESPONSES

                                      Charles W. Calomiris
                                        Mauricio Larrain
                                      Sergio L. Schmukler
                                        Tomas Williams

                                      Working Paper 25979
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25979


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We thank Anil Kashyap, Aart Kraay, Jesse Schreger (discussant), and participants at
presentations held at the 2019 ASSA Meetings, Colorado State University, Columbia Business
School, George Washington Business School, International Monetary Fund, Sao Paulo School of
Economics (FGV), and Stanford University for useful comments. We are grateful to Facundo
Abraham, Belinda Chen, Juan Cortina, Marta Guasch Rusiñol, and Soha Ismail for excellent
research assistance, and to Tatiana Didier for facilitating access to data. We also thank
Zhengyang Jiang and Arvind Krishnamurthy for sharing their data on foreign safe asset demand.
The World Bank Chile Research and Development Center, Knowledge for Change Program
(KCP), and Strategic Research Program (SRP) provided support for this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, Sergio L. Schmukler, and Tomas Williams.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Search for Yield in Large International Corporate Bonds: Investor Behavior and Firm Responses
Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, Sergio L. Schmukler, and Tomas Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 25979
June 2019
JEL No. F21,F23,F32,F36,F65,G11,G15,G31

                                           ABSTRACT

Emerging market corporations have significantly increased their borrowing in international
markets since 2008. We show that this increase was driven by large-denomination bond
issuances, most of them with face value of exactly US$500 million. Large issuances are eligible
for inclusion in important international market indexes. These bonds appeal to institutional
investors because they are more liquid and facilitate targeting market benchmarks. We find that
the rewards of issuing index-eligible bonds rose drastically after 2008. Emerging market firms
were able to cut their cost of funds by roughly 100 basis points by issuing bonds with a face value
equal to or greater than US$500 million relative to smaller bonds. Firms contemplating whether
to take advantage of this cost saving face a tradeoff: they can benefit from the lower yields
associated with large, index-eligible bonds, but they pay the potential cost of having to hoard
low-yielding cash assets if their investment opportunities are less than US$500 million. Because
of the post-2008 "size yield discount," many companies issued index-eligible bonds, while
substantially increasing their cash holdings. The willingness to issue large bonds and hoard cash
was greater for firms in countries with high carry trade opportunities that reduced the cost of
holding cash. We present evidence suggesting that these post-2008 behaviors reflected a search
for yield by institutional investors into higher-risk securities. These patterns are not apparent in
the issuance of investment grade bonds by firms in developed economies.

Charles W. Calomiris                             Sergio L. Schmukler
Columbia Business School                         The World Bank
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall                  MSN MC3-301
New York, NY 10027                               1818 H Street, N.W.
and NBER                                         Washington, DC 20433
cc374@columbia.edu                               Sschmukler@worldbank.org

Mauricio Larrain                                 Tomas Williams
Catholic University of Chile                     George Washington University
School of Management                             Department of Economics
Avenida Vicuña Mackenna 4860                     2115 G Street, NW
Santiago                                         Room 340
Chile                                            Washington, DC 20052
mauriciolarraine@gmail.com                       tomaswilliams@gwu.edu
1. Introduction

After the 2008 global financial crisis (GFC), interest rates in developed countries reached

historically low levels, especially for safe assets. Several studies argue that persistently low

interest rates on safe assets have led investors to search for yield by expanding the range

of investments they consider and by making them willing to accept increases in risk. As a

consequence, the search for yield has expanded the demand for emerging market securities,

especially corporate bonds issued in international markets (Becker and Ivashina, 2015;

Bruno and Shin, 2017). 1

         Because the international market for debt securities is dominated by institutional

investors, who face limits in their incentives or ability to undertake risk in unfamiliar asset

classes, the search for yield does not entail an unlimited willingness to accept new risks as

the demand for emerging market corporate debt rises. One way to limit risk, while

expanding investments into emerging market corporate debt, is to demand liquid

instruments. These securities allow investors to more easily sell positions when needed or

to increase them when desired, with minimal price impact and low transaction costs. Also,

institutional investors are often penalized with withdrawals or rewarded with inflows by

the ultimate investors (who are the principals in those investments). This disciplining

mechanism encourages managers to think of the risk that affects them (as agents) in terms

of deviations from the market benchmark indexes.

         By purchasing bonds that are included in major indexes, institutional investors

both enhance liquidity and limit the risk of underperforming relevant indexes. 2 Bonds that



1 We use the phrase "search for yield" to describe either (1) a broadening of the range of investments by
institutional investors (e.g., U.S. corporate bond funds) to include riskier (e.g., emerging market corporate)
bonds, or (2) decisions by ultimate individual investors to allocate more of their portfolios to riskier
investments (e.g., emerging market bond funds).
2 There have been several studies that document that institutional investors such as mutual funds do not

deviate too much from their respective indexes. See Cremers and Petajisto (2009) for evidence on the U.S.
equity mutual fund industry. Cremers et al. (2016) and Raddatz et al. (2017) show this pattern at the
international level. An extreme instance of this strategy is that used by exchange-traded funds (ETFs), the
importance of which has increased (Converse et al., 2018).

                                                      1
are included in market indexes are bought and sold more frequently and are held by a wide

range of investors, which means that holding a bond that is included in the index enhances

its liquidity. Bonds that are included in the index collectively define the benchmark of

market performance, which means that holding those bonds limits an institutional

investor's risk of underperforming the market benchmark.

        Two of the most relevant benchmark indexes for emerging market bonds are the

J.P. Morgan EMBI Global Diversified Index (which focuses on sovereign bonds) and the

J.P. Morgan CEMBI Narrow Diversified Index (which focuses on corporate bonds). 3 Both

indexes include bonds based on certain security attributes, notably the amount of

outstanding debt. Thus, only debt issues with face value equal to or greater than $500

(US$500) million are included in these indexes. A broader index (the CEMBI Broad) also

exists, which includes corporate debt with face value equal to or greater than $300 million.

        Because of their advantages, some institutional investors that expand their holdings

of emerging market corporate debt purchase bonds that are included in the major market

indexes. This means purchasing large bonds. One would expect that this preference would

increase bond prices through an inclusion premium and reduce bond yields, an effect that

we label the "size yield discount." Also, one would expect that this preference would

increase the likelihood of issuing large bonds, as firms participating in international bond

markets take advantage of cheaper financing costs.

        In this paper, we analyze how the change in global market conditions after 2008

interacted with market structure to affect the size and pricing of U.S. dollar-denominated

bonds issued by emerging market corporations. Specifically, we analyze a period when the

low interest rate environment created by developed countries' monetary policies after the

GFC interacted with preferences of international investors that follow rules governing the



3EMBI stands for Emerging Market Bond Index and CEMBI stands for Corporate Emerging Market Bond
Index.

                                              2
inclusion of bonds in debt market indexes. We also study how these changes affected firm

financing decisions and cash holdings.

       Our first novel finding is that the expansion in the demand for emerging market

corporate debt was accompanied by an increased preference for bonds large enough to be

included in market indexes. After the GFC, we observe a substantial reduction in the yields

of bonds issued in international markets with a face value of $500 million, relative to

otherwise similar bonds with lower face value. For example, when issuing $500 million

bonds instead of $400 million bonds, emerging market corporates paid about 100 basis

points less after the GFC than the differential they paid prior to 2008. In other words, the

size yield discount increased substantially after 2008. Not only did the average yields of

bonds with face value of $500 million significantly decrease relative to the period before

the GFC, but also this pattern is much more visible for emerging market issuers than for

investment grade developed market firms (considered relatively safe investments).

       Our second new finding is that, in the post-2008 period, emerging market firms

were much more likely to issue debt securities in international markets with a face value of

exactly $500 million. In general, when deciding to issue a large, index-eligible bond, firms

face a trade-off. On the one hand, they can secure cheaper financing costs. On the other

hand, if issuance size exceeds financing needs, firms have to save the difference in cash or

cash-like instruments, which have low returns. Our second finding suggests that, after the

GFC, the increase in the size yield discount moved the trade-off in favor of issuing $500

million bonds. Some firms chose to issue more than they needed to fund their projects in

order to reach the $500 million threshold, and hold cash assets from the proceeds of bond

issuance in excess of project funding needs. In addition, we show that higher interest rates

earned by firms on their cash assets encouraged them to issue large bonds. We find that

firms in countries with higher expected carry trade (our proxy for return on cash) issued



                                             3
more $500 million bonds, providing further evidence that firms have responded to a trade-

off when deciding to issue large bonds in amounts that exceed their funding needs.

        We present suggestive evidence that the channel driving these results is the investor

demand for emerging market debt that is skewed towards index-eligible bonds. We show

that an increase in the demand for emerging market debt, as proxied by investor flows to

emerging market debt funds, is highly positively correlated with the percentage of bond

issuances with face value of $500 million. Additionally, we show that funds that are less

familiar with emerging market corporate debt tend to have the highest demand for index-

eligible bonds. For instance, funds that specialize in developed market securities increased

their share of investments in emerging markets after the GFC. Also, using portfolio-level

data, we show that these funds tend to invest significantly more of their portfolio in bonds

with face value equal to or greater than $500 million, relative to funds that specialize in

emerging market securities.

        Although the literature has emphasized the role of the monetary policy

environment in shifting the demand for emerging market securities, it is conceivable that

factors in emerging markets could also be contributing to aggregate changes in issuance

behavior. For example, changes in the willingness of emerging market firms to issue bonds

could reflect higher commodity prices that increase the profitability of investment

opportunities. The fact that we observe emerging market firms clustering their issuances

at exactly $500 million after 2008, however, strongly suggests the importance of bond

investor demand-side influences on the change in issuance behavior. It is highly unlikely

that new investment opportunities leading to greater needs for funds are clustered exactly

at issuance amounts of $500 million. Moreover, the fact that yield reductions are

discontinuous at the $500 million threshold is highly suggestive of bond investor demand-

side influences. Exogenous increases in firms' desires for more funds in each capital raising

activity should lead to higher yields, not the lower ones we observe.

                                             4
         Next, we examine heterogeneous effects across the firm size distribution.

Specifically, we focus on two hypotheses. First, if the change in investor demand for bonds

is driving increased issuance, then large firms (defined as those with investment

opportunities that are close to or above $500 million) should be the firms most likely to

take advantage of the cost saving from issuing large bonds after 2008. The reason is that

firms with large investment opportunities have more immediate use for funds raised in the

bond market. 4 We find that, in fact, firms with sufficiently small asset size did not issue

large bonds either before or after 2008. Second, we expect to find that medium-sized firms

(defined more precisely with respect to the size of investment opportunities in the context

of our theoretical model) should see the greatest change in the probability of issuing large-

denomination debt when its cost decreases. In contrast, the very largest firms might have

been issuing large-denomination debt before 2008 simply by virtue of their more

significant financing needs, and the very smallest firms saw prohibitive costs from issuing

large bonds. We find that, indeed, medium-sized firms did see the largest increase in the

probability of issuing large bonds after 2008. These findings are consistent with the view

that changes in investor appetite for large bonds, and the consequences of those changes

for reducing yields on large bonds, drove the increase in the issuance of large bonds after

2008.

         To conclude the empirical analysis, we estimate how firms use issuance proceeds,

distinguishing between the behavior of relatively large and small firms that issued large

bonds. We show that emerging market firms that issued dollar-denominated bonds in

international markets with face value equal to or greater than $500 million after 2008 have

tended to hold more cash for every dollar of debt issued than firms that issued lesser

amounts. This result provides direct evidence of the trade-off faced by firms when issuing


4
 In contrast, smaller firms responding to incentives from the investor side will likely have a harder time
using large issuance proceeds, implying a cost that should make them less likely than large firms to take
advantage of the changes in market conditions that favor large-denomination debt.

                                                    5
large, index-eligible bonds: they can secure lower financing costs, at the expense of

hoarding cash. Moreover, the increased holding of cash is greater for small firms that

issued large bonds than for large firms that issued large bonds. This is consistent with small

firms "stretching" to issue more debt than necessary to fund their investments in order to

take advantage of the size yield discount.

         Our paper contributes to at least three different literatures. First, by showing that

bond index inclusion results in substantially lower yields and changes in issuance choices

by firms, we contribute to a large literature analyzing the effects of indexing on securities

prices and quantities. This literature has focused mostly on the effects of index rebalancing

on the pricing and liquidity of stocks and bonds. 5 The evidence on the consequences of

index investing has been slim (Wurgler, 2011). Our main contribution is to show that the

use of indexes by institutional investors has important effects on firms' financial decisions

and financing costs. Our evidence provides support for recent theoretical contributions

that seek to explain how the use of benchmarks enhances the liquidity of securities (Duffie

et al., 2017) and leads asset managers to effectively subsidize investments by benchmark

firms (Kashyap et al., 2018). 6 Our paper extends to the global sphere the evidence that an

increase in demand from passive investors increases firms' propensity to issue bonds in

the United States (Dathan and Davydenko, 2018). 7

         Second, we contribute to a growing literature studying how the low interest rate

environment after the GFC encouraged dollar-denominated corporate bond issuance



5 See, among others, Harris and Gurel (1986), Shleifer (1986), Chen et al. (2004), Barberis et al. (2005),
Greenwood (2005), Hau et al. (2010), Claessens and Yafeh (2013), Chang et al. (2015), Raddatz et al. (2017),
and Pandolfi and Williams (2019).
6 The magnitude of our estimates of the reduction in yields of index-eligible bonds is within the same range

of the model-implied estimates provided by Kashyap et al. (2018).
7
  Firms in the United States responded to that demand by issuing a disproportionate number of bonds with
sufficiently large size just to be eligible to be included in the most relevant indexes. We show that this size
effect is present for emerging market debt issuers and that there is a large yield discount for issuing index-
eligible bonds. We also show that the increased size-related yield discount for emerging market corporate
debt had important consequences for the firm size distribution of corporate debt issuers and for cash
holdings, especially by medium-sized firms.

                                                      6
around the world at the expense of other forms of financing, such as bank borrowing. 8

We show that the search for yield by institutional investors interacted with the institutional

arrangements determining index eligibility. The market structure for international debt

securities produced a rising incentive for emerging market firms to issue $500 million

bonds after the GFC. This has important consequences for costs and firms' financing

decisions.

         Third, our paper is related to the literature analyzing the influences on firms'

leverage and cash holdings choices, with particular emphasis on the increase in corporate

cash holdings. 9 For example, Xiao (2018) argues that firms that substitute from bank

financing to bond financing increase their holdings of cash for precautionary savings. In

this paper we also find that the structure of the corporate bond market can create strong

incentives for "over borrowing" by "medium-sized" firms, which end up holding more

cash than needed for their investment projects.

         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a theoretical

framework to understand how the search for yield can create a yield discount for index-

eligible debt, discussing the consequences for issuers. Section 3 describes our data sources.

Section 4 presents our issuance-level results. Section 5 examines bond holding differences

among mutual funds with respect to large bonds eligible for inclusion in indexes. Section

6 reports firm-level results that distinguish among the bond-issuance and cash-holding

behaviors of firms of different sizes. Section 7 concludes.




8 See among others Adrian et al. (2013), Shin (2013), Becker and Ivashina (2014, 2015), Acharya et al. (2015),
Carabin et al. (2015), Feyen et al. (2015), Du and Schreger (2016), Lo Duca et al. (2016), and Cortina et al.
(2018) for analyses on the drivers of issuance in corporate debt markets. There has also been a closely related
literature studying the behavior of bond funds and how they affect financial conditions for firms (Chui et
al., 2014, 2016; Ramos and Garcia, 2015; Goldstein et al., 2017; Shek et al., 2017).
9 See, for example, Bates et al. (2009), Falato et al. (2013), Begenau and Palazzo (2017), and Bruno and Shin

(2017).

                                                      7
2. Theoretical Framework

Our theoretical discussion has three parts. First, we review the literature explaining why

inclusion in an index can increase the value of a security in the market. Second, we consider

why the advantages of inclusion in an index should vary over time for emerging market

corporate debt. Third, we apply these theoretical principles to a simple model of index

inclusion in the emerging market corporate debt market, where issuance size thresholds

are the key determinant of index inclusion.



2.1. Why Does Index Inclusion Increase Corporate Debt Securities Prices?

Duffie et al. (2017) show that introducing a market benchmark improves price

transparency and promotes trade. Their paper explains how the existence of market

benchmarks ­ defined as "a measure of the `going price' of a standardized asset at a

specified time" ­ mitigates search friction, which are particularly relevant in over-the-

counter markets, such as those for corporate debt. Although their study does not consider

the effects of a benchmark on different securities, by construction, the information content

of the benchmark should be greatest for those large securities that are components of the

benchmark. Thus, the benchmark index reduces search costs and increases liquidity for

the included securities that participants are willing to hold and trade.

        Kashyap et al. (2018) study more directly how inclusion in an index produces a

higher price because asset managers ­ who are penalized by tracking error ­ face a strong

incentive to hold securities that are included in the benchmark, which they term the

"benchmark inclusion subsidy." Furthermore, they show that the higher the risk of the

investment, the greater the benchmark inclusion subsidy: the pricing premium for

inclusion is an increasing function of the security's riskiness.

        In summary, irrespective of whether securities are traded directly by investors or

by intermediaries, securities that are included in benchmarks will tend to be more liquid

                                                 8
and will enjoy a price premium related to liquidity. The presence of institutional investors

who care about tracking error adds another pricing premium to securities that are included

in the index. This premium, which gives rise to the size yield discount that lowers firms'

cost of funds, is an increasing function of risk.



2.2. Why Does the Size Yield Discount Rise in Response to a Sudden Demand Increase?

We hypothesize that a surge in investor demand for high-yield dollar-denominated

emerging market debt results in a large increase in the proportion of bonds that are

managed by asset managers that have relatively little experience with investing in emerging

market corporate debt. Some of these managers might enter as new emerging market fund

specialists, and will be particularly interested in minimizing tracking error by purchasing

index-eligible corporate debt. Others, such as those managing broader portfolios, will find

it attractive to purchase index-eligible debt when "crossing over" into the emerging market

asset class because of its greater liquidity. The assets of funds investing in broader

portfolios tend to be large and managers value the ability to get in and out of positions,

especially those that are outside their primary mandate, without having a price impact. 10

         Three frictions in asset management can explain the increase in the fraction of the

newly issued debt that is managed by fund managers that lack experience in the emerging

market asset class. These are: a human-capital-scarcity friction, a relationship-value friction,

and a position-size-limit friction. 11 The three frictions pertaining to fund managers,


10 Emerging market securities, and especially corporate securities, are a highly specialized asset class. The

risks that affect the value of these securities are often quite different from those affecting developed country
sovereign or corporate debt (Beim and Calomiris, 2001; Kaminsky and Schmukler, 2008; Karolyi, 2015;
Calomiris and Mamaysky, 2019). The risks include internal and external political and geopolitical events. As
a response, a specialized group of mutual funds and hedge funds hire and train asset managers to manage
portfolios of emerging market securities. This specialized group of managers are skilled at monitoring and
managing the constellation of risks that are relevant to this asset class.
11 First, it is not possible to suddenly increase the supply of trained and experienced emerging market

corporate debt asset managers (a human-capital-scarcity friction). Second, preexisting relationships between
investors and fund managers tend to encourage investors to place money in the funds they invested in before,
which limits the movement of funds to specialized emerging market funds (a relationship-value friction).
Third, fund managers cannot manage an unlimited amount of funds effectively, and so preexisting fund

                                                       9
combined with the potential conservatism of new investors, have a clear implication. When

low interest rates in developed economies produce a surge in demand for relatively risky

emerging market corporate debt, the incremental portfolio position in the new asset class

is likely to place more value on securities that are part of the index because of their greater

liquidity and lower tracking error. For this reason, the price premium associated with index

inclusion should rise. We summarize this implication as:

Hypothesis 1: A sudden increase in demand for emerging market corporate debt should produce a

relative increase in the demand for bonds included in global indexes. This should result in an increase in

the price (i.e., reduction in the yield) of large, index-eligible debt.

          The mechanism behind the reduction in the yield of index-eligible bonds relies on

an increase in the funds that are managed by managers who are less experienced in

emerging market corporate debt and tend to hold more index-eligible bonds. This leads to

the following corollary:

Cross-over Fund Corollary: After the surge in demand for emerging market corporate debt, "cross-

over" funds (those managing broader portfolios, such as global debt funds) with less experience in emerging

market corporate debt will hold a larger proportion of securities that are included in the index than

experienced emerging market corporate debt specialists.



2.3. Implications for Issuers: A Simple Model of Bond Issuance

Assume a continuum of emerging market firms that are potential bond issuers. Each firm

has an investment opportunity of a predetermined scale equal to , where the cumulative

distribution function of  is given by  ().  represents the size of the firm in the model.

Each investment opportunity has the same gross return  and has a positive net present



managers who are experts in the emerging market corporate debt asset class might not be able to take on all
the new demand, even if ultimate investors were willing to move funds to specialist managers (a position-
size-limit friction).

                                                        10
value. Firms finance their investment issuing bonds in foreign currency, so each firm will

issue at least the amount . If firms issue more than , they hold the difference between

the amount issued and  as cash.

         Assume there is a corporate debt index that includes only bonds of face value equal

to or greater than 500 (equivalent to $500 million in the data). We assume there is a yield

discount for index-eligible debt. The interest rate firms pay if they issue  is equal to  if

 < 500 and equal to  500 <  if   500. We denote the size yield discount by ,

where  =  -  500 .

         Holding cash is costly because it earns a low return of   <  - . Firms of

sufficiently large size (  500) do not have a choice to make; they simply issue a bond

of size  and enjoy the lower financing cost. Other firms ( < 500), on the other hand,

face a trade-off. They can issue  or "stretch," which implies issuing 500 and holding the

remaining (500 - ) in cash. Given the cost of holding cash, firms with  < 500, would

never choose to issue amounts of bonds between  and 500. 12 Profits under each

alternative (issuing  or issuing 500) are given by:

                                           =  - ,                                                           (1)

                        500 =  - 500( - ) + (500 - )  .                                                     (2)

         A firm will decide to issue 500 instead of  if and only if  500 >   , which

implies: 13

                                       (500 - ) 500
                                   +           >    .                                                       (3)
                                -     ( - )      



12 The profit of a firm with size  < 500, issuing  , is   =  - . If that firm issues    ( , 500),
                                                                                                       
it obtains profits equal to   =  -  + ( -  )  . We can re-write those profits as:   =  -
 -   + ( - ) +  =  - ( -  )( -  ). Given the opportunity cost of cash (  < ),
                                                                
                 
we get that   <   , so the firm will never choose to issue    ( , 500).
13 Intuitively, the first two expressions in this inequality capture the benefits to issue 500 (the lower interest

rate paid on debt) and the additional revenues from interest on cash holdings. The third term captures the
higher debt service cost associated with a larger amount of debt.

                                                       11
        This inequality implies a critical value of  above which firms issue 500 in debt:

                                    500( -  -   )
                              =
                                                  .                                    (4)
                                       ( -   )

        Let  denote the optimal issuance size. Each firm's optimal issuance size depends

on the size of the firm. Thus:

                                                   < 
                             = 500                  < 500.
                                                                                             (5)
                                                    500

        Firms in the size interval  , 500, stretch to issue 500. For these firms, the

amount they issue (I) is greater than the amount of their investment opportunity (X). For

smaller firms, ( <  ), the amount of bond issuance is equal to the size of their

investment opportunity. Let  () denote the cumulative distribution function of issuance

size (i.e., the percentage of issuers that issue the amount  or less):

                                ( )                  < 
                         ( ) =  ( )                   < 500 .
                                                                                             (6)
                                ( )                   500

        Figure 1, Panel A plots the cumulative distribution of issuance size. The cumulative

distribution is flat between  , 500 because no firm issues in this size interval. There is

then a discrete jump in the distribution at 500, driven by the mass of medium-sized firms

that find it optimal to stretch and issue 500.

        We model an increase in demand for emerging market corporate debt as an

exogenous increase in the size yield discount , in line with Hypothesis 1. Because  is a

decreasing function of , the increase in the size yield discount reduces the critical value

of asset size above which firms issue 500. Intuitively, as the yield reduction benefit of

issuing bonds of 500 increases, firms become more attracted to issue them. This leads to

the following hypothesis:




                                              12
Hypothesis 2: A sudden increase in demand for emerging market corporate debt should result in an

increased propensity to issue debt that is included in the index.

          We illustrate Hypothesis 2 in Figure 2, Panel B. The discrete jump of the

cumulative distribution at 500 becomes larger, as more firms with values of  < 500

stretch to issue 500 with the increased size yield discount.

          Note that  is a decreasing function of   . The intuition is that a higher return on

cash makes the strategy of issuing a bond larger than  and investing the remaining

(500 - ) in cash more attractive. This comparative static implication derived from

Equation (4) ­ stating that the critical value  is lower for higher values of   ­ is

summarized in the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis 3: A higher local interest rate should result in a higher propensity to issue large, index-

eligible debt.

          The model also has several cross-sectional predictions. First, by construction, only

firms with scale above  find it convenient to stretch and issue a 500 bond:

Hypothesis 4: Large firms are more likely to issue large amounts of debt and, thus, large-denomination

bonds that are eligible for inclusion in the index.

          In addition, as explained in Hypothesis 2, because an increase in the demand for

bonds that are included in the index increases  (reducing their yield), it also reduces . A

rise in  makes some firms that previously had an investment size () that was too small

to warrant an issuance of 500 to switch to that type of issuance. This comparative static

response to an increase in  is concentrated in "medium-sized" firms (those with

investment opportunities in the neighborhood of  ). Firms with investment opportunities

that are either greater than, or far smaller than, the prior value of  , should not respond

to the increase in  by increasing their bond issuance size. We summarize this comparative

static result in Hypothesis 5:

                                                      13
Hypothesis 5: An increase in the benefit of being included in the emerging market corporate debt index

causes some medium-sized firms, which previously would not have issued a sufficient amount of debt to gain

inclusion in the index, to issue bonds large enough to gain inclusion in the index. The change in the

probability of issuing large bonds should be greater for medium-sized firms than for firms in the upper and

lower tails of the size distribution.

         Lastly, an increase in the size yield discount  has no effect on the cash holdings

of sufficiently large firms, defined as those that would issue 500 or more in debt

irrespective of the changes in the yield discount. In contrast, medium-sized firms that prior

to the increase in  would have chosen to issue  in debt, respond to the increase in  by

choosing to issue 500 in debt, rather than  < 500, and accumulate cash equal to

(500 ­ ). Thus, within the group of firms that choose to issue 500 in bonds, firms of

relatively small size will increase their cash holdings more than relatively large issuers of

large bonds. We summarize this result in Hypothesis 6:

Hypothesis 6: Within the group of large bond issuers, relatively small-sized firms will increase their

cash holdings by more than relatively large-sized firms.



3. Data

We use data from different sources. The data on bond issuances come from the Thomson

Reuters Security Data Corporation Platinum database (SDC Platinum). This database

contains transaction-level information on new issuances of corporate bonds by public and

private firms. From this database, we obtain the date a bond is issued, the face value of the

bond, and the yield to maturity at issuance. SDC Platinum also contains additional

information that we employ, including the rating of the firm at issuance, the country of the

firm, the industry of the firm, the market in which the bond is issued, the type of bond

(fixed or flexible coupon), the currency of the bond, whether the issuance is public or

private, and the maturity at issuance of the bond.

                                                    14
         We focus on issuances of corporate bonds in U.S. dollars, which is a prerequisite

to being included in the bond indexes we analyze. We study issuances that take place only

in international markets, defined as a firm issuing a bond in a market that is different from

its country of origin. Additionally, we compare international dollar-denominated bonds

issued by emerging market firms with a sample of investment grade bonds issued by firms

from developed markets. In this way, we are able to compare yield and issuance outcomes

for firms that are inherently riskier (emerging market firms) with a control group of firms

that are considered relatively safe (investment grade developed market firms). This

comparison is relevant because we hypothesize that investors' search for yield leads them

to increase their exposure to riskier firms around the world. 14

         We include firms from 68 developed and emerging economies (countries or

markets) for the period 2000-2016. We use the nationality of the firm that is provided by

SDC Platinum to classify firms into developed and emerging markets (as listed in Appendix

Table 1). 15 We include both financial and non-financial firms, because the market structure

effects that we document affect issuances by any type of firms. However, our results are

robust to excluding financial firms. Our sample includes 19,906 issuances from 4,965

firms.

         We complement these data with additional information, mainly from three

different sources. We use injections/redemptions to emerging market debt funds from

Emerging Market Portfolio Research (EPFR) Global to gauge changes in investor interest

in emerging market debt. We use data from Morningstar Direct on the asset level portfolios

of mutual funds to understand the different types of investors holding emerging market



14 In the Appendix, we provide additional results using jointly high-yield developed market firm bonds and
emerging market firm bonds.
15 SDC Platinum contains a category that classifies the type of bond issued, which sometimes conflicts with

our classification using the nationality of the issuer. If this category indicates that an emerging market firm
issues the bond, we classify it as such regardless of the nationality of the firm provided by SDC. This affects
only 300 observations (1.5% of our sample).

                                                      15
corporate debt. For the use-of-funds analysis, we merge the SDC data with Worldscope

data, which provide information on the financial statements of firms. Those data include

important information on firms' assets, cash holdings, and sales (reported in balance

sheets, income statements, and cash flow statements). Worldscope data are available for

44% of the firms in the SDC database, resulting in a merged dataset of 2,190 firms.



4. Corporate Bond Issuances

4.1. New Findings on Yields and Issuance Behavior

As discussed in Section 2, we conjecture that part of the surge in investor interest in

emerging market corporate debt after the GFC reflected a change in the investor base. We

hypothesize that this compositional shift, together with the existence of the CEMBI

Narrow index, with a $500 million minimum cutoff, produced an increase in the interest

of international investors for large ($500 million and greater) emerging market corporate

bonds.

         To study how the shifts in size-dependent investor interest affected market yields,

we begin with simple comparisons. In Figure 2, we plot the evolution of the yield to

maturity during 2000-2016 for bonds issued by emerging market corporates with face value

below $300 million, between $300 and below $500 million, and equal to or above $500

million. We observe that yields for all issuance sizes declined after the GFC, but the effect

is particularly pronounced for $500 million bonds.

         In Figure 3, Panel A, we aggregate within the pre- and post-crisis periods and

compare the average yield to maturity of bonds of different issuance size for the two time

periods. We observe that, on average, yield to maturity decreases with issuance size. More

importantly, consistent with Hypothesis 1, after 2008, we observe a sharp decline in the

yield when moving to issuance sizes of $500 million (a fall of 115 basis points). This decline

at the $500 million threshold is much more pronounced than that observed in the pre-

                                               16
2008 period, suggesting that after 2008 there was an increase in bond investors' demand

for bonds of issuance size equal to or greater than $500 million. There is also a decline in

the yield when moving to the $300 million threshold, consistent with the CEMBI Broad

having a minimum size requirement for inclusion of $300 million. 16 However, compared

to the pre-2008 period, yields for $500 million emerging market corporate bonds declined

after 2008 by relatively more. 17

         Figure 3, Panel B presents the same analysis as Panel A for investment grade

corporate issuers in developed markets. Yields for issuances at the $500 million threshold

declined after 2008 by about 42 basis points. However, that decline was not much greater

than what is observed for the pre-2008 period, 15 basis points, suggesting a much larger

relative post-crisis effect on yields for emerging market firms.

         Next, we study the implications of the reduction in yields of large, index-eligible

bonds on corporate bond issuance behavior. Figure 4 plots the evolution of the total value

of U.S. dollar-denominated corporate bonds issued by emerging market firms (Panel A)

and the evolution of the total number of issuances (Panel B). The figure shows that the

value of international bond issuances by emerging market firms increased sharply after

2008. Between 2008 and 2013, the value of those bond issuances increased by 380%.

Consistent with Hypothesis 2, Table 1 also shows that bonds above $500 million

represented only 33% of the total value of bonds issued between 2000 and 2008. After

2008, their share of the total nearly doubled to 62%. This is an important new finding:



16 The CEMBI Broad includes smaller securities and has a cutoff of $300 million. The CEMBI Narrow has

an inclusion cutoff of $500 million and is composed of more liquid and selected securities. At the end of
2017, $61 billion tracked the CEMBI Broad, and $24 billion the CEMBI Narrow. Whereas this could indicate
a larger preference toward $300 million bonds, the assets tracking the EMBI (with a cutoff of $500 million)
have been much larger than the assets tracking specifically corporate debt in emerging markets. For a more
detailed account of the indexes and requirements for inclusion, see Appendix 1 and Appendix Table 2.
17 Another notable feature in Figure 3, Panel A is the increase in yields from issuing $100 to $200 million in

the post-2008 period. It is possible that firms that issued $200 million were constrained to do so because
they could not stretch to issue $300 or $500 million. Firms that were unable to stretch in the post-2008
period might be indistinguishably riskier than firms that issued $200 million in the pre-2008 period, which
could explain why yields for $200 million issuances remained higher in the post-2008 period.

                                                     17
after 2008, not only did total emerging market corporate bond issuances increased, there

was also a dramatic compositional shift from small issuances to large issuances ($500

million or more). Similarly, whereas the number of bonds issued above $500 million

represented 11% of the total number of bonds between 2000 and 2008, their share

increased to 33% after 2008, as illustrated in Table 1.

        To study this compositional change in more detail, Figure 5, Panel A shows the

cumulative distribution of emerging corporate bond issuances by size. We plot the

distribution for the periods before and after 2008. Firms issue bonds of all sizes, ranging

from amounts less than 10 million to nearly a billion dollars. For the post-2008 period, we

observe a discrete jump in the distribution at $500 million, indicating a new discontinuity

in the distribution, with 18% of all bond issuances having a face value exactly equal to $500

million. This discontinuity was much more muted in the pre-2008 period. The empirical

cumulative distributions of issuance size resemble the model-based distributions plotted

in Figure 1.

        The fact that we observe emerging market firms clustering their issuances at exactly

$500 million after 2008 points to the importance of the investor side. That is, the investor

demand for bonds appears to have influenced the change in issuance behavior by firms.

We observe a smaller increase for issuances of $300 million after 2008, despite an

important decrease in yields in that threshold. One potential explanation is that, because

the benefit of reduced yield for issuing $500 million bonds is much larger than for issuing

$300 million bonds, many firms decided to issue the former rather than the latter.

        Figure 5, Panel B replicates the previous figure, but for the sample of investment

grade firms issuing dollar-denominated bonds in developed economies. For those issuers,

we observe a smaller jump in the distribution at $500 million, and one that is more similar

before and after 2008. This is consistent with low-risk, advanced economy firms with lower

bond yields responding less to the post-2008 search-for-yield phenomenon. The difference

                                             18
between corporates across the two types of countries suggests that changes in the investor

side during the post-GFC environment was much more relevant for emerging market

corporate bond issuers than for developed country investment grade issuers. 18

            Table 2 reports the statistical significance of the differences in means for yields and

issuances, before and after 2008, for emerging economy issuers and investment grade

developed market issuers. Panel A shows that yields fell after 2008 for both bonds with

face value in the [400:500) range and those in the [500:600) range (expressed in millions of

U.S. dollars). But they fell much more for emerging market issuances in the [500:600)

range. The triple difference test is statistically significant and shows a differential of almost

100 basis points in the decline in yields between emerging and developed markets. The

table shows analogous comparisons in the issuance activity (Panel B), which reacted

positively to the yield decrease, again especially in emerging markets in the [500:600)

range. 19



4.2. Regression Analysis

We next use regressions to estimate how yields and issuances of bonds of different issuance

size categories changed after 2008 for emerging market firms. These regressions allow us

to control for observable and unobservable characteristics that can predict yields and

issuance size. As before, we include both emerging market issuers and investment grade

developed market issuers in our analysis. We estimate the following type of regression for

bond yields:




18 Results for high-yield developed country issuers' yields and issuances are very similar to those for emerging
market firms (Appendix Figure 2). These two sets of firms share two important characteristics. First, they
are inherently riskier than investment grade developed market firms. Furthermore, these high-yield
developed economy firms also can be included in special indexes that are similar to the CEMBI and EMBI.
The Bloomberg Barclays High Yield Very Liquid Index is an important benchmark for these firms that only
includes high-yield dollar-denominated debt from developed market firms, with a minimum issue size of
$500 million.
19 Appendix Table 3 reports similar results using narrower bins.


                                                      19
                                           ,
      =                          [:+100) +    [:+100)
                =100,200,...,900

                                   ,                                                  (7)
                   +   [:+100)   +    [:+100)

                      +  +  +  +  +  .

        In this specification,  is the yield to maturity of a bond issued by firm  in

time , where  can be any given day during our sample period. [:+100) is a dummy

variable that indicates if the bond issued is of size [:  + 100), where  =

100, 200, ... ,900 million U.S. dollars (there are no bond issuances with face value greater

than $1,000 million in the data).  is a dummy variable that indicates whether a firm

belongs to the emerging market category.  is a dummy variable that denotes bonds

issued in the post-2008 period.  ,  , and  are country, industry, and quarter-year fixed

effects.  is a vector of bond controls, including whether a bond is issued in public or

private markets, whether the issuer is foreign owned, whether the government owns the

firm (at least partially), and whether the bond coupon rate is fixed or flexible. The

regressions also control for the maturity and rating of the bonds. We cluster the standard

errors in all regressions by country and quarter-year.

        The regressions estimate how the yield has changed in the post-2008 period relative

to the pre-2008 period for a bond of size [:  + 100) that was issued by an emerging

market firm relative to one issued by an investment grade developed market firm. More

specifically, we estimate (controlling for unobservables) the change in the size yield

discount from the pre-2008 period to the post-2008 period for emerging markets relative
                                                       ,     ,
to developed markets. This differential is captured by 500 - 400 .

        In our issuance regressions, we use the following specification:

       [:+100) =  +  +  +      +  + , ,                                               (8)




                                             20
where the dependent variable is a dummy variable that indicates whether bond  , issued at

time  is of size [:  + 100), where  = 100, 200, ... ,900. 20

         Equations (7) and (8) are effectively difference-in-difference specifications, where

we use developed economy investment grade firms as a counterfactual for the behavior of

emerging market firms. We are interested in the coefficient of the interaction term,
,
  in Equation (7) and  in Equation (8). They measure either the change in the

yield to maturity of a certain size or the change in the probability of issuing a bond of a

certain size, before and after 2008, for emerging market firms relative to the same change

for developed economy firms.

         To test for pre-treatment parallel trends, in Figure 6, Panel A displays the evolution

of the average yield to maturity over the period 2000 to 2016 for $500 million bond

issuances by emerging market issuers and developed market investment grade issuers,

respectively. Panel B shows the evolution of the average number of bond issuances of size

equal to $500 million, relative to the total number of issuances, for the same two sets of

issuers over the same period. Until 2008, we observe a similar pattern in yields and

issuances for the two groups. After 2008, we observe a sharp decline in the yields of $500

million issuances and an increase in the number of $500 million issuances only for

emerging market bond issuers.

         We report the results of estimating Equation (7) in Table 3. To make the table
                                                   ,
more readable, we report only the coefficients for   in the table. 21 We compare the



20 In Appendix Table 4, we show that our results are robust to adding firm fixed effects. The specification
with firm fixed effects is more stringent than the regression with industry fixed effects, because it allows us
to control for unobserved time-invariant firm characteristics. However, to identify firm fixed effects, we
need to restrict our sample to firms that have issued at least two bonds, one in the pre-2008 period and
another in the post-2008 period, forcing us to lose many observations.
21 In Appendix Table 5 and 6, we report all the estimated coefficients. With those coefficients we can

compute the reduction in yields from issuing $500 million rather than $400 million bonds within a country
group, between the post-2008 and pre-2008 periods. For developed market firms, this double differential
ranges from 3 to 22 basis points, depending on the controls used, and is not statistically different from zero.
For emerging market firms, it ranges from 93 to 218 basis points and is statistically different from zero.

                                                     21
size yield discount for emerging market issuers after 2008 with the size yield discount for

developed economy investment grade issuers after 2008, taken relative to the pre-2008
                                                ,     ,
values. We find that this triple differential, (500 - 400 ), is 99 basis points, which

is statistically different from zero. This size yield discount difference falls to 92 basis points

when we add country, industry-year, and quarter-year fixed effects (Table 3, column 2).

When we add bond controls, maturity, and ratings fixed effects, the size yield discount

difference becomes 76 basis points and remains statistically different from zero (Table3,

column 3). Results are very similar when we use spreads over the maturity-relevant U.S.

treasuries, rather than yields, as the dependent variable.

         With respect to issuance quantities, we estimate Equation (8) using the issuance

indicator for bonds in different size bins as the dependent variable. 22 Table 4, Panel A

shows that the coefficient of the interaction term is positive and statistically significant for

issuances of size between $500 and $600 million. This means that after 2008 emerging

market bond issuers were 9 percentage points more likely to issue bonds in this size bin,

relative to developed economy investment grade issuers. This is a significant effect,

especially when compared to the average probability of an emerging market firm issuing a

bond of $500 million before 2008, which is 10%. At the same time, the likelihood of issuing

bonds in the [100:200) bin decreased, as emerging market issuers substituted large bond

issues for small ones. The issuance of $300 to $400 million bonds also increased after 2008,

but by less than for the $500, consistent with our finding that the decrease in the yields for




22In additional robustness tests we also include maturity-time and ratings-time fixed effects and results
remain very similar (Appendix Table 7).

                                                   22
this size group was smaller. As before, results are very similar when we control for bond

characteristics (Panel B). 23,24



4.3. Placebo Test of Bond Index Inclusion

To provide a placebo test of whether our results are driven by the index inclusion

requirements, we re-estimate Equations (7) and (8) using bonds that are not included in

the CEMBI index because of other index-inclusion requirements unrelated to size.

Specifically, we keep only floating rate bonds and bonds with less than five years of

maturity. Because these bonds are not included in the index, irrespective of size, we expect

to find no effects on issuances and yields at the $500 million threshold. Table 3, column 4

reports the results of this exercise for yields and Table 5 reports the results for issuances.

Indeed, we observe no significant change in the yields of bonds in the bin size [500:600)

and no significant increase in issuances for these bonds. This test supports the hypothesis

that the decrease in yields and the increase in issuances after 2008 for bonds of size

between $500 and $600 million reflect the effect of index inclusion, not size per se.



4.4. Carry Trade Influences

Our theoretical framework in Section 2 also predicts that, ceteris paribus, firms should be

more likely to issue $500 million bonds when they are located in countries where there is

a relatively large expected local interest rate from investing in cash (Hypothesis 3). In Table

6, we test that prediction by exploiting the cross-country variation in our sample. We

regress a dummy that is one if a firm issued a $500 million bond and zero if the firm issued



23 We also test whether the treatment effect of index inclusion interacts with the Treasury basis variable

constructed by Jiang et al. (2018, 2019), which they interpret as a convenience yield for U.S. Treasuries. Most
of the variation in that variable occurs during the 2007-2009 crisis. We find that there is no evidence of an
interaction after the crisis (Appendix Table 8).
24 Table 4 estimates Equation (6) for a sample of strictly positive issuance observations. In Appendix Table

9, we re-estimate the equation for a sample containing all observations (including those with no issuances)
and the results remain unchanged.

                                                     23
any bond below that size on our carry trade variable. Following Bruno and Shin (2017),

our measure of carry takes the form of a "carry Sharpe ratio," which is the difference

between the local money market interest rate and the U.S. money market interest rate. We

adjust for exchange rate risk by dividing the interest rate differential by the annualized

volatility of the exchange rate during the previous two quarters. Like a Sharpe ratio, this

measure captures the expected profit from investing in local currency adjusted by exchange

rate risk. We include time fixed effects to exploit the cross-country variation, along with

different sets of fixed effects and bond controls. We find that there is a positive and

statistically significant association between the carry trade measure and the probability of

issuing $500 million bonds. Interestingly, in results not reported here, we find no

statistically significant carry effect when we do not adjust for the volatility of the exchange

rate. This suggests that firms do take the risk of exchange rate depreciation into account

when deciding to issue dollar-denominated bonds.



5. Inspecting the Mechanism: The Role of Institutional Investors

We posit that the driver of change in the importance of index eligibility over time is the

movement to a low interest rate environment in developed economies. The search for

yield across the world and the increase in investor interest in emerging market corporates

raised the value to fund investors of holding large emerging market bonds that are part of

indexes.

        We also conjecture that the composition of international investors changed from

a near exclusive reliance on a preexisting group of specialist emerging market corporate

bond investors toward a broader investor base. The latter includes old and new emerging

market sovereign bond funds and developed economy corporate bond funds, managed by

agents with relatively little prior experience in the emerging market corporate asset class.

We label these developed market institutional investors and emerging market sovereign

                                              24
investors the "cross-over investors," because they are crossing over from other asset

classes into the emerging market corporate debt asset class. In the cross-over corollary in

Section 2, we hypothesize that these cross-over investors will tend to invest more in index-

eligible bonds relative to specialists.

        In this section, we explicitly test the cross-over corollary, using data on different

funds' holdings of emerging market corporate bonds. Figure 7 presents two pieces of

evidence that connect investor interest with changes in the composition of emerging

market corporate bond issuance. Panel A plots the cumulative flows into mutual funds

that invest in emerging market sovereign and corporate debt from 2003 to 2016. It also

plots the number of $500 million bonds issued by emerging market firms, as a fraction of

all bonds issued by these firms. The correlation between the two is very high (0.93),

showing a clear connection between the growing investor interest in emerging market debt

and the growing relative importance of issuances that just meet the threshold of $500

million. Panel B plots the percentage of the portfolio invested in emerging markets by

developed market debt mutual funds from 2005 to 2016. We observe a sharp increase in

the weight dedicated to emerging market securities within these funds, which is consistent

with a crossing-over of developed market debt funds into emerging market securities.

Together, these figures show the increase of investor interest in emerging market debt

securities, from ultimate investors and from asset managers from developed countries.

        We complement the evidence in Figure 7 with additional evidence showing that

investors less familiar with the emerging market corporate asset class tend to hold a greater

proportion of index-eligible emerging market corporate debt. We assemble data from

Morningstar Direct on debt funds that we categorize into emerging market corporate

specialists and cross-overs, using fund categories provided by Morningstar. Within the

cross-over category, we also classify funds into emerging market mixed (those that invest

in both emerging market corporate debt and sovereign debt), emerging market sovereign,

                                             25
and developed markets (Appendix 2). Our data contain 1,435 funds with $4,561 billion in

assets under management (Table 7).

         Funds that specialize in emerging market corporate debt are relatively small

compared to funds that specialize in sovereign emerging market debt or developed market

funds. For each of the funds, we observe its portfolio at the end of December 2016. Most

of the funds in each category held at least one emerging market corporate bond in their

portfolio. Within each category, emerging market corporate debt constituted 2%, 16%,

19%, and 64% of the debt portfolios of developed market, emerging market sovereign,

emerging market mixed, and emerging market corporate specialists funds, respectively.

         One more noteworthy feature is the importance of each type of fund in terms of

their investments in the dollar-denominated emerging market international corporate debt

market. 25 Cross-over funds together invested $128.4 billion in emerging market corporate

bonds, while emerging market corporate specialists invested $20.8 billion in these securities

at the end of 2016 (Table 7, column 7). Although advanced market funds held a low

fraction of emerging market securities in their portfolios, the fact that the sizes of those

funds tend to be so large implies that they held a substantial dollar amount in emerging

market debt. These data show the importance of cross-over investors for this market.

         We test the cross-over corollary in Table 8. For each type of fund, we first compute

the total amount of U.S. dollar-denominated corporate emerging market bonds (issued in

international markets) held in the portfolio. Then, we compute the percentage of that

amount held in each of the following three categories: bonds with face value less than $300

million, bonds with face value in the $300-$500 million range and bonds with face value

equal to or greater than $500 million. We compute the average percentage held in each

specific bucket size by each mutual fund category. We compare across funds of different


25 Most of the funds in our sample invest only in dollar-denominated emerging market corporate bonds
issued in international markets. In 2016, these bonds represented 85% of their holdings in emerging market
corporate bonds.

                                                   26
categories, and with respect to the outstanding amount of corporate bonds issued by

emerging market firms.

       The results lend support to the cross-over corollary. Cross-over funds invest

relatively more in bonds with face value equal to or greater than $500 million. In fact, we

obtain a consistent fund pecking order with 83%, 78%, 74%, and 69% invested in this

bucket size by developed market, emerging market sovereign, emerging market mixed, and

emerging market corporate specialists funds, respectively. We report differences in means

tests for each type of cross-over fund relative to the corporate emerging market funds

(Table 8, column 4). We find that sovereign emerging market and advanced market funds

display statistically significant differences with respect to the holdings of corporate

emerging market bonds. Additionally, we compare the portfolio of each type of fund with

the total amount outstanding of dollar-denominated international corporate emerging

market bonds at the end of 2016 (Table 8, column 5). In general, corporate emerging

market funds held a portfolio similar to the outstanding amount of corporate bonds,

whereas cross-over funds skewed their portfolio toward large-denomination bonds.



6. Consequences for Firms

Our analysis of yields and issuances in Section 4 is highly suggestive that a shift in bond

investor demand (search for yield) has been the main driver of the post-2008 yield decline

and issuance increase for large emerging market corporate bonds. However, that evidence

does not rule out some potential influences from the issuer side ­ such as improvements

in investment opportunities ­ in driving some of the increase in large-face value emerging

market corporate bond issuances.

       In this section, we consider how firm-level differences could affect issuance

behavior. This analysis provides additional evidence that sheds more light on the role of

bond investor demand changes in driving our results. The evidence is reported in two

                                            27
parts. First, we test the two implications about bond demand shifts for cross-sectional

differences in issuer responses (Hypotheses 4 and 5), both of which follow from the fact

that different sized firms face different economic costs when issuing large amounts in the

bond market. Second, we examine the uses of funds raised by firms of different sizes that

issue large bonds (Hypothesis 6) as part of our firm-level analysis. In theory, firm size

should be measured with respect to the size of a firm's investment opportunity. In practice,

investment opportunity size is not observable, so we use asset size as a proxy, assuming a

positive correlation between the two. Medium-sized firms are defined, in theory, as those

with investment opportunities just below the pre-2008 critical value  . We have no

theoretical prior to predict the corresponding asset size of medium-sized firms in the firm

size distribution. In our empirical work, we identify medium-sized firms as those

occupying the range of the asset size distribution between small firms (which are too small

to respond to the post-2008 increase in the yield discount for $500 million bonds) and

large firms (which are so large that they issued bonds equal to or greater than $500 million

before and after 2008). 26



6.1. Bond Issuance Differences and Firm Size

Figure 8 tests a firm-size related implication of the post-GFC investor demand-side shift:

medium-sized firms should display the biggest change in their propensity to issue large,

index-eligible bonds (Hypothesis 5). Prior to 2008, medium-sized firms should have been

less likely than large firms to issue large bonds, but unlike small firms, medium-sized firms

(those willing to accumulate excess cash balances to access low-interest funding) decided

to stretch and issue $500 million bonds after the GFC. Figure 8 is consistent with this


26Firms likely differ in the ratio of asset size relative to investment opportunity size. In our empirical work,
therefore, we do not expect to identify a single threshold value of assets that corresponds to a fixed
proportion of the theoretical threshold value of medium-sized firms' investment opportunities. Rather, we
expect to find that the responsiveness of firms to the increase in the post-2008 yield discount on large bonds
should be zero for very small asset size, then rise as asset size increases, and decline at very large asset size.

                                                       28
prediction: the size distribution of firms issuing bonds of $500 million or more shifted to

the left after 2008.

        In addition, we conduct Probit and Logit estimations, separately for emerging

market issuers and developed market investment grade issuers, to estimate how firm size

affects the change in the probability of issuing a large bond (equal to or greater than $500

million) after the GFC. We estimate:

     , = 1  + 2  + 3 (   ) + 4 (   )+, ,                                                (9)

where  , is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm issued a bond with face value equal

to or greater than $500 million, and zero if it issued a bond of smaller size. We measure

the size of a firm with the log of total assets.

        Table 9, Panel A shows that both interaction terms (3 and 4 ) are positive and

highly significant. This indicates that larger firms were more likely to issue larger bonds

than smaller firms, both before and after the GFC. This is consistent with Hypothesis 4.

Moreover, for firms of any size, the change in the likelihood of issuing a large bond after

the GFC can be calculated from the estimated coefficients reported in Table 9, Panel A.

These implied changes (which we label "marginal effects") are reported in Table 9, Panel

B for firms of various sizes. Consistent with Hypothesis 5, we find that the marginal effects

are zero for very small asset size, then rise as asset size increases, peaking at around the

90th percentile, and decline toward zero thereafter. We interpret this as evidence that

medium-sized emerging market firms see the greatest change in the probability of issuing

large bonds. The changes reported in Panel B for medium-sized firms are large and

statistically significant in emerging markets, but small and insignificant in developed

economies. Figure 9 plots the probability of issuing large bonds, pre- and post-2008 for

emerging and developed market firms, as a continuous function of asset size.

        These results are consistent the view that a shift in bond investor demand for

index-eligible debt acted as a treatment effect on emerging market bond issuers. Large

                                               29
firms were exogenously positioned, by virtue of their size, to better take advantage of the

new issuance opportunities, which required firms to issue bonds of large size. Some

medium-sized firms in emerging markets, seeking to borrow at unusually low rates

available in the post-2008 environment, stretched and engaged in unprecedented issuance

of large (index-eligible) bonds, which resulted in a relatively significant increase in the

probability of large bond issuance by those firms.



6.2. Uses of Funds from Large Bond Issuances by Firms of Different Sizes

Lastly, we investigate the uses of funds by emerging market firms issuing large-

denomination bonds. We focus on differences in the uses of funds by relatively small and

large firms issuing them. Firms taking advantage of the yield discount in $500 million

bonds might be issuing bonds that are larger than the investment project opportunities

they face. As a consequence, some large bond issuing firms might devote a larger share of

the money raised in these issuances towards cash and short-term investments. To study

this, we follow the methodology by Kim and Weisbach (2008) and Erel et al. (2012). We

focus exclusively on the use of funds as measured by changes in cash and short-term

investments.

        We begin by calculating the accumulation of cash two years after each firm's bond

issuance by estimating the following regression:

                                
                   =  +  +  1 +    
                                  
                                                                                     (10)
                           
                  +  1 +      +  +  ,
                            




                                                30
              0            -
where  = log    + 1.  stands for cash holdings and short-term investments.

 = 2 denotes the two-year time period considered for the analysis. 27  are the total

assets of the firm in the year previous to the issuance.   =

      -1   -
                                        + 1, where total sources of funds represent the total
                   


funds generated by the firm internally and externally during a given year.  are firm

observable characteristics that we use as controls.

         Figure 10, Panel A reports the results of estimating Equation (7) for the change in

cash and short-term investments as dependent variable, controlling for the log of initial

assets in the year before issuance, growth of sales, and the standard deviation of growth of

sales. 28 We report the dollar effects, breaking down our sample into different categories. 29

We find that emerging market firms issuing $500 million and above bonds tended to hold

more cash after a bond issuance in post-2008 period relative to the pre-2008 period.

Quantitatively, for every million-dollar raised before 2008, they held 0.12 million dollars in

cash and short-term instruments two years after the issuance. The estimate for the post-

2008 period jumps to 0.71 million dollars. We note that Equation (10) is estimated with

relatively few observations, which implies that the true increase may have been less, given

that the coefficients are not estimated very precisely. We do not observe this increase in

the use of cash and short-term instruments for emerging market firms issuing bonds



27 Results for one year after a large bond issuance are similar to those reported for the two-year horizon, but
the coefficients for the one-year horizon are larger for both relatively small and large firms. Using the second
year mitigates the heterogeneity across firms related to the reporting dates of financial statements (given that
offering dates occur at different times within the offering year). In addition, firms might take some time to
spend the cash raised in their issuances, so cash holdings in the first year might not be too informative.
Therefore, we confine our analysis to the two-year horizon.
28 It is conceivable that these results might be driven by selection bias. Emerging market firms that issued in

the pre-2008 period differ on average from those issuing in the post-2008 period. There are several
observable characteristics of firms that might be correlated with holdings of cash, such as the size of firms,
their growth, and their uncertainty. We control for this possibility by adding these observables to the
estimations.
29 One potential concern is that firms might issue bonds of different sizes during a given year. However,

firms issue these types of bonds infrequently. The average emerging market firm only issues bonds of this
type once every 6.6 years (Appendix Table 10).

                                                      31
smaller than $500 million. Firms that issue these smaller bonds held 0.41 (0.25) million

dollars per million dollars issued in before (after) 2008. We do not observe a similar

increase for developed market firms (whose estimates decline from 0.49 to 0.34).

        If the relatively small emerging market firms issuing large bonds were the ones

stretching to take advantage of the yield discount in $500 million bonds in the post-2008

period, then we should observe that these are the firms driving our results in the uses of

funds, and specifically the accumulation of cash. In Figure 10, Panel B, we present the Kim

and Weisbach (2008) analysis for the post-2008 period for emerging market firms, dividing

companies that issued large bonds into high- and low-asset firms (above and below the

country median of assets, respectively). During this period, relatively small firms issuing

large bonds tended to hold much more cash than large firms issuing large bonds, consistent

with our prediction.



7. Conclusions

The GFC led to a persistent period of low interest rates throughout the developed world.

This low interest rate environment produced a search for yield by institutional investors

that favored some classes of global securities, such as emerging market corporate debt,

that had not been as popular among developed countries' institutional investors prior to

the crisis. In this paper, we show that institutional investors searching for yield in emerging

market corporate debt after 2008 favored corporate debt securities that were large enough

to qualify for inclusion in market indexes.

        Inclusion in market indexes provides a liquidity benefit to investors in these bonds

because holding a portfolio of bonds included in the index improves the liquidity of

investors' positions. Mutual funds that track a market index also benefit from holding

bonds in the index; doing so reduces the risk that their performance will deviate from the

market benchmark. The benefits of index inclusion are especially attractive for cross-over

                                              32
fund investors, which manage a considerable pool of assets, lack experience with emerging

market corporate debt, and favor liquidity. Indeed, we find that cross-over funds hold

especially significant proportions of large, index-eligible emerging market corporate debt.

        The sudden rise in the demand for emerging market corporate debt by fund

investors produced a sizeable increase in the yield discount associated with index eligibility,

and a large increase in the proportion of issuance of large, index-eligible corporate debt.

The financial rewards of issuing index-eligible debt after 2008 were significant. Firms able

to issue a $500 million bond, rather than, say, a $400 million bond, saved close to a full

percentage point in yield to maturity. These changes in issuance size were not apparent for

investment grade developed country corporate bond issuances, which by virtue of their

lower preexisting risk and greater ability to attract institutional investors in the pre-2008

era were less affected by the search for yield after 2008.

        Large size emerging economy firms were exogenously better positioned to take

advantage of the new opportunities to issue large bonds at lower yields. Medium-sized

emerging economy firms, however, saw the greatest change in the probability of issuing

large bonds. These medium-sized issuers who stretched and issued large bonds were

willing to retain significant amounts of cash from the proceeds of their bond issuances to

access funds at a lower cost.

        Our findings raise important questions for future research. First, because the

increased discount on emerging market corporate debt was larger for risky debt, it might

have constituted a subsidy for greater risk taking. Did firms respond to this subsidy by

increasing the riskiness of their operations? Second, with respect to the extra cash holdings

of relatively small firms issuing large bonds after 2008, how did the combination of dollar-

denominated debt and domestic cash holdings affect their exposure to exchange rate risk,

and their other risk-management practices? Also, if equity capital is scarce, did the

combination of increased leverage and additional cash from bond issuance by medium-

                                              33
sized firms that stretched to raise their issuance amount crowd in or crowd out productive

investments? Third, in our empirical analysis our data did not permit us to distinguish

between the two alternative drivers of the yield discount for index eligibility (greater

liquidity or reduced tracking error). If liquidity is relatively important, then one would

expect that fund demand for index-eligible debt should be greater for debt with lower bid-

ask spreads. If tracking error is relatively important, then even relatively illiquid debt in the

index would enjoy substantial yield discounts in the primary market. Furthermore, tracking

error should be relatively unimportant for funds that do not track the CEMBI index.




                                               34
References
Acharya, V., S. Cecchetti, J. de Gregorio, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, P. Lane, and U. Panizza
      (2015). "Corporate Debt in Emerging Economies: A Threat to Financial Stability?"
      Brookings Institution, Committee on International Economic Policy and Reform.
Adrian, T., P. Colla, and H.S. Shin, (2013). "Which Financial Frictions? Parsing the
      Evidence from the Financial Crisis of 2007 to 2009." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual
      2012, Vol. 27, edited by D. Acemoglu, J. Parker, and M. Woodford, University of
      Chicago Press, 159-214.
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and J. Wurgler (2005). "Comovement." Journal of Financial
      Economics 75(2), 283-317.
Bates, T., K.M. Kahle, and R.M. Stulz (2009). "Why Do U.S. Firms Hold So Much More
      Cash than They Used To?" Journal of Finance, 64(5), 1985-2021.
Becker, B. and V. Ivashina (2014). "Cyclicality of Credit Supply: Firm-Level Evidence."
      Journal of Monetary Economics 62(C), 76-93.
Becker, B. and V. Ivashina (2015). "Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market." Journal of
      Finance 70(5), 1863-1902.
Begenau, J. and B. Palazzo (2017). "Firm Selection and Corporate Cash Holdings."
      National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 23249.
Beim, D.O., and C.W. Calomiris (2001). "Emerging Financial Markets." McGraw-
      Hill/Irwin, 2001.
Bruno, V. and H.S. Shin (2017). "Global Dollar Credit and Carry Trades: A Firm-level
      Analysis." Review of Financial Studies 30(3), 703-749.
Calomiris, C.W. and H. Mamaysky (2019). "How News and Its Context Drive Risk and
      Returns Around the World." Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Carabin, M., A. de la Garza, and O. Moreno (2015). "Global Liquidity and Corporate
      Financing in Mexico." Bank of Mexico, Mimeo.
Chang, Y.C., H.G. Hong, and I. Liskovich (2015). "Regression Discontinuity and the Price
      Effects of Stock Market Indexing." Review of Financial Studies 28(1), 212-246.
Chen, H., G. Noronha, and V. Singal (2004). "The Price Response to S&P 500 Index
      Additions and Deletions: Evidence of Asymmetry and a New Explanation." Journal
      of Finance 59(4), 1901-1930.
Chui, M., I. Fender, and V. Sushko (2014). "Risks Related to EME Corporate Balance
      Sheets: The Role of Leverage and Currency Mismatch." BIS Quarterly Review,
      September 2014, 35-47.
Chui, M., E. Kuruc, and P. Turner (2016). "A New Dimension to Currency Mismatches
      in the Emerging Markets-Non-Financial Companies." Bank of International
      Settlements, Working Paper 550.
Claessens, S. and Y. Yafeh (2013). "Comovement of Newly Added Stocks with National
      Market Indices: Evidence from Around the World." Review of Finance 17(1), 203-227.
Converse, N., E. Levy-Yeyati, and T. Williams (2018). "How ETFs Amplify the Global
      Financial Cycle in Emerging Markets." Institute of International Economic Policy,
      Working Paper 2018-1.
Cortina, J., T. Didier, and S. Schmukler (2018). "Corporate Borrowing and Debt Maturity:
      The Effects of Market Access and Crises." CEPR Discussion Paper DP13008 and
      Mo.Fi.R. Working Paper 149.
Cremers, M. and A. Petajisto (2009). "How Active Is Your Fund Manager? A New
      Measure that Predicts Performance." Review of Financial Studies, 22(9), 3329-3365.
Cremers, M., M. Ferreira, P. Matos, and L. Starks (2016). "Indexing and Active Fund
      Management: International Evidence." Journal of Financial Economics, 120(3), 539-560.
Dathan, M. and S.A. Davydenko (2018). "Debt Issuance in the Era of Passive Investment."
      University of Toronto, Mimeo.

                                            35
Du, W. and J. Schreger (2016). "Local Currency Sovereign Risk." Journal of Finance 71(3),
       1027-1070.
Duffie, D., P. Dworczak, and H. Zhu (2017). "Benchmarks in Search Markets." Journal of
       Finance, 72(5), 1983-2044.
Erel, I., B. Julio, W. Kim, and M. Weisbach (2012). "Macroeconomic Conditions and
       Capital Raising." Review of Financial Studies, 25(2), 341-376.
Falato, A., D. Kadyrzhanova, J. Sim, and R. Steri (2013). "Rising Intangible Capital,
       Shrinking Debt Capacity, and the US Corporate Savings Glut." Board of Governors
       of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-67.
Feyen, E., K. Gosh, K. Kibuuka, and S. Farazi (2015). "Global Liquidity and External
       Bond Issuance in Emerging Economies and Developing Economies." World Bank,
       Research Working Paper 7363.
Goldstein, I., H. Jiang, and D.T. Ng (2017). "Investor Flows and Fragility in Corporate
       Bond Funds." Journal of Financial Economics 126(3), 592-613.
Greenwood, R. (2005). "Short- and Long-Term Demand Curves for Stocks: Theory and
       Evidence on the Dynamics of Arbitrage." Journal of Financial Economics 75(3), 607-
       649.
Harris, L.E. and E. Gurel (1986). "Price and Volume Effects Associated with Changes in
       the S&P 500 List: New Evidence for the Existence of Price Pressures." Journal of
       Finance 41(4), 815-829.
Hau, H., M. Massa, and J. Peress (2010). "Do Demand Curves for Currencies Slope Down?
       Evidence from the MSCI Global Index Change." Review of Financial Studies 23(4),
       1681-1717.
Jiang, Z., A. Krishnamurthy, and H. Lustig (2018). "Foreign Safe Asset Demand and The
       Dollar Exchange Rate." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
       24439.
Jiang, Z., A. Krishnamurthy, and H. Lustig (2019). "Dollar Safety and The Global Financial
       Cycle." Graduate School of Stanford Business, Mimeo.
Kaminsky, G., and S. Schmukler (2008). "Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: Financial
       Liberalization and Stock Market Cycles." Review of Finance, 12(2), 253-292.
Karolyi, G.A. (2015). Cracking the Emerging Markets Enigma. Oxford University Press, 2015.
Kashyap, A.K., N. Kovrijnykh, J. Li, and A. Pavalova (2018). "The Benchmark Inclusion
       Subsidy." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 25337.
Kim, W. and M. Weisbach (2008). "Motivations for Public Equity Offers." Journal of
       Financial Economics 87(2), 281-307.
Lo Duca, M, Nicoletti, G., and A. Vidal Martinez (2016). "Global Corporate Bond
       Issuance: What Role for US Quantitative Easing?" Journal of International Money and
       Finance, 60, 114-150.
Pandolfi, L. and T. Williams (2019). "Capital Flows and Sovereign Debt Markets: Evidence
       from Index Rebalancings." Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Raddatz, C., S. Schmukler, and T. Williams (2017). "International Asset Allocations and
       Capital Flows: The Benchmark Effect." Journal of International Economics, 108, 413-
       430.
Ramos, M. and S. Garcia (2015). "Is Trouble Brewing for EMEs?" Bank of Mexico,
       Working Paper 2015-08.
Shek, J., I. Shim, and H.S. Shin (2017). "Investor Redemptions and Fund Manager
       Discretionary Sales of EME Bonds: How Are They Related?" Review of Finance 22(1),
       207-241.
Shin, H.S. (2013). "The Second Phase of Global Liquidity and its Impact on Emerging
       Economies." Keynote Address at Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Asia
       Economic Policy Conference.

                                           36
Shleifer, A. (1986). "Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down?" Journal of Finance 41(3),
      579-590.
Wurgler, J. (2011). "On the Economic Consequences of Index-Linked Investing." In
      Challenges to Business in the Twenty-First Century: The Way Forward, edited by G.
      Rosenfeld, J. Lorsch, and R. Khurana, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 20-
      34.
Xiao, J. (2018). "Corporate Debt Structure, Precautionary Savings, and Investment
      Dynamics." Meeting Papers 887, Society for Economic Dynamics.




                                          37
Appendix 1. The Emerging Market Debt Index Universe

There are relatively few indexes that track emerging market corporate debt denominated

in foreign currencies. The most prominent index provider companies that cater to

investors interested in emerging market debt are Barclays/Bloomberg, Citigroup, and J.P.

Morgan. Among them, J.P. Morgan is arguably the leader in the emerging market segment

in terms of the funds that track their performance against its indexes. For instance, as of

July 2017, EPFR Global tracks the performance of 450 specialized emerging market debt

funds. Of those, 394 funds (88%) declared to be tracking their performance against a J.P.

Morgan index. These funds had $317 billion under management, and $280 billion (88%)

of those assets are benchmarked against J.P. Morgan indexes.

       Throughout the paper we focus on the important J.P. Morgan bond indexes. There

are three broad families of J.P. Morgan emerging market indexes: the CEMBI (corporate

debt denominated in U.S. dollars), the EMBI (sovereign and quasi-sovereign debt

denominated in U.S. dollars), and the GBI (sovereign debt denominated in local currency).

Appendix Figure 1 presents the assets under management of funds that track their

performance against J.P. Morgan indexes divided by family type. Appendix Table 2

presents the different requirements that a bond must fulfill to enter the most popular J.P.

Morgan indexes in this segment: the CEMBI Broad Diversified, the CEMBI Narrow

Diversified, and the EMBI Global Diversified.




                                            38
Appendix 2. Fund Classification with Morningstar Direct Mutual Fund Data

We classify Morningstar funds into emerging market corporate specialists and cross-over

categories. The cross-over category is also sub-divided into developed markets, emerging

market sovereign, and emerging market mixed. To categorize funds, we use the

Morningstar "global category," which Morningstar created by analyzing the composition

of mutual fund portfolios. We consider a fund as emerging market if its global category in

Morningstar is "Emerging Markets Fixed Income," "Africa Fixed Income," "India Fixed

Income," "Latin America Fixed Income," or "Mexico Fixed Income." We classify the

other funds in the database as developed markets, because they do not seem to be related

to emerging markets.

        Emerging market funds are subdivided into corporate, sovereign, and mixed funds,

using the Morningstar variable "primary prospectus benchmark." This variable indicates

which index or group of indexes a fund is benchmarked against. If a fund is solely

benchmarked against a corporate (sovereign) bond index or indexes, it is classified as

corporate (sovereign). If a fund is benchmarked against a bond index that follows both

corporate and sovereign bonds (disregarding their share in the index) or a group of indexes

that include corporate and sovereign indexes, it is classified as mixed.

        To determine whether the funds are benchmarked against a corporate, sovereign,

or mixed bond index or indexes, we used the following guidelines. J.P. Morgan CEMBI

indexes and indexes with "corporate" or "non-sovereign" in their name are classified as

corporate. J.P. Morgan EMBI and GBI-EM indexes are classified as sovereign. J.P. Morgan

ELMI+ indexes are classified as mixed because they are money market indexes. Indexes

with "government," "treasury," "sovereign," or a similar term in their name are classified

as sovereign. For the funds in the database that do not fall into the guidelines described

above or whose "primary prospectus benchmark" is not available, we searched manually

the composition of their holdings through Morningstar, the Financial Times, or the official

                                             39
fund's website to determine whether the fund should be classified as corporate, sovereign,

or mixed. If a fund only holds corporate (sovereign) bonds in its portfolio, it is classified

as corporate (sovereign). If a fund holds both corporate and sovereign bonds, it is classified

as mixed.




                                             40
                                      Figure 1
                  Model-Based Cumulative Distribution of Issuance Size
This figure plots the model-based cumulative distribution of issuance size. I denotes issuance size,
G(I) denotes the cumulative distribution of issuance size, and X denotes firm size (which represents
the size of the firm's investment opportunity). Firms of size below X issue X, firms in the size interval
[X:500) issue 500, and firms of size greater or equal than 500 issue X. Because of the opportunity cost
of cash, there are no bond issuances of size [X:500). Panel A plots the cumulative distribution of
issuance size for a given X. Panel B shows how the cumulative distribution of issuance size changes
when the size yield discount (D) increases (which decreases X).
                        Panel A. Cumulative Distribution of Issuance Size
   G I


F 500

   F 




                                                              500                                    I


                  Panel B. Effect of an Increase in the Size Yield Discount (D)
   G I




                                                              500                                    I

                                                                            
                                                           Figure 2
                       Yield to Maturity of U.S. Dollar Corporate Bonds Issued by Emerging Markets
This figure shows the yield to maturity of international U.S. dollar-denominated bonds issued by firms in emerging
markets during 2000-2016. The lines show the average yield to maturity of bonds issued with face values below
$300 million (0:300), between $300 and $500 million [300:500), and equal to or above $500 million [500:1,000),
respectively.

                           9

                           8
   Yield to Maturity (%)




                           7

                           6

                           5

                           4

                           3



                                               (0:300)   [300:500)   [500:1,000)
                                                                     Figure 3
                                                Yield to Maturity of Issuances, Pre and Post 2008
This figure shows the average yield to maturity of international U.S. dollar-denominated bonds of different
issuance sizes in millions of U.S. dollars for firms in emerging markets (Panel A) and investment grade firms in
developed markets (Panel B) during the pre-2008 (2000-2008) and post-2008 (2009-2016) periods.
                                                              Panel A. Emerging Markets
                              8.5

                              8.0

                              7.5
Yield to Maturity (%)




                              7.0

                              6.5

                              6.0

                              5.5

                              5.0

                              4.5
                                    [100:200)    [200:300)   [300:400)   [400:500) [500:600)   [600:700)   [700:800)   [800:900)
                                                                             Issuance Size


                                                             Panel B. Developed Markets
                              6.5

                              6.0

                              5.5
      Yield to Maturity (%)




                              5.0

                              4.5

                              4.0

                              3.5

                              3.0
                                    [100:200)    [200:300)   [300:400)   [400:500) [500:600)   [600:700)   [700:800)   [800:900)
                                                                             Issuance Size
                                                                   Pre-2008 Period             Post-2008 Period
                                                                   95% CI                      95% CI
                                                          Figure 4
                        Value and Number of U.S. Dollar Corporate Bonds Issued by Emerging Markets
This figure shows the total value (Panel A) and the total number (Panel B) of international U.S. dollar-denominated
bonds issued by firms in emerging markets during 2000-2016. The areas represent bonds issued with different face
values in millions of U.S. dollars. The total value of bonds is measured in billions of 2011 U.S. dollars.

                                                Panel A. Total Value of Bonds
                        140

                        120
Total Value of Bonds




                        100

                         80

                         60

                         40

                         20

                          0




                                               Panel B. Total Number of Bonds
                        450
                        400
                        350
Total Number of Bonds




                        300
                        250
                        200
                        150
                        100
                         50
                          0



                                               (0:300)   [300:500)   [500:1,000)
                                                            Figure 5
                                   Cumulative Distribution of Issuance Size, Pre and Post 2008
This figure shows the cumulative distribution of international U.S. dollar-denominated bond issuances by size in
millions of U.S. dollars for emerging market firms (Panel A) and investment grade developed market firms (Panel
B) during the pre-2008 (2000-2008) and post-2008 (2009-2016) periods.

                                                    Panel A. Emerging Markets
                         1.0


                         0.8
    Cumulative Density




                         0.6


                         0.4


                         0.2


                         0.0
                               0      100   200     300     400        500      600    700        800    900
                                                                  Issuance Size

                                                    Panel B. Developed Markets
                         1.0


                         0.8
    Cumulative Density




                         0.6


                         0.4


                         0.2


                         0.0
                               0      100    200    300     400     500     600         700        800    900
                                                              Issuance Size
                                                   Pre-2008 Period             Post-2008 Period
                                                                          Figure 6
                                               Yield to Maturity and Corporate Bond Issuances of $500 Million
This figure shows the evolution of the yield to maturity and the percentage of international $500 million corporate
bond issuances during 2000-2016. Panel A displays the average yield to maturity in each year for $500 million bond
issuances. Panel B shows the average number of bond issuances of size equal to $500 million, relative to the total
number of bond issuances. The series display percent values for emerging market firms and investment grade
developed market firms during 2000-2016.
                                                                  Panel A. Yield to Maturity
                                          10


                                           8
Yield to Maturity (%)




                                           6


                                           4


                                           2




                                                                      Panel B. Issuances
                                          20
     Total Number of Bond Issuances (%)
       Number of $500 Million Bonds/




                                          16


                                          12


                                           8


                                           4


                                           0




                                                                  Emerging Markets         Developed Markets
                                                                    Figure 7
                                                  Mutual Fund Investments in Emerging Markets
Panel A shows the cumulative flows into emerging market sovereign and corporate debt funds in billions of U.S.
dollars and the share of international $500 million bond issuances during 2003-2016. The latter share is calculated
as the number of international $500 million bonds issued by emerging market firms relative to all international
dollar-denominated bonds issued by these firms. The correlation coefficients between the two time series are
reported at the top of the figure. Panel B shows the weight of developed market mutual funds in emerging market
sovereign and corporate debt during 2005-2016.
                                       Panel A. Flows into Emerging Market Debt and Share of $500 Million Bonds
                                       25                                                                              120
                                            Correlation = 0.93
     Share of $500 Million Bonds (%)




                                       20
                                                                                                                       90




                                                                                                                             Cumulative Flows
                                       15
                                                                                                                       60
                                       10

                                                                                                                       30
                                        5


                                        0                                                                              0



                                                      Number of $500 Million Bonds/Total Number of Bonds (Left Axis)
                                                      Cumulative Flows to Emerging Market Debt Funds (Right Axis)


                                       Panel B. Weight in Emerging Markets of Developed Market Mutual Funds
                                       20


                                       15
   Weight (%)




                                       10


                                        5



                                        0




                                                   Median Exposure to Emerging Markets of Developed Market Funds
                                                                               Figure 8
                                                         Size Distribution of Issuers of Different Bond Sizes
This figure shows the firm size distribution of emerging market issuers and investment grade developed market issuers of international U.S. dollar-denominated bonds of different
sizes during the pre-2008 (2000-2008) and post-2008 (2009-2016) periods. Firm size is measured by the log of total assets. The left-side graphs show the cumulative distribution of
issuers of international bonds with a face value below $500 million (0:500). The right-side graphs show the cumulative distribution of issuers of international bonds with a face
value equal to or above $500 million [500:1,000). Issuers in each sub-period are defined as firms that issued bonds of a certain size at least once during this period. Densities are
estimated using the Epanechnikov kernel function.
                                                                           Panel A. Emerging Markets
                                 Issuers of (0:500) Bonds                                                              Issuers of [500:1,000) Bonds
             0.35                                                                              0.35

             0.30                                                                              0.30

             0.25                                                                              0.25

             0.20                                                                              0.20
   Density




             0.15                                                                              0.15

             0.10                                                                              0.10

             0.05                                                                              0.05

             0.00                                                                              0.00
                    0                 5                        10                    15               0                     5                        10                   15
                                          Log of Issuer Size                                                                    Log of Issuer Size

                                                                           Panel B. Developed Markets
             0.25                                                                              0.25

             0.20                                                                              0.20

             0.15                                                                              0.15
   Density




             0.10                                                                              0.10

             0.05                                                                              0.05

             0.00                                                                              0.00
                    -5       0             5            10            15             20               -5           0             5             10           15            20
                                          Log of Issuer Size                                                                    Log of Issuer Size
                                                                           Pre-2008 Period            Post-2008 Period
                                                                            Figure 9
                                           Probability of Issuing Large U.S. Dollar-Denominated Bonds by Firm Size
This figure shows the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-denominated bond with a face value equal to or above $500 million [500:1,000) in the pre-2008 (2000-2008)
and post-2008 (2009-2016) periods for firms of different sizes. Firm size is measured by the log of total assets. The sample is restricted to firms that issued at least one bond during
2000-2016. The probabilities are computed from probit and logit regressions reported in Table 9 for the [500:1,000) bond issuance dummy on the pre-2008 dummy, the post-2008
dummy, and the interaction of the pre and post dummy variables with the log of assets. Panel A reports the probabilities computed using the probit regressions. Panel B reports the
probabilities computed using the logit regressions. The left-side graphs restrict the sample to firms in emerging markets. The right-side graphs restrict the sample to investment grade
firms in developed markets.
                                                                                  Panel A. Probit
                                  Emerging Markets                                                                                     Developed Markets
                1.0                                                                                           1.0

                0.8                                                                                           0.8

                0.6                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                               Probability
  Probability




                0.4                                                                                           0.4

                0.2                                                                                           0.2

                0.0                                                                                           0.0
                      0              5                        10                                                    0                     5                        10
                                         Log of Issuer Size                                                                                   Log of Issuer Size
                                                                                   Panel B. Logit
                1.0                                                                                           1.0

                0.8                                                                                           0.8

                0.6                                                                                           0.6
 Probability




                                                                                                Probability




                0.4                                                                                           0.4

                0.2                                                                                           0.2

                0.0                                                                                           0.0
                      0              5                        10                                                    0                     5                        10
                                         Log of Issuer Size                                                                                   Log of Issuer Size
                                                                             Pre-2008 Period                        Post-2008 Period
                                                       Figure 10
                             Change in Cash and Short-Term Investments After Bond Issuance
This figure shows the coefficients of cash and short-term investments from firm-level panel OLS regressions that measure the use of funds for
international U.S. dollar-denominated bond issuers two periods after the issuance. Panel A shows the use of funds for emerging market issuers
and investment grade developed market issuers of bonds of different sizes during the pre-2008 (2000-2008) and post-2008 (2009-2016)
periods. The graph shows the dollar effect separately for issuers of international bonds with a face value below $500 million (0:500) and equal
to or above $500 million [500:1,000). Panel B shows the use of funds for bond issuers in emerging markets during 2009-2016, separately for
firms with high assets and low assets. A firm is classified as a "high asset firm" if its average assets during 2009-2016 are equal to or greater than
the assets of the median firm in the same country, using only firms that issued bonds equal to or greater than $500 million during 2009-2016.
Analogously, "low asset firms" are those below the median firm. The analysis follows the specification of Kim and Weisbach (2008). The
dependent variable for year t is Cash = log[((Vn - V0)/Assets) + 1], where V is cash and short-term investments. Independent variables are
bond issuance value and other sources of funds, both normalized by total assets, in addition to the log of total assets. Panel A also controls for
the contemporaneous growth rate of sales, and the standard deviation of the growth of sales. Total assets are measured at the value of the year
just before the issuance. The dollar effect captures the dollar change in the dependent variable two years after the issuance year that results
from a one dollar increase in a firm's bond issuance. All variables are winsorized at the 1% level.
                    Panel A. Controlling for Growth of Sales and the Standard Deviation of the Growth of Sales
              0.8
                                                                  0.71
                                                                                         0.67

              0.6
                                                                                                   0.54
                                                                                                                            0.49
$ Change




                      0.41
              0.4
                                                                                                                                     0.34
                               0.25
              0.2
                                                       0.12


              0.0
                         (0:500)                         [500:1,000)                         (0:500)                         [500:1,000)
                                    Emerging Markets                                                    Developed Markets
                                                               Pre-2008 Period     Post-2008 Period



                                      Panel B. High Asset and Low Asset Emerging Market Firms
              1.2




                                                                                                 0.81
              0.8
   $ Change




              0.4



                                                          0.06
              0.0

                                                              High Asset Firms      Low Asset Firms
                                  Table 1
               Emerging Market Bond Issuances of Different Sizes
This table reports the percentage of international U.S. dollar-denominated bonds issuances with
face value below $300 million (0:300), between $300 and $500 million [300:500), and equal to or
above $500 million [500:1,000), by firms in emerging markets during the pre-2008 (2000-2008) and
post-2008 (2009-2016) periods. Column 1 displays the percentage of the total value of bonds
issued in each size category relative to the total value of bonds issued of any size. The value of each
bond is in constant 2011 U.S. dollars. Column 2 displays the percentage of the total number of
bonds issued in each size category relative to the total number of bonds issued of any size.
                                                      (1)                            (2)
                                             Total Value of Bonds           Total Number of Bonds

                                            Pre 2008      Post 2008         Pre 2008      Post 2008

(0:300)                                      42.86%        16.64%            75.41%         47.52%
[300:500)                                    23.99%        21.72%            13.41%         19.67%
[500:1,000)                                  33.15%        61.64%            11.18%         32.81%
                                                                    Table 2
                         Yield to Maturity and Probability of Issuing Bonds of Different Sizes, [400:500) and [500:600)
This table reports mean tests for the yield to maturity and the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-denominated bond with face value between $400 and $500
million [400:500), and between $500 and $600 million [500:600), for firms in emerging markets and investment grade firms in developed markets during the pre-2008 (2000-
2008) and post-2008 (2009-2016) periods. Panel A shows the yield to maturity (in percent) in each category. Panel B shows the percentage of issued bonds. Columns 1-3
show the mean tests and differences (pre and post 2008) for the [400:500) bonds, separately for emerging and developed markets. Columns 4-6 show the mean tests and
differences (pre and post 2008) for the [500:600) bonds. Column 7 shows the difference-in-differences effects between columns 3 and 6 for each region. Column 8 reports
the triple difference between emerging and developed markets. The yield to maturity variable is winsorized at the 5% level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                         Panel A. Yield to Maturity
                                             [400:500)                                            [500:600)                          Diff-in-Diff           Triple Diff
                             Pre 2008        Post 2008          Diff              Pre 2008        Post 2008          Diff
                                (1)             (2)          (3)=(2)-(1)             (4)             (5)          (6)=(5)-(4)         (7)=(6)-(3)        (8)=EM(7)-DM(7)

Emerging Markets               7.189            6.223           -0.966 ***          7.100            4.922           -2.177 ***         -1.211 ***
                             (0.232)          (0.189)          (0.312)            (0.180)          (0.078)          (0.189)            (0.333)                    -0.988 ***
Developed Markets              5.534            4.076           -1.458 ***          5.357            3.676           -1.681 ***         -0.223                   (0.344)
                             (0.077)          (0.075)          (0.109)            (0.068)          (0.058)          (0.092)            (0.147)
                                                                             Panel B. Issuance
                                             [400:500)                                            [500:600)                          Diff-in-Diff           Triple Diff
                             Pre 2008        Post 2008          Diff              Pre 2008        Post 2008          Diff
                                                                                                                                      (7)=(6)-(3)        (8)=EM(7)-DM(7)
                                (1)             (2)          (3)=(2)-(1)             (4)             (5)          (6)=(5)-(4)
Emerging Markets               0.043            0.063            0.020 ***          0.065            0.188            0.123 ***          0.103 ***
                             (0.004)          (0.005)          (0.006)            (0.005)          (0.008)          (0.009)            (0.011)                     0.072 ***
Developed Markets              0.043            0.047            0.004              0.074            0.110            0.035 ***          0.031 ***               (0.013)
                             (0.002)          (0.003)          (0.003)            (0.003)          (0.004)          (0.005)            (0.006)
                                                   Table 3
                                     Yield to Maturity and Issuance Sizes
 This table reports difference-in-difference regressions of the yield to maturity of international U.S. dollar-
 denominated bonds of different sizes in millions of U.S. dollars, measuring the relative change after 2008 for
 firms in emerging markets (EM) compared to investment grade firms in developed markets. The analysis is
 restricted to positive bond issuance observations during 2000-2016 and includes both emerging market and
 investment grade developed market issuers. The full equation estimated is Equation (7) in the text. Columns 1-4
 report the coefficients  ,          of the interaction term between the dummy of each bucket size, the post 2008
 dummy (equal to one for 2009-2016) and the emerging market dummy. The coefficients  ,  ,                       , and
        are estimated but are not reported in this table to conserve space. They are reported instead in Appendix
 Table 5 and Appendix Table 6. Column 2 includes country, industry-year, and quarter-year fixed effects (FE).
 Column 3 includes country, industry-year, maturity, rating, quarter-year fixed effects, in addition to bond-firm
 controls. Bond-firm controls include a dummy indicating whether the bond was issued publicly or privately, a
 dummy indicating whether the firm is foreign-owned, a dummy indicating whether the firm has partial
 government ownership, and a fixed or flexible coupon dummy. Column 4 reports a placebo test using non-
 index-eligible bonds, which are those with less than five years of maturity or flexible coupon rates. Standard
 errors are clustered at the country and quarter-year levels. The yield to maturity variable is winsorized at the 5%
 level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                          Associated                   Dependent Variable: Yield to Maturity
                                          Coefficients          (1)              (2)           (3)               (4)
                                               ,
EM*[100:200)*Post 2008                                        -0.778           -0.161          0.469        -0.537
                                                             (0.619)          (0.425)        (0.340)       (1.417)
                                               ,
EM*[200:300)*Post 2008                                          0.27            0.339          0.863 ***     0.965
                                                             (0.261)          (0.301)        (0.305)       (0.653)
                                               ,
EM*[300:400)*Post 2008                                        -0.034           -0.293          0.435 *      -0.575
                                                             (0.235)          (0.277)        (0.253)       (0.821)
                                               ,
EM*[400:500)*Post 2008                                         0.492            0.872 **       1.154 ***     0.052
                                                             (0.366)          (0.366)        (0.339)       (0.560)
                                               ,
EM*[500:600)*Post 2008                                        -0.496 ***       -0.052          0.397        -0.228
                                                             (0.153)          (0.409)        (0.308)       (0.985)
                                               ,
EM*[600:700)*Post 2008                                         0.915 *          0.588          0.516        -0.560
                                                             (0.516)          (0.513)        (0.454)       (1.044)
                                               ,
EM*[700:800)*Post 2008                                         0.820 **         0.176          0.531         2.941 ***
                                                             (0.380)          (0.586)        (0.451)       (0.509)
                                               ,
EM*[800:900)*Post 2008                                         0.752            0.850          1.275 *       1.996 ***
                                                             (0.540)          (0.983)        (0.645)       (0.547)

Bond Controls                                                  No               No             Yes              No
Country FE                                                     No               Yes            Yes              No
Industry-Year FE                                               No               Yes            Yes              No
Maturity FE                                                    No               No             Yes              No
Ratings FE                                                     No               No             Yes              No
Quarter-Year FE                                                No               Yes            Yes              No
Diff-in-Diff                          ,               ,       -0.988 ***       -0.924 **     -0.757 **         -0.280
                                                   
P-Value                                                        0.002            0.021         0.029             0.823
Number of Observations                                         7,939            7,939         7,818             1,600
R2                                                             0.344            0.659         0.763             0.471
                                                             Table 4
                                         Probability of Issuing Bonds of Different Sizes
This table reports difference-in-difference regressions of the change in the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-denominated
bond of a certain size in millions of U.S. dollars, pre and post 2008, for firms in emerging markets (EM) relative to investment grade firms
in developed markets. The analysis is restricted to positive bond issuance observations during 2000-2016. Panel A reports the regressions
for the probability of issuing a bond of a certain size as a dependent variable on the interaction of the post 2008 dummy (equal to one for
2009-2016) with the emerging market dummy. The regressions include country, industry and quarter-year fixed effects (FE). Panel B
reports the same regression as in Panel A, but including maturity and rating fixed effects, in addition to bond-firm controls. Bond-firm
controls include a dummy indicating whether the bond was issued publicly or privately, a dummy indicating whether the firm is foreign-
owned, a dummy indicating whether the firm has partial government ownership, and a fixed or flexible coupon dummy. Standard errors
are clustered at the country and quarter-year levels. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.
                                  Panel A. Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=[X:X+100)
                                                            Probability of Issuing Debt of a Certain Amount
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)            (8)         (9)
                                 (0:100)    [100:200)   [200:300) [300:400) [400:500) [500:600) [600:700)            [700:800)   [800:900)
EM*Post 2008                    -0.090       -0.075 ** -0.012         0.038 ** 0.015          0.090 *** -0.001         0.019       0.012
                               (0.056)      (0.029)    (0.020)      (0.015)    (0.016)      (0.023)     (0.009)      (0.012)     (0.009)


Bond Controls                     No          No          No            No          No         No           No          No           No
Country FE                        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Industry FE                       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Quarter-Year FE                   Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Mean Probability                 0.359       0.173       0.127        0.0908      0.0471      0.101       0.0296      0.0491       0.0157
Number of Countries                68          68          68           68          68          68          68          68           68
Number of Observations           19,905      19,905      19,905       19,905      19,905      19,905      19,905      19,905       19,905
R2                                0.218      0.0701      0.0457       0.0539      0.0407      0.0624      0.0371      0.0463       0.0271
                                  Panel B. Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=[X:X+100)
                                                            Probability of Issuing Debt of a Certain Amount
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)            (8)         (9)
                                 (0:100)    [100:200)   [200:300) [300:400) [400:500) [500:600) [600:700)            [700:800)   [800:900)
EM*Post 2008                    -0.074       -0.076 ** -0.009         0.037 ** 0.014          0.084 *** -0.003         0.013       0.011
                               (0.058)      (0.029)    (0.019)      (0.015)    (0.016)      (0.024)     (0.009)      (0.013)     (0.009)


Bond Controls                     Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Country FE                        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Industry FE                       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Maturity FE                       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Quarter-Year FE                   Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Rating FE                         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Mean Probability                 0.359       0.173       0.127        0.0908      0.0471      0.101       0.0296      0.0491       0.0157
Number of Countries                68          68          68           68          68          68          68          68           68
Number of Observations           19,724      19,724      19,724       19,724      19,724      19,724      19,724      19,724       19,724
R2                                0.264      0.0734      0.0471       0.0553      0.0429      0.0853      0.0448      0.0660       0.0327
                                                   Table 5
              Placebo Test: Probability of Issuing Non-Index-Eligible Bonds of Different Sizes
This table reports difference-in-difference regressions of the change in the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-
denominated bond of a certain size in millions of U.S. dollars, pre and post 2008, for firms in emerging markets (EM) relative to
investment grade firms in developed markets. The analysis is restricted to positive bond issuance observations during 2000-2016. The
table reports the regressions for the bond issuance dummy of each size bucket on the interaction of the post 2008 dummy (equal to
one for 2009-2016) with the emerging market dummy. As opposed to the results in Table 4, the regressions in this table use only non-
index-eligible bonds, which are those with less than five years of maturity or flexible interest rates. All regressions include country,
industry, and quarter-year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors are clustered at the country and quarter-year levels. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                        Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=[X:X+100)
                                                          Probability of Issuing Debt of a Certain Amount
                                (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)             (8)          (9)
                              (0:100)     [100:200)   [200:300) [300:400) [400:500) [500:600) [600:700)             [700:800)    [800:900)
EM*Post 2008                  0.109        -0.048       0.029       0.011       0.001       -0.045 *    -0.010       -0.040 *** -0.010
                            (0.067)       (0.033)     (0.031)     (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.024)     (0.008)      (0.015)     (0.011)


Country FE                      Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Industry FE                     Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Quarter-Year FE                 Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Mean Probability               0.489        0.199       0.104       0.0560      0.0275       0.0703      0.0145       0.0281      0.00832
Number of Countries             60           60          60           60          60           60          60           60           60
Number of Observations         9861         9861        9861         9861        9861         9861        9861         9861        9861
R2                             0.198       0.0948      0.0572       0.0472      0.0290       0.0662      0.0316       0.0514      0.0340
                                     Table 6
         Probability of Issuing $500 Million Bonds and the Carry Trade
This table reports linear regressions of the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-
denominated bond on the log of one plus the lagged carry trade measure for firms in emerging
markets during 2009-2016. The estimations include only issuances of bonds of less than or equal to
$500 million in face value. The carry trade measure is the difference between the interest rate in the
money market in local currency and the U.S. money market rate, divided by the annual volatility of
the exchange rate during the previous quarter. The regression in column 1 includes quarter-year
fixed effects (FE). The regression in column 2 includes industry and quarter-year fixed effects. The
regressions in columns 3 and 4 include maturity controls and industry, rating, and quarter-year
fixed effects. Maturity controls use the maturity in years of each bond, measured as the number of
years to final maturity. Standard errors are clustered at the country and time levels. Standard errors
are clustered at the country and quarter-year level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                             Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=500
                                               (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)
Log(1 + Lagged Carry Trade)                   0.023 ***       0.052 ***       0.055 ***       0.093 ***
                                            (0.005)         (0.012)         (0.012)         (0.014)


Maturity controls                              No              No              Yes             Yes
Industry FE                                    No              Yes             Yes             Yes
Rating FE                                      No              No              No              Yes
Quarter-Year FE                                Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Number of Observations                       1,331           1,322           1,286           1,284
    2
R                                            0.043           0.103           0.108           0.172
                                                                           Table 7
                                               Number, Size, and Portfolio Composition of Debt Mutual Funds
This table reports the number of funds, their size, and the portfolio composition of each category of mutual funds at the end of December 2016. The sample is restricted to fixed
income funds. Columns 1, 3, 5-7 consider the full sample of fixed income funds. Columns 2 and 4 restrict the sample to funds with at least one emerging market corporate debt
security in their portfolio. Column 5 reports the percentage of corporate debt over total debt for each category of funds. Columns 6 and 7 report the percentage and the total value
of the emerging markets corporate debt, respectively. The size of the funds and the value of corporate debt is computed from the market value in millions of U.S. dollars.
Corporate debt is composed of corporate, corporate inflation projected, and undefined bond securities. Corporate debt is considered emerging market corporate debt when it is
issued by an emerging market firm.
                                                 Number of Funds                               Fund Size                           Corporate Debt
                                                                 With                                    With                                                        Emerging
                                                               Emerging                                Emerging                                                       Market
                                                                                                                                               Emerging              Corporate
                                             All Funds          Market               All Funds          Market                   All
                                                                                                                                                Market                 Debt
                                                               Corporate                               Corporate
                                                                 Debt                                    Debt
                                                 (1)              (2)                    (3)              (4)                    (5)                (6)              (7)=(3)*(6)
Cross-Over Funds
 Developed Markets                               895               580                4,201,066         3,456,386              33.56%             1.75%                73,712
 Emerging Market Sovereign                       315               265                 278,354           273,884               21.78%            16.22%                45,156
 Emerging Market Mixed                           129               101                 49,045             41,259               26.74%            19.49%                 9,560

Emerging Market Specialists Funds
 Emerging Market Corporate Specialis             96                 91                 32,593             32,364               87.66%            63.86%                20,815
All                                             1,435             1,037               4,561,058         3,803,894              33.15%             3.27%               149,249
                                                           Table 8
                                Portfolio Composition by Issuance Size of Debt Mutual Funds:
                                 Holdings in International U.S. Dollar-Denominated Bonds
This table reports the percentage of emerging market corporate debt of a certain size interval over the total value of emerging market corporate debt
issued of any size that the mean fund of each category held in its portfolio at the end of December 2016. The analysis is restricted to fixed income
funds and to international U.S. dollar-denominated bonds. Columns 1, 2, and 3 report the percentage of emerging market corporate bonds issued
with face values below $300 million (0:300), between $300 and $500 million [300:500), and equal to or above $500 million [500:1,000), respectively.
Corporate emerging market debt is composed of corporate, corporate inflation projected, and undefined bond securities issued by an emerging
market firm. Column 4 reports the differences in means tests for bond issuances with a face value equal to or above $500 million for each type of
funds with respect to the emerging market corporate funds. Column 5 reports the difference in the share of the portfolio in each bucket size for each
category of funds with respect to the total amount outstanding. The total amount outstanding is the U.S. dollar-denominated outstanding value of
all the international corporate emerging market bonds included in Thomson Reuters Security Data Corporation Platinum database (SDC Platinum)
at the end of 2016.
                                               Total Value of Emerging Market Corporate Debt                               Differences
                                                                                                                                   Compared to
                                                                                                           Compared to EM
                                                  (0:300)            [300:500)           [500:1,000)                               Outstanding
                                                                                                             Specialists
                                                                                                                                     Amount
                                                    (1)                  (2)                 (3)                    (4)                (5)

Cross-Over Funds
 Developed Markets                                  6.70 %             10.73 %             82.57 %              -13.540 ***              14.420
                                                (19.157)            (22.718)            (28.686)                 (2.469)
 Emerging Market Sovereign                          6.31 %             15.45 %             78.24 %                -9.209 ***             10.089
                                                (12.163)            (19.719)            (22.901)                 (2.660)
 Emerging Market Mixed                              7.40 %             18.29 %             74.31 %                -5.284                 6.164
                                                (15.371)            (18.557)            (23.230)                 (3.261)

Emerging Market Specialists Funds
 Emerging Market Corporate Specialists              6.32               24.65               69.03                     -                   0.880
                                                 (9.071)            (15.520)            (18.690)
Total Amount Outstanding                          12.41 %              19.44 %             68.15 %                                         -
                                                      Table 9
                           Probability of Issuing Large U.S. Dollar-Denominated Bonds
This table reports the probit and logit regressions of the change in the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-denominated
bond with a face value equal to or above $500 million [500:1,000) in the pre-2008 (2000-2008) and post-2008 (2009-2016) periods, for
firms in emerging markets and investment grade firms in developed markets. The data are aggregated by firm and sub-period (pre-
2008 and post-2008) level. The sample is restricted to firms that issued at least one bond during 2000-2016. Panel A report regression
coefficients for the [500:1,000) bond issuance dummy on the pre-2008 dummy, the post-2008 dummy, and the interaction of the pre
and post dummy variables with the log of assets. Assets are computed as the mean value per firm and sub-period. Columns 1 and 2
report the probit regressions. Columns 3 and 4 report the logit regressions. Panel B reports the marginal effects for the increase in the
probability of issuing [500:1,000) bonds after 2008 for firms in the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles of the size
distribution. Robust standard errors are reported. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

                                                          Panel A. Coefficients

                                                         Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance= [500:1,000)
                                              Probit Regression Coefficients                      Logit Regression Coefficient
                                       Emerging Markets          Developed Markets         Emerging Markets         Developed Markets
                                             (1)                        (2)                      (3)                       (4)
Pre 2008                                     -5.683 ***                -4.241 ***              -10.356 ***                -7.257 ***
                                            (0.512)                   (0.262)                   (0.979)                  (0.474)
Post 2008                                    -4.395 ***                -3.701 ***                -7.426 ***               -6.218 ***
                                            (0.318)                   (0.250)                   (0.578)                  (0.437)
Pre 2008 * ln(Assets)                         0.501 ***                 0.368 ***                 0.921 ***                0.631 ***
                                            (0.055)                   (0.027)                   (0.102)                  (0.048)
Post 2008 * ln(Assets)                        0.420 ***                 0.323 ***                 0.711 ***                0.544 ***
                                            (0.035)                   (0.026)                   (0.063)                  (0.044)
Number of Observations                        1,688                     2,240                    1,688                       2,240
                                                       Panel B. Marginal Effects
                                                      Probit Regression                                   Logit Regression
                                       Emerging Markets          Developed Markets         Emerging Markets         Developed Markets
                                             (1)                        (2)                      (3)                       (4)
10th Percentile                               0.010 **                  0.001                     0.017 ***                0.003
                                            (0.004)                   (0.001)                   (0.006)                  (0.002)
25th Percentile                               0.036 ***                 0.018 *                   0.041 ***                0.019 *
                                            (0.010)                   (0.010)                   (0.010)                  (0.011)
50th Percentile                               0.092 ***                 0.035 *                   0.091 ***                0.035 **
                                            (0.017)                   (0.018)                   (0.017)                  (0.017)
75th Percentile                               0.157 ***                 0.035                     0.162 ***                0.038
                                            (0.026)                   (0.024)                   (0.026)                  (0.024)
90th Percentile                               0.171 ***                 0.011                     0.180 ***                0.010
                                            (0.043)                   (0.040)                   (0.045)                  (0.043)
95th Percentile                               0.156 ***                -0.008                     0.154 **                -0.013
                                            (0.059)                   (0.049)                   (0.064)                  (0.051)
99th Percentile                               0.103                    -0.024                     0.074                   -0.028
                                            (0.075)                   (0.048)                   (0.075)                  (0.044)
                                        Appendix Figure 1
                 Assets Benchmarked to J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Debt Indexes
This figure shows the evolution of the assets of funds that track their performance against J.P. Morgan's emerging market
debt indexes during 2007-2018. Numbers are in billions of U.S. dollars. CEMBI stands for Corporate Emerging Market Bond
Index, EMBI stands for Emerging Market Bond Index, and GBI stands for Government Bond Index.

          80                                                                                               400

          70                                                                                               350

          60                                                                                               300

          50                                                                                               250

          40                                                                                               200

          30                                                                                               150

          20                                                                                               100

          10                                                                                               50

           0                                                                                               0



                            CEMBI Broad (Left Axis)                     CEMBI Narrow (Left Axis)
                            GBI (Right Axis)                            EMBI (Right Axis)
                                                      Appendix Figure 2
                                       Yield to Maturity of Issuances, Pre and Post 2008
                         Including High-Yield Developed Market Bonds in the Emerging Market Sample
This figure shows the average yield to maturity (Panel A) and the cumulative distribution (Panel B) of international
U.S. dollar-denominated bonds of different issuance sizes in millions of U.S. dollars, for emerging market issuers
and high-yield developed market issuers during the pre-2008 (2000-2008) and post-2008 (2009-2016) periods.

                                            Panel A. Yield to Maturity of Issuances, Pre and Post 2008
                          9.0

                          8.5

                          8.0
 Yield to Maturity (%)




                          7.5

                          7.0

                          6.5

                          6.0

                          5.5
                                    [100:200)   [200:300)     [300:400)   [400:500) [500:600)       [600:700)   [700:800)    [800:900)
                                                                              Issuance Size

                                                            Pre-2008 Period                     Post-2008 Period
                                                            95% CI                              95% CI


                                     Panel B. Cumulative Distribution of Issuance Size, Pre and Post 2008
                          1.0


                          0.8
Cumulative Density




                          0.6


                          0.4


                          0.2


                          0.0
                                0         100      200         300        400        500      600      700       800        900
                                                                                Issuance Size

                                                                Pre-2008 Period              Post-2008 Period
                                             Appendix Table 1
                                             List of Countries
This table displays the list of markets classified as emerging and developed in the sample.
Emerging Markets                  Emerging Markets (Cont'd)               Developed Markets
Argentina                         Mongolia                                Australia
Azerbaijan                        Morocco                                 Austria
Bahrain                           Nigeria                                 Belgium
Brazil                            Oman                                    Canada
Chile                             Panama                                  Denmark
China                             Peru                                    Finland
Colombia                          Philippines, The                        France
Croatia                           Poland                                  Germany
Czech Republic                    Qatar                                   Greece
Dominican Republic                Russian Federation                      Hong Kong SAR, China
Egypt, Arab Rep.                  Saudi Arabia                            Iceland
El Salvador                       Singapore                               Ireland
Guatemala                         South Africa                            Italy
Hungary                           Taiwan, China                           Japan
India                             Thailand                                Luxembourg
Indonesia                         Trinidad and Tobago                     Netherlands
Israel                            Turkey                                  New Zealand
Jamaica                           Ukraine                                 Norway
Kazakhstan                        United Arab Emirates                    Portugal
Korea, Rep.                       Venezuela, RB                           Spain
Kuwait                                                                    Sweden
Lebanon                                                                   Switzerland
Malaysia                                                                  United Kingdom
Mexico                                                                    United States
                                                       Appendix Table 2
                                                  CEMBI and EMBI Requirements
This table reports the requirements for bonds to qualify for inclusion in the J.P. Morgan CEMBI and EMBI indexes.

                                                      CEMBI
                                                                                                               EMBIG Diversified
                          CEMBI Broad/ Broad Div.               CEMBI / Div (Narrow)

                        Issuer needs to belong to a country in one of the following regions: GNI per capita must be below the Index Income
Country/Region
                        Asia ex Japan, Latam, Eastern Europe, Middle East/Africa.            Ceiling (IIC) for three consecutive years.
                         Headquartered in an emerging market (EM) country, or
Issuer                   100% of the issuer's asset are within EM economies, or                 N/A
                         100% secured by assets within EM economies.
                                                                                                Daily available pricing from third party evaluation
Liquidity               N/A                                 N/A
                                                                                                vendor.

                        All fixed, floaters, amortizers, and All fixed, bullets (only two largest
                                                                                                  All fixed, floaters, amortizers, capitalizers, and
Instrument Type         capitalizers.                        instruments from any issuer).
                                                                                                  loans.
                        Defaulted bonds are excluded.        Defaulted bonds are excluded.

Minimum Outstanding
                        $300 Million                        $500 Million                        $500 Million
Face Value Amount
                                                                                                 Enter when at least two and a half years to
                         Enter when at least five years to maturity.
Maturity                                                                                        maturity.
                         Exit when less than thirteen months to maturity.
                                                                                                 Exit when less than one year to maturity.
                        Local law instruments are not eligible; Euroclearable or settled
Law/Settlement                                                                           N/A
                        through another institution outside issuing country.
Includes Quasi-
                        N/A                                                                     Yes
Sovereign Bonds
                                                            Appendix Table 3
                      Yield to Maturity and Probability of Issuing Bonds of Different Sizes, [400:500) and [500:550)
This table reports mean tests for the yield to maturity and the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-denominated bond issued with face value between
$400 and $500 million [400:500), and between $500 and $550 million [500:550), for firms in emerging markets and investment grade firms in developed markets
during the pre-2008 (2000-2008) and post-2008 (2009-2016) periods. Panel A shows the yield to maturity (in percent) in each category. Panel B shows the percentage
of issued bonds. Columns 1-3 show the mean tests and differences (pre and post 2008) for the [400:500) bonds separately for emerging and developed markets.
Columns 4-6 show the mean tests and differences (pre and post 2008) for the [500:550) bonds. Column 7 shows the difference-in-difference effects between columns
3 and 6 for each region. Column 8 reports the triple difference between emerging and developed markets. The yield to maturity variable is winsorized at the 5% level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                       Panel A. Yield to Maturity
                                            [400:500)                                           [500:550)                        Diff-in-Diff         Triple Diff

                            Pre 2008        Post 2008          Diff              Pre 2008       Post 2008          Diff
                                                                                                                                  (7)=(6)-(3)      (8)=EM(7)-DM(7)
                               (1)             (2)          (3)=(2)-(1)             (4)               (5)      (6)=(5)-(4)
Emerging Markets              7.189            6.223          -0.966 ***           7.089              4.883      -2.206 ***         -1.240 ***
                            (0.232)          (0.189)         (0.312)             (0.188)            (0.079)     (0.195)            (0.338)               -1.029 ***
Developed Markets             5.534            4.076          -1.458 ***           5.270              3.602      -1.669 ***         -0.211              (0.344)
                            (0.077)          (0.075)         (0.109)             (0.073)            (0.061)     (0.098)            (0.150)
                                                                           Panel B. Issuance
                                            [400:500)                                           [500:550)                        Diff-in-Diff         Triple Diff

                            Pre 2008        Post 2008          Diff              Pre 2008       Post 2008          Diff
                                                                                                                                  (7)=(6)-(3)      (8)=EM(7)-DM(7)
                               (1)             (2)          (3)=(2)-(1)             (4)               (5)      (6)=(5)-(4)
Emerging Markets              0.043            0.063           0.020 ***           0.060              0.179       0.120 ***          0.099 ***
                            (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.006)             (0.005)            (0.007)     (0.009)            (0.011)                0.071 ***
Developed Markets             0.043            0.047           0.004               0.067              0.100       0.033 ***          0.028 ***          (0.013)
                            (0.002)          (0.003)         (0.003)             (0.003)            (0.004)     (0.005)            (0.006)
                                                      Appendix Table 4
                                       Probability of Issuing Bonds of Different Sizes
                                                 Adding Firm Fixed Effects
This table reports difference-in-difference regressions of the change in the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-
denominated bond of a certain size in millions of U.S. dollars, pre and post 2008, for firms in emerging markets (EM) relative to
investment grade firms in developed markets. The analysis is restricted to positive bond issuance observations during 2000-2016. The
table reports the regressions for the bond issuance dummy of each size bucket on the interaction of the post 2008 dummy (equal to 1
for 2009-2016) with the emerging market dummy. All regressions include bond-firm controls, namely, a dummy indicating whether
the bond was issued publicly or privately, a dummy indicating whether the firm is foreign-owned, a dummy indicating whether the
firm has partial government ownership, and a fixed or flexible coupon dummy. They also include firm, maturity, and quarterly-year
fixed effects (FE). Standard errors are clustered at the country and quarter-year levels. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                       Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=[X:X+100)
                                                          Probability of Issuing Debt of a Certain Amount
                               (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)              (8)          (9)
                             (0:100)     [100:200)    [200:300) [300:400) [400:500) [500:600) [600:700)              [700:800)    [800:900)
EM*Post 2008                 -0.001       -0.071 *    -0.041 ** 0.012           -0.031 *     0.092 *** 0.010           0.029      -0.005
                            (0.036)      (0.038)     (0.019)    (0.025)        (0.017)     (0.026)    (0.016)        (0.018)     (0.007)

Bond Controls                  Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Frim FE                        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Maturity FE                    Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Quarter-Year FE                Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Mean Probability              0.367       0.171        0.125        0.0875      0.0466        0.101       0.0293      0.0503       0.0155
Number of Countries             68          68           68           68          68           68           68          68           68
Number of Observations        17,022      17,022       17,022       17,022      17,022       17,022       17,022      17,022       17,022
R2                            0.563        0.345        0.342       0.365        0.397        0.364       0.363        0.335        0.407
                                            Appendix Table 5
                   Yield to Maturity and Issuance Sizes: Developed Market Coefficients
 This table reports difference-in-difference regressions of the yield to maturity of international U.S. dollar-
 denominated bonds of different sizes in millions of U.S. dollars, measuring the relative change before and after
 2008 for investment grade firms in developed markets (DM) compared to firms in emerging markets. The analysis
 is restricted to positive bond issuance observations during 2000-2016 and includes both emerging market and
 investment grade developed market issuers. The full equation estimated is Equation (7) in the text. Columns 1-4
 report the coefficients  of the dummy of each bucket size and the coefficients  ,             of the interaction term
 between the dummy of each bucket size and the post 2008 dummy (equal to 1 for 2009-2016). The coefficients
  and  ,              are estimated but are not reported in this table to conserve space. They are reported instead in
 Table 3 and Appendix Table 6. Column 2 includes country, industry-year, and quarter-year fixed effects (FE).
 Column 3 includes country, industry-year, maturity, rating, quarter-year fixed effects, in addition to bond-firm
 controls. Bond-firm controls include a dummy indicating whether the bond was issued publicly or privately, a
 dummy indicating whether the firm is foreign-owned, a dummy indicating whether the firm has partial
 government ownership, and a fixed or flexible coupon dummy. Column 4 reports a placebo test using only non-
 index-eligible bonds, which are those with less than five years of maturity or flexible coupon rates. Standard errors
 are clustered at the country and quarter-year levels. The yield to maturity variable is winsorized at the 5% level. *,
 **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                        Associated                      Dependent Variable: Yield to Maturity
                                        Coefficients             (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)
[100:200)                                                      -1.155 ***       -0.713 ***     -0.294 **      -2.202 ***
                                                              (0.279)          (0.193)        (0.135)        (0.518)
[200:300)                                                      -0.825 ***       -0.549 ***     -0.352 ***     -1.946 ***
                                                              (0.200)          (0.166)        (0.123)        (0.501)
[300:400)                                                      -0.519 **        -0.377 **      -0.244         -1.495 ***
                                                              (0.201)          (0.180)        (0.147)        (0.553)
[400:500)                                                      -0.468 **        -0.343 *       -0.292         -1.585 ***
                                                              (0.221)          (0.191)        (0.182)        (0.535)
[500:600)                                                      -0.645 ***       -0.344 **      -0.195 *       -2.056 ***
                                                              (0.158)          (0.158)        (0.111)        (0.567)
[600:700)                                                      -0.271           -0.199         -0.219         -1.369 ***
                                                              (0.170)          (0.180)        (0.201)        (0.437)
[700:800)                                                      -0.155            0.008         -0.081         -0.285
                                                              (0.184)          (0.178)        (0.144)        (0.509)
[800:900)                                                       0.000            0.000          0.000          0.000
                                                              (0.000)          (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
                                             ,
[100:200)*Post 2008                                            -0.977 **        -4.703 ***     -5.968 ***     -2.222 ***
                                                              (0.412)          (0.259)        (0.353)        (0.505)
                                             ,
[200:300)*Post 2008                                            -0.845 ***       -4.679 ***     -6.028 ***     -1.586 ***
                                                              (0.205)          (0.276)        (0.341)        (0.541)
                                             ,
[300:400)*Post 2008                                            -1.319 ***       -4.847 ***     -6.178 ***     -2.327 ***
                                                              (0.127)          (0.276)        (0.336)        (0.407)
                                             ,
[400:500)*Post 2008                                            -1.458 ***       -5.147 ***     -6.224 ***     -2.444 ***
                                                              (0.154)          (0.224)        (0.288)        (0.388)
                                             ,
[500:600)*Post 2008                                            -1.681 ***       -5.181 ***     -6.396 ***     -2.195 ***
                                                              (0.154)          (0.235)        (0.305)        (0.245)
                                             ,
[600:700)*Post 2008                                            -1.907 ***       -5.287 ***     -6.308 ***     -2.965 ***
                                                              (0.251)          (0.240)        (0.341)        (0.526)
                                             ,
[700:800)*Post 2008                                            -2.344 ***       -5.701 ***     -6.623 ***     -4.113 ***
                                                              (0.148)          (0.292)        (0.312)        (0.384)
                                             ,
[800:900)*Post 2008                                            -2.048 ***          -5.3 ***    -6.505 ***     -4.239 ***
                                                              (0.214)          (0.271)        (0.331)        (0.512)

Bond Controls                                                   No               No             Yes             No
Country FE                                                      No               Yes            Yes             No
Industry-Year FE                                                No               Yes            Yes             No
Maturity FE                                                     No               No             Yes             No
Ratings FE                                                      No               No             Yes             No
Quarter-Year FE                                                 No               Yes            Yes             No
Number of Observations                                         7,939            7,939          7,818            1,600
R2                                                             0.344            0.659          0.763            0.471
                                        Appendix Table 6
           Yield to Maturity and Issuance Sizes: Emerging Market Coefficients, Pre 2008
 This table reports difference-in-difference regressions of the yield to maturity of international U.S. dollar-
 denominated bonds of different sizes in millions of U.S. dollars, measuring the relative change before 2008 for
 firms in emerging markets (EM) compared to investment grade firms in developed markets. The analysis is
 restricted to positive bond issuance observations during 2000-2016 and includes both emerging market and
 investment grade developed market issuers. The full equation estimated is Equation (7) in the text. Columns 1-4
 report the coefficients  of the interaction term between the dummy of each bucket size and the emerging
 market dummy. The coefficients  ,  ,                and  ,          are estimated but are not reported in this table
 to conserve space. They are reported instead in Table 3 and Appendix Table 5. Column 2 includes country,
 industry-year, and quarter-year fixed effects (FE). Column 3 includes country, industry-year, maturity, rating,
 quarter-year fixed effects, in addition to bond-firm controls. Bond-firm controls include a dummy indicating
 whether the bond was issued publicly or privately, a dummy indicating whether the firm is foreign-owned, a
 dummy indicating whether the firm has partial government ownership, and a fixed or flexible coupon dummy.
 Column 4 reports a placebo test using only non-index-eligible bonds, which are those with less than five years
 of maturity or flexible coupon rates. Standard errors are clustered at the country and quarter-year levels. The
 yield to maturity variable is winsorized at the 5% level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                       Associated                      Dependent Variable: Yield to Maturity
                                       Coefficients             (1)              (2)           (3)               (4)
EM*[100:200)                                                   2.998 ***        2.942 ***      2.165 ***      3.664 ***
                                                             (0.393)          (0.499)        (0.454)        (0.572)
EM*[200:300)                                                   2.592 ***         2.75 ***      2.014 ***      3.404 ***
                                                             (0.369)          (0.431)        (0.425)        (0.697)
EM*[300:400)                                                   1.687 ***        2.479 ***      1.678 ***       2.63 ***
                                                             (0.450)          (0.489)        (0.419)        (0.914)
EM*[400:500)                                                   1.655 ***        1.872 ***      1.278 ***      3.193 ***
                                                             (0.448)          (0.430)        (0.387)        (0.457)
EM*[500:600)                                                   1.742 ***        1.946 ***      1.321 ***       2.51 ***
                                                             (0.299)          (0.545)        (0.446)        (0.746)
EM*[600:700)                                                   0.478             1.18 **       0.932 *        1.545 ***
                                                             (0.490)          (0.586)        (0.509)        (0.440)
EM*[700:800)                                                   0.544            1.776 **       1.112 *       -0.639
                                                             (0.392)          (0.757)        (0.582)        (0.407)
EM*[800:900)                                                   0.406            1.086          0.489         -0.424
                                                             (0.557)          (0.970)        (0.604)        (0.494)

Bond Controls                                                   No              No             Yes              No
Country FE                                                      No              Yes            Yes              No
Industry-Year FE                                                No              Yes            Yes              No
Maturity FE                                                     No              No             Yes              No
Ratings FE                                                      No              No             Yes              No
Quarter-Year FE                                                 No              Yes            Yes              No
Diff-in-Diff                                                   0.087           0.074          0.043            -0.683
P-Value                                                        0.722           0.838          0.875             0.456
Number of Observations                                         7,939           7,939          7,818             1,600
R2                                                             0.344           0.659          0.763             0.471
                                                    Appendix Table 7
                                     Probability of Issuing Bonds of Different Sizes
                                 Adding Maturity-Time and Ratings-Time Fixed Effects
This table reports difference-in-difference regressions of the change in the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-denominated
bond of a certain size in millions of U.S. dollars, pre and post 2008, for firms in emerging markets (EM) relative to investment grade firms
in developed markets. The analysis is restricted to positive bond issuance observations during 2000-2016. The table reports regressions for
the bond issuance dummy of each size bucket on the interaction of the post 2008 dummy (equal to one for 2009-2016) with the emerging
market dummy. The regressions in Panel A include firm, industry-year, and maturity-quarter-year fixed effects (FE). The regressions in
Panel B include firm, industry-year, and ratings-quarter-year fixed effects. All the regressions include bond-firm controls, namely, a
dummy indicating whether the bond was issued publicly or privately, a dummy indicating whether the firm is foreign-owned, a dummy
indicating whether the firm has partial government ownership, and a fixed or flexible coupon dummy. Standard errors are clustered at the
country and quarter-year levels. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                  Panel A. Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=[X:X+100)
                                                            Probability of Issuing Debt of a Certain Amount
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)            (8)         (9)
                                 (0:100)    [100:200)   [200:300) [300:400) [400:500) [500:600) [600:700)            [700:800)   [800:900)
EM*Post 2008                     0.012       -0.090 *    -0.035       0.019      -0.020       0.083 *** 0.018          0.012      -0.001
                               (0.042)      (0.048)     (0.024)     (0.025)     (0.015)     (0.023)    (0.013)       (0.017)     (0.009)


Bond Controls                     Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Firm FE                           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Industry-Year FE                  Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Maturity-Quarter-Year FE          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Mean Probability                 0.367       0.170       0.125        0.0876      0.0469      0.101       0.0296      0.0506       0.0157
Number of Countries                68          68          68           68          68          68          68          68           68
Number of Observations           17,147      17,147      17,147       17,147      17,147      17,147      17,147      17,147       17,147
R2                               0.578       0.380       0.394        0.435       0.452       0.417       0.437       0.386        0.459
                                  Panel B. Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=[X:X+100)
                                                            Probability of Issuing Debt of a Certain Amount
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)            (8)         (9)
                                 (0:100)    [100:200)   [200:300) [300:400) [400:500) [500:600) [600:700)            [700:800)   [800:900)
EM*Post 2008                     0.014       -0.087 *    -0.027       0.017      -0.001       0.029        0.039 ** 0.003          0.005
                               (0.047)      (0.046)     (0.032)     (0.028)     (0.019)     (0.027)      (0.016)    (0.015)      (0.009)


Bond Controls                      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Firm FE                            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Industry-Year FE                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Ratings-Quarter-Year FE            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Mean Probability                  0.369       0.170       0.124      0.0869      0.0469        0.101      0.0295      0.0507      0.0158
Number of Countries                67          67          67          67          67           67           67          67          67
Number of Observations           16,996      16,996      16,996      16,996      16,996       16,996      16,996      16,996      16,996
R2                                0.598       0.406       0.437       0.490       0.499        0.460       0.481       0.440       0.504
                                                         Appendix Table 8
                                          Probability of Issuing Bonds of Different Sizes
                                               Demand for Safe U.S. Dollar Assets
This table reports difference-in-difference regressions of the change in the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-
denominated bond of a certain size in millions of U.S. dollars, pre and post 2008, for firms in emerging markets (EM) relative to
investment grade firms in developed markets. The analysis is restricted to positive bond issuance observations during 2000-2016. Panel
A reports the regressions for the bond issuance dummy of each size bucket on the interaction of the post 2008 dummy and the
emerging market dummy and on the interaction of the U.S. Treasury basis and the emerging market dummy. Panel B reports the same
type of regressions, but including the additional interaction of the post 2008 dummy, the emerging market dummy, and the U.S. treasury
basis. The U.S. treasury basis is the difference between the yield on a cash position in U.S. Treasurys and the synthetic dollar yield
constructed from a cash position in a foreign bond, that is hedged back into dollars. It is computed as in Jian et al. (2018). All
regressions include bond-firm controls, namely, a dummy indicating whether the bond was issued publicly or privately, a dummy
indicating whether the firm is foreign-owned, a dummy indicating whether the firm has partial government ownership, and a fixed or
flexible coupon dummy. They also include firm, industry-year, and quarter-year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors are clustered at the
country and quarter-year levels. The yield to maturity variable is winsorized at the 5% level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                  Panel A. Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=[X:X+100)
                                                            Probability of Issuing Debt of a Certain Amount
                                  (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)             (8)          (9)
                                (0:100)     [100:200)   [200:300) [300:400) [400:500) [500:600) [600:700)              [700:800)    [800:900)
EM*Post 2008                    0.020        -0.071      -0.034       0.012       -0.021        0.073 *** 0.017          0.005      -0.003
                              (0.039)       (0.053)     (0.022)     (0.025)      (0.015)      (0.022)    (0.013)       (0.017)     (0.010)
EM*U.S. Treasury Basis         -0.195 *** -0.061          0.086 ** 0.099 ** 0.002               0.062      -0.011        0.025       0.000
                              (0.061)     (0.055)       (0.042)    (0.039)  (0.033)           (0.042)     (0.022)      (0.016)     (0.016)


Bond Controls                     Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Firm FE                           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Industry-Year FE                  Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Quarter-Year FE                   Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Mean Probability                 0.367        0.170       0.125       0.0876       0.0469       0.101       0.0296       0.0506      0.0157
Number of Countries                68           68          68          68           68          68           68           68          68
Number of Observations          17,147       17,147      17,147       17,147       17,147      17,147       17,147       17,147      17,147
R2                               0.572        0.369       0.390        0.432       0.449        0.410        0.434       0.380        0.457
                                  Panel B. Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=[X:X+100)
                                                            Probability of Issuing Debt of a Certain Amount
                                  (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)             (8)          (9)
                                (0:100)     [100:200)   [200:300) [300:400) [400:500) [500:600) [600:700)              [700:800)    [800:900)
EM*Post 2008                   -0.026        -0.099      -0.015       0.009       -0.005        0.096 *** 0.006          0.034       0.004
                              (0.049)       (0.061)     (0.028)     (0.033)      (0.023)      (0.029)    (0.020)       (0.022)     (0.011)
EM*U.S. Treasury Basis         -0.128 *      -0.020       0.058       0.103 ** -0.021           0.029       0.005       -0.017 ** -0.010
                              (0.068)       (0.069)     (0.058)    (0.0411)    (0.030)        (0.037)     (0.025)      (0.008)    (0.017)

EM*Post 2008* U.S.             -0.284 *      -0.175       0.116      -0.020        0.100        0.142      -0.068        0.178 *** 0.041
Treasury Basis                (0.158)       (0.120)     (0.113)     (0.097)      (0.075)      (0.104)     (0.071)      (0.050)    (0.031)


Bond Controls                     Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Firm FE                           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Industry-Year FE                  Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Quarter-Year FE                   Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Mean Probability                 0.367        0.170       0.125       0.0876       0.0469       0.101       0.0296       0.0506      0.0157
Number of Countries                68           68          68          68           68          68           68           68          68
Number of Observations          17,147       17,147      17,147       17,147       17,147      17,147       17,147       17,147      17,147
R2                               0.572        0.369       0.390        0.432       0.450        0.410        0.435       0.380        0.457
                                              Appendix Table 9
                         Unconditional Probabilities of Issuing a Bond of Different Sizes
This table reports difference-in-difference regressions of the change in the probability of issuing an international U.S. dollar-
denominated bond of a certain size in millions of U.S. dollars, pre and post 2008, for firms in emerging markets (EM) relative to the
same change for investment grade firms in developed markets, during the 2000-2016 period. The analysis is restricted to positive and
zero bond issuance observations. Columns 1-9 report the regressions for the bond issuance dummy of each size bucket on the
interaction of the post 2008 dummy (equal to one for 2009-2016) with the emerging market dummy. All regressions include country,
industry, and quarter-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country and quarter-year levels. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                       Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if Issuance=[X:X+100)
                                                  Unconditional Probability of Issuing Debt of a Certain Amount
                               (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)     (8)            (9)
                             [0:100)     [100:200) [200:300) [300:400) [400:500) [500:600) [600:700) [700:800)              [800:900)
EM*Post 2008                -0.064       -0.070 ** -0.014        0.030 ** 0.012           0.079 *** -0.002        0.016       0.010
                           (0.045)      (0.027)    (0.017)     (0.014)    (0.014)       (0.020)     (0.008)     (0.010)     (0.008)


Country FE                    Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Industry FE                   Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Quarter-Year FE               Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Number of Countries            68           68         68          68          68          68          68          68           68
Number of Observations       22,095       22,095     22,095      22,095      22,095      22,095      22,095      22,095       22,095
R2                           0.170        0.0736     0.0459      0.0517      0.0365      0.0485      0.0312       0.0353      0.0233
                               Appendix Table 10
                          Frequency of Bond Issuances
This table reports the mean number of issuances and the duration between issuances for
international U.S. dollar-denominated bonds of any size, with face values below $300
million (0:300), between $300 and $500 million [300:500), and equal to or above $500
million [500:1,000), by firms in emerging markets and investment grade firms in developed
markets during 2000-2016. The analysis is restricted to firms that issued the relevant type
of bond at least once during the sample period. Panel A reports the number of issuances
per year as follows: (1) the total number of bonds issued are summed per firm-year
observation, (2) the mean number of issuances are then computed per firm, (3) the mean
firm is computed. Panel B reports the number of years between bond issuances on
average. The values are computed as one over the respective values in Panel A.

                       Panel A. Number of Issuances per Year
                                        Emerging Markets            Developed Markets
Any Bucket Size                                0.145                        0.293
(0:300)                                        0.128                        0.288
[300:500)                                      0.086                        0.135
[500:1,000)                                    0.113                        0.174
                          Panel B. Years Between Issuances
                                        Emerging Markets            Developed Markets
Any Bucket Size                               6.898                         3.411
(0:300)                                       7.837                         3.470
[300:500)                                     11.669                        7.389
[500:1,000)                                   8.854                         5.751
