                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            PRUDENTIAL MONETARY POLICY

                                      Ricardo J. Caballero
                                          Alp Simsek

                                      Working Paper 25977
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25977


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2019, Revised March 2020




We thank Chris Ackerman, Michal Kowalik, Alberto Martin (discussant), Andrea Manera,
Matthew Rognlie (discussant), Harald Uhlig, Shengxing Zhang and the seminar participants at
the CCBS conference hosted by the Bank of England and MacCalm, the ECB Conference on
Macroprudential Policy and Research, the Tepper-LAEF conference on Advances in Macro-
Finance, the AEA annual meeting, the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton University, the
Bank for International Settlements, and the New York Fed. Simsek acknowledges support from
the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Number SES-1455319. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Prudential Monetary Policy
Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 25977
June 2019, Revised March 2020
JEL No. E00,E12,E21,E22,E30,E40,G00,G01,G11

                                          ABSTRACT

Should monetary policymakers raise interest rates during a boom to rein in financial excesses?
We theoretically investigate this question using an aggregate demand model with asset price
booms and financial speculation. In our model, monetary policy affects financial stability through
its impact on asset prices. Our main result shows that, when macroprudential policy is imperfect,
there are conditions under which small doses of prudential monetary policy (PMP) can provide
financial stability benefits that are equivalent to tightening leverage limits. PMP reduces asset
prices during the boom, which softens the asset price crash when the economy transitions into a
recession. This mitigates the recession because higher asset prices support leveraged, high-
valuation investors' balance sheets. The policy is most effective when the recession is more likely
and leverage limits are neither too tight nor too slack. With shadow banks, whether PMP "gets in
all the cracks" or not depends on the constraints faced by shadow banks.


Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics, E52-528
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E52-552
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu




Dynamic link to the most recent draft is available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/nmzrbx964e12yus/PMP_public.pdf?dl=0
 1.     Introduction
Should monetary policy have a prudential dimension? That is, should policymakers raise interest
rates, or delay a cut, to rein in ...nancial excesses during a boom? This question has occupied the
minds of central bankers and monetary policy researchers for decades. At present, there are two
dominant views. The fully-separable view contends that monetary policy should focus exclusively
on its traditional mandate while delegating ...nancial stability concerns to macroprudential policy
(see, e.g., Weidmann (2018); Svensson (2018)). The non-separable view argues that, in practice,
macroprudential policy might be insu¢ cient for dealing with ...nancial excesses since its tools are
limited and inexible (see, e.g., Stein (2014); Gourio et al. (2018)). This debate has spawned
a growing literature investigating the costs and bene...ts of prudential monetary policy (PMP).
In this paper, we provide a new rationale for PMP, and we describe a set of circumstances
under which PMP is as e¤ective as macroprudential policy. This equivalence is useful since, as
highlighted by the non-separable view, monetary policy in practice is signi...cantly nimbler than
macroprudential policy when responding to cyclical uctuations.1
    PMP has obvious costs: it slows down the economy and leads to ine¢ cient factor utilization
during the boom. The bene...ts are less well understood. One of the main arguments for PMP is
the asset price channel: monetary policy can mitigate the asset price boom and therefore make
the subsequent crash smaller and less costly (see, e.g., Borio (2014); Adrian and Liang (2018)).
This view is supported by evidence that monetary policy has a sizable, nearly immediate impact
on asset prices. Despite its potential importance, there is little formal analysis on how the asset
price channel of PMP works and whether (or when) it improves social welfare. We ...ll this gap
by developing an aggregate demand model with asset price booms and speculation.
    In our model, the economy starts in a boom with high asset valuations-- high prices rela-
tive to short-run productivity and asset payo¤s. There is a chance that asset valuations will
decline without a change in short-run productivity-- consistent with a large ...nance literature on
"time-varying risk premia" (see, e.g., Campbell (2014)). The decline in asset valuations lowers
aggregate demand (due to a consumption wealth e¤ect). Monetary policy cuts interest rates to
stimulate demand but it might be constrained. We work with the zero lower bound constraint,
but our mechanism applies for other frictions that prevent policymakers from cutting interest
rates during recessions. With interest rate frictions, the economy experiences a risk-centric de-
mand recession -- a recession associated with a decline in risky asset valuations (see Caballero
and Simsek (forthcoming)).
    Our focus is on the boom preceding the recession, which features not only high asset val-
uations but also ...nancial speculation -- investors with heterogeneous valuations trading risky
   1
     Adrian et al. (2017) summarize the results from a tabletop exercise conducted by the Federal Reserve that
"aimed at confronting Federal Reserve Bank presidents with a plausible, albeit hypothetical, macro-...nancial
scenario that would lend itself to macroprudential considerations...From among the various tools considered,
tabletop participants found many of the prudential tools less attractive due to implementation lags and limited
scope of application...Monetary policy came more quickly to the fore as a ...nancial stability tool than might have
been thought before the exercise."


                                                        2
...nancial assets. We focus on speculation among investors with heterogeneous beliefs (optimists
and pessimists), but similar insights apply if speculation is driven by other forces such as het-
erogeneous risk tolerances (e.g., banks and households). Financial speculation matters because
optimists' wealth share is a key state variable for the economy. In particular, when optimists
have more wealth in the recession, they push up asset prices and aggregate demand, softening the
recession. However, individual optimists who take on leverage during the boom (and pessimists
who lend to them) do not internalize the welfare e¤ects of optimists' wealth losses during the
recession. This externality motivates policy interventions in the boom. Macroprudential policy
is in theory the ideal tool for disciplining optimists'risk taking, but in practice it is imperfect.
Our main result shows when PMP can e¤ectively reduce optimists'risk exposure.
      To illustrate this result, we introduce some notation and relations (we provide microfoun-
dations in the main text). Speci...cally, let s = 1 and s = 2 denote the boom and the recession
states, respectively. The economy is set in continuous time and transitions from the boom state
to the recession state according to a Poisson process. Let                      s   and Qs denote optimists'wealth
share and the price of capital (asset price) in state s, respectively. In the recession state s = 2,
the asset price (and thus aggregate demand) is an increasing function of optimists'wealth share:

                                                 Q2 = Q2 (         2) .                                                (1)

In the boom state s = 1, optimists choose an above-average leverage ratio, ! o
                                                                             1 > 1. Therefore,
if there is a transition to the recession state, their wealth share declines. Speci...cally,

                                        2                           Q1
                                            =1     (! o
                                                      1       1)               1 ,                                     (2)
                                        1                           Q2

where Q1 =Q2 > 1 captures the magnitude of the price decline after the transition. Note that
this equation also describes an increasing relation between optimists'wealth share,                        2,   and the
asset price in the recession, Q2 (since      !o
                                              1   > 1 ). Given a boom wealth share               1,   the equilibrium
pair (   2 ; Q2 )   corresponds to the intersection of two increasing relations (1) and (2), similar to
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of these relations.
      As a benchmark, suppose the monetary authority sets interest rates in the boom to achieve
asset prices and aggregate demand consistent with potential output, Q1 = Q . In the recession,
monetary policy is constrained, so asset prices and aggregate demand fall short of potential
output, Q2 < Q . A larger wealth share for optimists,                     2,   increases asset prices and aggregate
demand and softens the recession. This e¤ect is an aggregate demand externality, which provides
a rationale for prudential policies that improve optimists'wealth share in the recession,                         2.
      Eq. (2) suggests that there are two prudential channels policymakers can use to increase
 2.   First consider macroprudential policy that reduces optimists'leverage ratio, ! o
                                                                                     1 . This policy
increases     2     by reducing optimists' exposure to a given asset price decline, Q =Q2 . Second,
suppose instead that optimists'leverage ratio is ...xed, ! o     o
                                                           1 = ! 1 , and consider PMP that lowers



                                                          3
Figure 1: Graphical illustration of the relations that determine optimists'wealth share and the
asset price in recession, ( 2 ; Q2 ). The left (resp. right) panel illustrates the e¤ect of macropru-
dential policy (resp. PMP).


the asset price during the boom, Q1 < Q (by increasing the interest rate). This policy increases
 2   by decreasing the size of the asset price decline, Q1 =Q2 , for a given level of optimists'exposure.
Figure 1 shows that these two policies can achieve the same allocations, illustrating the logic
behind our main result.
     PMP has two drawbacks relative to macroprudential policy. First, optimists'leverage ratio
has to be at least somewhat constrained, ! o     o
                                           1 = ! 1 . In practice, this is likely to be the case for
a variety of reasons-- due to ...nancial frictions, self-imposed limits, or binding macroprudential
policy. Nonetheless, our model provides a cautionary note for environments in which optimists'
constraints are loose. In particular, in the extreme case where optimists are fully unconstrained,
their leverage ratio adjusts to completely undo the prudential e¤ects of monetary policy. That
is, once ! o
           1 adjusts,    2   does not depend on Q1 . The intuition is that, since optimists perceive
smaller risks from transitioning to a recession, they increase their leverage ratio. This result
illustrates that PMP is more e¤ective when optimists face tighter leverage limits.
     Second, even when monetary policy achieves the same prudential objectives as macropru-
dential policy, it is more costly because it lowers asset prices during the boom, Q1 < Q . This
lowers aggregate demand and reduces factor utilization below the e¢ cient level. However, in
a neighborhood of the price level that ensures e¢ cient factor utilization (Q ), these negative
welfare e¤ects are second order. On the other hand, the bene...cial e¤ects of softening the re-
cession are ...rst order. We formalize this insight and establish that (when optimists are subject
to some leverage limit) the ...rst-order welfare e¤ects of PMP are exactly the same as the e¤ects
of tightening the leverage limit directly. Put di¤erently, for small policy changes, PMP is as
e¤ ective as macroprudential policy. PMP increases unemployment in a booming economy, which



                                                    4
has negligible costs, and reduces unemployment during a recession, which has sizeable bene...ts.2
       We also characterize the optimal monetary policy in our environment and establish two
comparative statics results. First, the planner utilizes PMP more when the leverage limit (or
macroprudential policy) is at an intermediate level. Intuitively, when the limit is too loose,
PMP is not worthwhile because it requires a large decline in Q1 to push optimists against their
constraints. Naturally, when the limit is already too tight, further tightening via PMP is not
bene...cial. These two extreme cases illustrate that macroprudential policy and PMP can be
complements as well as substitutes. Second, as expected, the planner utilizes PMP more when
she perceives a greater probability of transitioning into a risk-centric recession. This result
highlights that the planner should calibrate PMP by monitoring the tail risk in asset prices --
the chance of a su¢ ciently large decline that would trigger a demand recession.
       Finally, one of the main practical concerns with prudential policies is the presence of "shadow
banks"-- lightly regulated high-valuation agents who can circumvent regulatory constraints.
Stein (2013) noted that in these environments PMP might have an advantage over macropru-
dential policy "because it gets in all of the cracks." We extend our analysis to consider shadow
banks-- optimists who are not subject to regulatory leverage limits. We ...nd that whether PMP
is more e¤ective than macroprudential policy depends on the nature of the leverage limits faced
by shadow banks. Even if shadow banks circumvent the regulatory leverage limit, they might
still be constrained due to ...nancial frictions or self-imposed limits. In this case, PMP is in-
deed more e¤ective than macroprudential policy, because it improves the ...nancial stability of
all banks whereas macroprudential policy stabilizes only the regulated banks. We also analyze
the other extreme case in which shadow banks are fully unconstrained. In this case, PMP can
still replicate the ...nancial stability bene...ts of macroprudential policy; however, both policies
are weaker than when there are no shadow banks. The policies are weaker because of general
equilibrium feedbacks: shadow banks (when unconstrained) respond to the stabilizing bene...ts
of either policy by increasing their leverage and risk taking.

       Literature review. Our paper is part of a large literature that investigates the e¤ect of
monetary policy on ...nancial stability. Adrian and Liang (2018) provide a recent survey (see
also Smets (2014)). As they note, easy monetary policy can generate ...nancial vulnerabilities
by fueling credit growth, exacerbating the maturity mismatch of ...nancial intermediaries, and
inating asset prices. Our paper focuses on the asset-price channel, which is underexplored.
       One strand of the literature emphasizes that loose monetary policy can reduce risk premia
during the boom by exacerbating the "reach for yield" (see, e.g., Rajan (2006); Maddaloni and
   2
     This discussion illustrates how our main result may apply beyond our particular model of risk-centric re-
cessions. For example, suppose the recession features no interest rate frictions, but there are ...nancial frictions
and ...re-sale prices that increase in experts' wealth share. Suppose experts take on leverage during the boom to
increase the size of their investments (as in Lorenzoni (2008)). The analogues of Eqs. (1) and (2) apply in this
setting. Hence, as long as experts' leverage is constrained, PMP would improve experts' balance sheets in the
recession and increase welfare. In this alternative setup, the policy would increase welfare by mitigating ...re-sale
externalities, whereas in our model PMP internalizes aggregate demand externalities.


                                                         5
Peydró (2011); Borio and Zhu (2012); Morris and Shin (2014); Lian et al. (2018); Acharya and
Naqvi (2018)). In our model, monetary policy does not directly a¤ect the risk premium-- it
a¤ects asset prices mainly through the traditional discount rate channel. Nonetheless, we ...nd
a role for PMP because the reduction in asset prices during the boom softens the asset price
crash after a transition to recession. Our channel is stronger (and it operates through the same
key equations) if loose monetary policy reduces the risk premium during the boom (see, e.g.,
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005); Adrian and Shin (2010); Hanson and Stein (2015); Gertler and
Karadi (2015); Gilchrist et al. (2015) for empirical evidence and Adrian and Duarte (2016) for
a model in which monetary policy a¤ects the risk premium).
       Our paper complements the literature emphasizing the credit channel. A number of papers
show that monetary policy can a¤ect ...nancial stability by inuencing credit growth or leverage.
Woodford (2012) articulates this channel using a New Keynesian framework (that builds upon
Curdia and Woodford (2010)) in which loose monetary policy increases the leverage of ...nancial
institutions (or borrowers), which in turn increases the probability of a crisis (by assumption). A
growing empirical literature has documented that rapid credit growth is indeed associated with
more frequent and more severe ...nancial crises (e.g., Borio and Drehmann (2009); Jordà et al.
(2013)). Recent work uses the empirical estimates from this literature to calibrate Woodford-
style models and quantify the costs and bene...ts of PMP. Svensson (2017); IMF (2015) argue
that the costs of this policy exceed the bene...ts, whereas Gourio et al. (2018); Adrian and Liang
(2018) ...nd mixed e¤ects. We show that monetary policy can also a¤ect ...nancial stability
by inuencing asset prices during the boom. Moreover, our model does not require a ...nancial
crisis: there are bene...ts if the economy transitions into a plain-vanilla recession (associated with
a decline in asset prices). Hence, quantitative analyses that rely purely on the credit channel
and crises likely underestimate the potential bene...ts of PMP.
       It is instructive to contrast our analysis with Svensson (2017), who works with a di¤erent
setup and reaches di¤erent conclusions. Svensson (2017) assumes that weaker aggregate demand
in the boom translates into weaker aggregate demand if the economy transitions into recession.
This assumption implies that since PMP weakens aggregate demand in the boom, it also weakens
aggregate demand in the recession. However, while one can imagine some mechanisms by which
weakness in the boom persists into the recession (such as habit formation or backward-looking
ination expectations), it is clearly not generic. For example, it does not follow in a model like
ours where PMP weakens asset prices in the boom but strengthens asset prices and aggregate
demand in the recession. Likewise, when aggregate demand has features of a stock variable,
weaker aggregate demand in the boom naturally strengthens aggregate demand in the recession.3
       In our model, PMP causes an output gap during the boom, which generates a second-order
   3
    This is the case in standard models that feature diminishing returns to spending. For example, Rognlie et al.
(2018) shows how weaker investment in the boom creates pent-up investment demand in the recession (when
capital has diminishing returns). Berger et al. (2018) show that, with ...xed-rate mortgages, higher interest rates
in the boom shift household re...nancing from the boom to the recession. Mian et al. (2019) establish similar
results when borrowers and savers di¤er in their marginal propensities to save out of permanent income.



                                                        6
welfare loss (for small changes in policy), and mitigates the output gap during the recession,
which generates a ...rst-order welfare gain. Kocherlakota (2014) and Stein (2014) derive simi-
lar insights by assuming that the Fed uses a quadratic loss function to penalize deviations of
unemployment from its target. They show that targeting ...nancial stability ...ts naturally into
the Fed'
       s dual mandate. Our model provides a microfoundation for their key assumption that
accommodative monetary policy exacerbates ...nancial vulnerability.
    Our paper is part of a growing theoretical literature that analyzes the interactions between
macroprudential and monetary policies in environments with aggregate demand externalities
(e.g., Korinek and Simsek (2016)).4 This literature typically concludes that ...nancial stability
issues are best addressed with macroprudential policy. We assume macroprudential policy is
constrained, and we ...nd a role for monetary policy that interacts with macroprudential policy.
We also investigate the asset price channel, whereas Korinek and Simsek (2016) and Farhi
and Werning (2016) focus on credit. Rognlie et al. (2018) analyze investment and show that
incorporating this ingredient would strengthen our main result. When alternative policies are
imperfect, PMP can be used to reduce investment during the boom, which increases investment
and asset prices in the recession (see also Footnote 3).
    Finally, although our mechanism is more general, our model is related to a growing liter-
ature on belief disagreements and speculation (e.g., Scheinkman and Xiong (2003); Fostel and
Geanakoplos (2008); Geanakoplos (2010); Simsek (2013a,b); Cao (2017); Boroviµ
                                                                            cka (2020); Bai-
ley et al. (2019); Iachan et al. (2015); Heimer and Simsek (2019); Bigio and Zilberman (2019)).
Similar to Caballero and Simsek (forthcoming), we analyze speculation when aggregate demand
can inuence output due to interest rate rigidities. We depart from our earlier work by assuming
that ...nancial markets are incomplete due to exogenous leverage limits (see Remark 4). This
assumption ensures that monetary policy a¤ects the extent of speculation.
    In Section 2 we introduce the basic environment and provide a partial characterization of the
equilibrium. In Section 3, we characterize the equilibrium in the recession state and illustrate the
aggregate demand externalities that motivate policy interventions. In Section 4, we characterize
the equilibrium in the boom state and establish our main result that shows monetary policy
can replicate the ...nancial stability e¤ects of macroprudential policy. In Section 5, we introduce
our welfare criterion and show that PMP achieves the same welfare e¤ects as macroprudential
policy. In Section 6, we characterize the optimal PMP in our setting and establish its comparative
statics. In Section 7, we add "shadow banks"to our framework and analysis. Section 8 concludes
and is followed by several appendices that contain omitted derivations and proofs.
    4
      Several papers analyze the interaction of macroprudential and monetary policies but focus on other frictions
(e.g., Stein (2012); Collard et al. (2017); Martinez-Miera and Repullo (2019); Allen et al. (2019); Acharya and
Plantin (2019)). A vast literature theoretically investigates macroprudential policy but doesn' t focus on nominal
rigidities or monetary policy (see, e.g., Dávila and Korinek (2017) and the references therein).




                                                        7
 2.       Environment and equilibrium
In this section we introduce our general dynamic environment. We then provide a de...nition
and a partial characterization of the equilibrium. In subsequent sections we further analyze this
equilibrium under di¤erent assumptions about monetary policy.

Potential output and risk premium shocks. The economy is set in in...nite continuous
time, t 2 [0; 1), with a single consumption good and a single factor of production, capital. Let
kt;s denote the capital stock at time t in the aggregate state s 2 S .
       The rate of capital utilization is endogenous and denoted by             t;s   2 [0; 1]. When utilized at
this rate, kt;s units of capital produce
                                                    A   t;s kt;s                                               (3)

units of the consumption good. The capital stock follows the process

                                           dkt;s =dt
                                                     = gs          t;s   .                                     (4)
                                             kt;s

The depreciation function           t;s   is weakly increasing and weakly convex (and strictly so above
some range      t;s     ). Hence, utilizing capital at a higher rate allows the economy to produce
more current output at the cost of faster depreciation and slower output growth. Without nomi-
nal rigidities, there is an optimal level of capital utilization denoted by             , which we characterize
later. With nominal rigidities, the economy may operate below this level of utilization,                 t;s      ,
which we refer to as a demand recession.
       The expected growth rate of capital (before depreciation) is gs , which is an exogenous para-
meter. The states, s 2 S , di¤er only in terms of gs . For simplicity, we assume there are three
states, s 2 f1; 2; 3g. The economy starts in state s = 1. While in states s 2 f1; 2g, the economy
transitions into state s0       s + 1 according to a Poisson process that we describe below. Once
the economy reaches s = 3, it stays there forever.
       Fluctuations in the expected growth rate, gs , a¤ect our analysis mainly by generating uctu-
ations in asset valuations unrelated to short-run productivity. Hence, we view these uctuations
as a convenient modeling device to capture "time-varying risk premia" driven by beliefs, risks,
or risk attitudes.5 We assume the parameters satisfy g2 < min (g1 ; g3 ): the economy starts with
high valuations, transitions to lower valuations, and transitions back to higher valuations (see
Figure 2). Under appropriate assumptions, we will establish that the decline in asset prices
in state 2 will trigger a demand recession. Accordingly, we refer to states 1; 2; and 3 as "the
boom," "the recession," and "the recovery," respectively. For analytical tractability, we focus
on a single business cycle. We assume the economy transitions between states according to
   5
      In Caballero and Simsek (forthcoming), we formalize this intuition by showing that (in a two period model)
changes in gs generate the same e¤ect on asset prices and current economic activity as changes in risk aversion and
(perceived or real) risk. A large literature documents that time-varying risk premia are a pervasive phenomenon
in ...nancial markets (see Cochrane (2011); Shiller (2014); Campbell (2014) for recent reviews).


                                                        8
                                      Figure 2: The timeline of events.


exogenous shocks (see the concluding section for whether PMP could endogenously trigger the
recession).

                                                                              i
Transition probabilities and belief disagreements. We let                     s   > 0 denote investor i'
                                                                                                       s
belief about the Poisson transition probability from state s into state s0 = s + 1. Since state
                                      i
s = 3 is an absorbing state,          3   = 0 for each i. For the remaining states, we assume there are
two types of investors, i 2 fo; pg. Type o investors are "optimists," and type p investors are
"pessimists." We assume investors'beliefs satisfy:
                    o       p             o       p
Assumption 1.       1   <   1   and       2   >   2.

When the economy is in the boom state s = 1, optimists assign a smaller transition probability
to the recession state s = 2. When the economy is in the recession state, they assign a greater
transition probability to the recovery state s = 3.
   The key role of "optimists" is that they value risky assets more than "pessimists" in both
states so that: (i) during the boom, they will take on leverage, and (ii) during the recession,
they will increase risky asset prices. Hence, we view disagreements as a convenient modeling
device to capture persistent heterogeneous asset valuations. In particular, we can also think of
"optimists" as banks (or institutional investors) that are more risk tolerant and less Knightian
than households or pension funds ("pessimists").

Menu of ...nancial assets.            There are two types of ...nancial assets. First, there is a market
portfolio that represents a claim on all output (see Remark 1 for how to interpret the market
portfolio in our context). We let Qt;s kt;s denote the price of the market portfolio, so Qt;s is the


                                                        9
price per unit of capital. We let rt;s denote the instantaneous expected return on the market
portfolio conditional on no transition. Second, there is a risk-free asset in zero net supply. We
                                    f
denote its instantaneous return by rt;s .
   In Caballero and Simsek (forthcoming), we allow for Arrow-Debreu securities that enable
investors to trade the transition risk. Here, we assume ...nancial markets are incomplete and
thus investors speculate by adjusting their position on the market portfolio, i.e., changing their
leverage ratio (see also Remark 4).

Market portfolio price and return.                Absent state transitions, the price of capital Qt;s
follows an endogenous, deterministic path. Using Eq. (4), the growth rate of the price of the
market portfolio is given by

                                d (Qt;s kt;s ) =dt                               _ t;s
                                                                                 Q
                                                   = gs                t;s   +         ,
                                    Qt;s kt;s                                    Qt;s

                          _
where we use the notation X        dX=dt. Consequently, the return of the market portfolio absent
state transitions can be written as

                                           yt;s                                  _ t;s
                                                                                 Q
                                 rt;s =             + gs               t;s   +         .           (5)
                                          Qt;s kt;s                              Qt;s

Here, yt;s denotes the endogenous level of output at time t. The ...rst term captures the "divi-
dend yield" component of return. The second term captures the capital gain conditional on no
transition, which reects the expected (net) growth of capital and its price.

                                                                                                    i
Portfolio choice.      Investors are identical except for their beliefs about state transitions,    s.
They continuously make consumption and portfolio allocation decisions. At any time t and state
s, investor i has some ...nancial wealth denoted by ai                                        i
                                                     t;s . She chooses her consumption rate, ct;s ,
and the fraction of her wealth to allocate to the market portfolio, ! i
                                                                      t;s . She invests the residual
fraction, 1   !i
               t;s , in the risk-free asset.
   Note that ! i
               t;s also captures the investors' leverage ratio. We impose a leverage limit in the
boom state s = 1:
                                                 !i
                                                  t;1        ! t;1 ,                               (6)

where ! t;1   1 (to ensure market clearing). We allow for ! t;1 = 1, in which case the leverage
limit does not bind. Our main result applies when the leverage limit may bind (see Remark 2
for how to interpret the leverage limit in our context). We assume there is no leverage limit in
the remaining states-- this does not play an important role beyond simplifying the analysis.
   For analytical tractability, we assume investors have log utility. The investors'problem (at




                                                        10
time t and state s) can then be written as
                                                          Z   1
              i                                                             ~
            Vt;s ai
                  t;s = h            max
                                       i
                                                    i
                                                   Et;s           e         t
                                                                                log ci
                                                                                     ~;s
                                                                                     t ~
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                         dt                                    (7)
                              ct     i                    t
                                 ~;! t
                               ~;s   ~;s
                                       ~   ~ t;s
                                           t   ~
                   8
                   <      dai      i    f       i
                            t;s = at;s rt;s + ! t;s rt;s
                                                                                   f
                                                                                  rt;s           ct;s dt absent transition,
            s.t.                                                                                                               (8)
                   : ai 0 = ai         i Qt;s0 Qt;s                               if there is a transition to state s0 6= s
                      t;s    t;s 1 + ! t;s  Qt;s

            and ! i
                  t;1      ! t;1 :

       i [ ] denotes the expectation operator corresponding to investor i'
Here, Et;s                                                               s beliefs for state
transition probabilities.

Equilibrium in asset markets. Asset markets clear when the total wealth held by investors
is equal to the value of the market portfolio both before and after the portfolio allocation
decisions:
                                               p                    p p
                                       ao              o o
                                        t;s + at;s = ! t;s at;s + ! t;s at;s = Qt;s kt;s :                                     (9)

When the conditions in (9) are satis...ed, the market clearing condition for the risk-free asset
(which is in zero net supply) holds.

Nominal rigidities and equilibrium in goods markets. The supply side of our model
features nominal rigidities similar to the New Keynesian model. There is a continuum of com-
petitive production ...rms that own the capital stock and produce the ...nal good. For simplicity,
these production ...rms have pre-set nominal prices that never change (see Remark 3 for how
partial price exibility would a¤ect our analysis). Firms choose their capital utilization rate,
 t;s ,   to maximize their market value subject to demand constraints. They take into account both
that greater        t;s   increases production according to Eq. (3) and that it leads to faster capital
depreciation according to Eq. (4).
     First consider the benchmark case without price rigidities. In this case, ...rms solve

                                                   max    t;s Akt;s                      t;s   Qt;s kt;s .                    (10)
                                                    t;s



The optimality condition is given by

                                                              0
                                                                      t;s       Qt;s = A.                                     (11)

That is, the frictionless level of utilization ensures that the marginal depreciation rate is equal
to the marginal product of capital.
     Next consider the case with price rigidities. Firms solve problem (10) with the additional
constraint that their output is determined by aggregate demand. As in the New Keynesian
model, ...rms optimally meet this demand as long as their price exceeds their marginal cost. In

                                                                            11
a symmetric environment, the real price per unit of consumption good is one for all ...rms, and
                                      0
                                        ( t;s )Qt;s
each ...rm'
          s marginal cost is given by      A        . Therefore, ...rms'optimality condition is6

                                                      p
                       yt;s =   t;s Akt;s   = co
                                               t;s + ct;s         as long as          0
                                                                                          t;s   Qt;s    A.               (12)

Interest rate rigidity and monetary policy.                           Our assumption that production ...rms do
not change their prices implies that the aggregate nominal price level is ...xed. The real risk-
free interest rate, then, is equal to the nominal risk-free interest rate, which is determined by
monetary policy. We assume there is a lower bound on the nominal interest rate, which we set
                          f
as zero for convenience: rt;s          0:
                                                                                          n o
                                                                                            f
       We model monetary policy as a sequence of interest rates,                           rt;s , and implied levels of
                                                                                                  t;s
factor utilization and asset price levels,             t;s ; Qt;s t;s ,        chosen subject to the zero lower bound
constraint. Absent price rigidities, factor utilization and asset price levels satisfy condition (11).
Therefore, we de...ne the conventional output-stabilization policy as

                                             f             f
                                            rt;s = max 0; rt;s        for each s,                                        (13)

       f
where rt;s ("rstar") is recursively de...ned as the instantaneous interest rate that obtains when
condition (11) holds and the planner follows the output-stabilization policy in (13) at all future
times and states.
       Our goal is to understand whether the planner might want to use (pre-announced) monetary
policy for prudential purposes in the boom state. In particular, we assume the planner follows
the conventional output-stabilization policy in (13) for the recession and the recovery states
s 2 f2; 3g, but she might deviate fromn
                                      this rule in theo boom state s = 1. For now, we allow the
                                        f
planner to choose an arbitrary path, rt;1 ; Qt;1 ; t;1 , that is consistent with the equilibrium
                                                                          t
conditions. We specify the monetary policy further in Section 4.2 and de...ne the equilibrium
below.

De...nition 1. The equilibrium is a collection of processes for allocations, prices, and returns
such that capital evolves according to Eq. (4), its instantaneous return is given by Eq. (5),
investors maximize their expected utility subject to a leverage limit in the boom state (cf.
problem 7), asset markets clear (cf. Eq. (9)), goods markets clear (cf. Eq. (12)), and the
monetary authority follows the conventional
                                     n        output-stabilization
                                                       o           policy in states s 2 f2; 3g [cf.
                                       f
Eq. (13)] and chooses a feasible path rt;1 ; Qt;1 ; t;1 in state s = 1.
                                                                          t

Remark 1 (Interpreting the market portfolio). In a richer environment with multiple assets, the
market portfolio would capture the wealth-weighted average of all risky assets. In particular, our
analysis can accommodate multiple asset classes such as bonds, housing, and equities-- subject
                                                            0
   6                                                            (0)Qt;s
       If instead the marginal cost exceeded the price,           A
                                                                              > 1, ...rms would choose   t;s   = 0 and produce
yt;s   = 0. This case does not emerge in equilibrium.



                                                            12
to their own price uctuations-- as long as these assets are held in equal relative proportion by
"optimists" (banks) and "pessimists." In practice, banks are typically more exposed to bond
prices, as well as to house prices, but relatively less exposed to stock prices. Since our goal is to
analyze how PMP a¤ects bank balance sheets, we interpret the market portfolio as a weighted
average of all risky assets according to their weights in banks' portfolios (see the concluding
section for further discussion).

Remark 2 (Interpreting the leverage limit). We view the leverage limit as capturing a variety
of unmodeled (and relevant) features that would make banks' leverage ratio (to some extent)
exogenous to the aggregate risk that we focus on. First, the leverage limit can capture a
regulatory constraint. Second, the limit can capture a market-imposed leverage constraint due
to ...nancial frictions such as moral hazard, adverse selection, lenders'uncertainty or their desire
for safety. Third, the limit can be self-imposed: speci...cally, it can capture banks' leverage
choice in a richer environment that features multiple risks, e.g., sectoral risks in addition to
the aggregate risk that we model. In such an environment, as long as ...nancial markets are
incomplete, banks'leverage choice would be determined by a combination of risks and therefore
would respond relatively less to changes in aggregate risk.

Remark 3 (Partial price exibility). While our assumption of ...xed nominal prices is extreme,
partial price exibility would not substantially change our qualitative conclusions. In fact,
partial exibility would typically amplify the recession: it would lead to nominal price deation
during the recession that would exacerbate the lower bound in (13) (see Caballero and Simsek
(forthcoming) for further discussion). Partial exibility would play a more important role for
our analysis in the boom: PMP in the boom can generate price deation (in addition to negative
output gaps). In the concluding section, we discuss how PMP can be adjusted in practice to
reduce its side e¤ects on ination.

   We next provide a generally applicable partial characterization of the equilibrium. In sub-
sequent sections, we use this characterization to describe the equilibrium in the di¤erent states
and policy regimes.

2.1.    Equilibrium in the goods market
We ...rst state the following result for the equilibrium in the goods market.

Lemma 1. The equilibrium features the output-asset price relation:

                                      yt;s =kt;s = A      t;s   = Qt;s .                        (14)

The return of the market portfolio (absent transition) is

                                                     _ t;s
                                                     Q                               Qt;s
                      rt;s =   + gs        t;s   +               where     t;s   =          .   (15)
                                                     Qt;s                            Q

                                                     13
Here,     and Q denote the e¢ cient level of the capital utilization and the asset price charac-
terized, respectively, by

                                                      0
                                                          ( )       =       ;                                    (16)
                                                                           A
                                                              Q     =           :                                (17)

   Eq. (14) establishes a tight relation between output and asset prices. This relation follows
because, in view of log utility, each investor optimally consumes a fraction of her wealth each
period. Therefore, aggregate spending is a fraction of aggregate wealth. Since output is deter-
mined by spending, aggregate output is also a fraction of aggregate wealth. Combining this with
Eq. (5) implies the equilibrium return on the market portfolio is given by Eq. (15).
   Eq. (16) describes the e¢ cient factor utilization without nominal rigidities. It follows from
Eqs. (11) and (14). Note that the e¢ cient factor utilization is constant across states.
   Eq. (17) describes the e¢ cient asset price and it follows from Eq. (14). This is the asset
price level such that the associated aggregate demand leads to e¢ cient capital utilization (and
ensures actual output is exactly equal to potential output). When Qt;s < Q , we have                     t;s   <      :
capital is utilized below its e¢ cient level, which we interpret as a demand recession. Therefore,
the traditional monetary policy in (13) can be replaced by

                                               f                                 f
                                   Qt;s = Q ; rt;s              0 or Qt;s < Q ; rt;s = 0.                        (18)

Monetary policy can equivalently be thought of as stabilizing the price per capital.

 2.2.   Equilibrium in asset markets
The asset market equilibrium depends on investors'optimal leverage ratio, ! i
                                                                            t;s , which we char-
acterize next. To this end, we de...ne investors'relative wealth shares as

                                                i
                                                           ait;s
                                                t;s                 for i 2 fo; pg .                             (19)
                                                          Qt;s kt;s

                                          o           p
The wealth shares sum to one,             t;s    +    t;s   = 1 [cf. Eq. (9)]. The budget constraints in (7) imply
that investors'leverage ratio,       !i
                                      t;s ,      is closely related to their wealth share after transition,        i :
                                                                                                                   t;s0

                                          i
                                          t;s0                             Qt;s0 Qt;s
                                          i
                                                      1 = !i
                                                           t;s         1              .                          (20)
                                          t;s                                 Qt;s0

When the transition decreases the asset price, Qt;s0 < Qt;s , an investor'
                                                                         s wealth share decreases
after the transition,   i      <    i ,   if and only if she has above-average leverage, ! i
                        t;s0        t;s                                                    t;s > 1. Moreover,
we can think of investors as e¤ectively choosing a target wealth share after transition,                  i ,    and
                                                                                                          t;s0
adjusting their leverage ratio,       !i
                                       t;s ,     to achieve this target.



                                                                  14
Lemma 2. Investors choose a wealth share after transition,                                               i ,    that satis...es
                                                                                                         t;s0

                                   i
                               i   t;s    Qt;s0 Qt;s                 f
                      rt;s +   s   i
                                                                    rt;s          with equality if ! i
                                                                                                     t;s < ! t;s .                       (21)
                                   t;s0      Qt;s0

The asset market is in equilibrium ((9) holds) when

                                                             o             p
                                                             t;s0   +      t;s0   = 1:                                                   (22)

In equilibrium, if there is no transition, investors' wealth share evolves according to
                                                                    p
                                                                                                 !
                                                                                         i
                                              _i
                                               t;s             p    t;s                  t;s0
                                                   i
                                                         =     s    p         1          i
                                                                                                     .                                   (23)
                                                   t;s              t;s0                 t;s


   Eq. (21) is investors' portfolio optimality condition [cf. problem (7)]. As long as the
investor is unconstrained, she adjusts her leverage ratio until the risk-adjusted expected return
on capital is equal to the risk-free rate. The risk-adjusted return captures aggregate price changes
 Qt;s0 Qt;s
    Qt;s0     as well as the adjustment of marginal utility relative to other investors if there is a
                i
                t;s
transition     i      . For the equilibria we analyze, the leverage limit never binds for pessimists.
               t;s0
Consequently, the optimality condition (21) always holds as equality for pessimists, but it might
apply as inequality for optimists.
   Eq. (22) recasts asset market clearing in terms of investors' wealth shares. Together with
Eq. (21), this equation characterizes the equilibrium asset price Qt;s .
   Eq. (23) describes investors' wealth shares if there is no state transition. It follows from
investors'budget constraints (7) and the asset market equilibrium conditions. Pessimists'beliefs
(superscript p) appear in this expression because the optimality condition (21) always holds as
equality for them, so we can use their beliefs to price assets. In equilibrium, there is a risk-reward
trade-o¤. If an investor chooses            i       <    i     (resp.             i      >   i ) so that her           wealth share decreases
                                            t;s0         t;s                      t;s0       t;s
(resp. increases) after a state transition, then she also has                                _it;s > 0 (resp.          _i
                                                                                                                        t;s < 0) so her wealth
share grows (resp. shrinks) if there is no state transition.
   We end this section with the following result that characterizes these equations further for the
case in which the leverage limit doesn'
                                      t bind. To state the result, we de...ne the wealth-weighted
average of the transition probability as

                                                                 o                               o
                                             t;s    =        t;s t;s    + (1             t;s )   t;s .


Lemma 3. Suppose optimists are unconstrained, ! o
                                                t;1 < ! t;1 . In equilibrium, investors' wealth




                                                                        15
shares evolve according to
                                 i           i
                                 t;s0        s
                                  i
                                        =          if there is a state change to s0 ,                                                 (24)
                                  t;s        t;s
                                 _i
                                  t;s              i
                                  i
                                        =          s     t;s       if there is no state change.                                       (25)
                                  t;s

The equilibrium asset price satis...es the risk balance condition

                                                                        Qt;s        f
                                            rt;s +     t;s     1                 = rt;s .                                             (26)
                                                                        Qt;s0
                                                                                            o              p
                                                                                      o     t;s        p   t;s
                                    t bind, Eq. (21) implies
       When the leverage limit doesn'                                                 s     o      =   s   p      : investors trade the
                                                                                            t;s0           t;s0
market portfolio until they equate their perceived probabilities multiplied by marginal utilities.
The results follow from combining this observation with Lemma 2.
       Eqs. (24         25) show that, when type i investors perceive a below-average transition probabil-
        i
ity,    s   <   t;s ,   their wealth share decreases after transition but drifts upward absent transition.
Conversely, when investors assign above-average transition probability, their wealth share in-
creases after transition but drifts downward absent transition. Eq. (26) says the asset price is
determined as if there is a "representative investor" that has the wealth-weighted average belief.

Remark 4 (Role of market incompleteness due to the leverage limit). Lemmas 2 and 3 clarify
the di¤erences between this model and the one in Caballero and Simsek (forthcoming). The
equations in Lemma 3 are the same as their counterparts in Caballero and Simsek (forthcoming),
where we allow investors to trade transition risks via Arrow-Debreu securities. The intuition is
that, as long as the leverage limit does not bind, the market portfolio and the risk-free asset are
su¢ cient to dynamically complete the market. The main di¤erence in this setting is that the
leverage limit can bind, in which case the wealth-share dynamics are di¤erent than in Caballero
and Simsek (forthcoming) and are characterized by the equations in Lemma 2.


 3.         The recession and aggregate demand externalities
We next characterize the equilibrium starting in the recession state and illustrate the aggregate
demand externalities that motivate prudential policies. For the rest of the paper, with a slight
abuse of notation, we often drop the superscript o from optimists'wealth share:

                                                                         o
                                                             t;s         t;s .

                                                                                              p
Pessimists'wealth share is the complement of this expression,                                 t;s   =1            t;s .   We will describe
the remaining variables as functions of optimists'wealth share, so this convention will simplify
the notation. The following result describes the equilibrium starting in the recession state.


                                                                   16
Proposition 1. Suppose parameters satisfy Assumption A1 in the appendix. The recovery state
                                                                   f
s = 3 features positive interest rates and e¢ cient asset prices, rt; 3 > 0; Qt;3 = Q , whereas the
                                                                                       f
recession state s = 2 features zero interest rates and ine¢ ciently low asset prices, rt; 2 = 0; Qt;2 <
Q . The asset price in the recession is a function of optimists' wealth share, Qt;2 = Q2 (                 t;2 ),
that satis...es
                                                   dQ2 ( )
                                 Q2 ( ) < Q and            > 0 for each          2 (0; 1) .               (27)
                                                     d
                   Qt;s
Since   t;s   =    Q         [cf. Lemma 1], greater       in the recession improves improves factor utilization
and output as well as asset prices.

    The results for the recovery state are straightforward since there is no further transition and
no speculation. To show the results for the recession state, note that Lemma 3 applies since
there is no leverage limit in state s = 2. Then, combining the risk balance condition (26) with
Eq. (15), we obtain

                                            Qt;2          _ t;2
                                                          Q                   Qt;2      f
                                 + g2                 +         +   t;2   1          = rt; 2.             (28)
                                            Q             Qt;2                Q

   This equation together with the goodsn      market
                                                    o equilibrium condition (18) determines the
                                          f
path of interest rates and asset prices, rt;2 ; Qt;2 . To see how, ...rst consider the case in which
the interest rate constraint does not bind. In this case, we have Qt;2 = Q and Eq. (28) yields
                                       f;
the output-stabilizing interest rate: rt; 2 =             + g2      ( ).
                                                     f;
    Under Assumption A1, g2 is su¢ ciently low that rt; 2 < 0. In this case, we instead have
 f
rt; 2 = 0 and Eq. (28) yields an equation for the asset price, Qt;2 . In the appendix, we solve this
equation (together with investors'wealth dynamics) and establish Eq. (27).
    Intuitively, a reduction in g2 exerts downward pressure on asset prices due to low expected
                                                                                  f
output growth. Monetary policy responds by lowering the risk-free interest rate, rt; 2 , and keeps
asset prices at the e¢ cient level, Qt;2 = Q . However, if monetary policy is constrained, then
condition (28) requires Qt;2 to fall below Q . This asset price decline increases the expected
return of the market portfolio. The equilibrium obtains when "the representative investor"(who
has the wealth-weighted average belief) is indi¤erent between holding the market portfolio and
the risk-free asset. However, the decline in Qt;2 also lowers aggregate spending and triggers a
demand recession.
    Importantly, the asset price is higher when optimists have a greater wealth share in the
recession,        t;2 .   In this case, since "the representative investor"is more optimistic (greater     t;2 ),
a smaller decline in Qt;2 is su¢ cient to make her indi¤erent. This leads to higher asset prices,
which in turn improves spending and mitigates the recession. Figure 3 illustrates the solution
for a particular parameterization (described in Appendix A.6).
    As we formalize in Section 5, the positive relationship between optimists'wealth and output
in the recession is an aggregate demand externality. In particular, individual optimists that take
on leverage during the boom (and pessimists that lend to them) do not internalize the e¤ects of

                                                            17
                                            1


                                          0.99


                                          0.98


                                          0.97


                                          0.96


                                          0.95


                                          0.94


                                          0.93


                                          0.92


                                          0.91


                                           0.9
                                                 0    0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9    1




Figure 3: Equilibrium price of capital in the recession state s = 2. The dotted line illustrates
the frictionless price level, Q .


their ...nancial decisions on output in the recession. This motivates policy interventions in the
boom designed to increase optimists'wealth share in the recession, which we turn to next.


 4.     The boom and prudential policies
In this section, we establish our main result that shows monetary policy can replicate the
prudential bene...ts of tightening an existing leverage limit. To this end, we characterize the
equilibrium in the boom state, s = 1, focusing on optimists' wealth share after transition to
recession,   t;2   (which will be the key input to our welfare analysis in Section 5). We start
by analyzing a benchmark without PMP and show that macroprudential policy that tightens
the leverage limit increases             t;2 .       We then introduce our main ingredient and allow monetary
policy to be used for prudential purposes. In that context, we ...rst establish a negative result:
when there is no leverage limit, PMP is useless because optimists endogenously change their
risk taking to undo the prudential bene...ts. We then consider the case with a leverage limit and
establish our main result.

 4.1.    Benchmark without prudential monetary policy
First suppose there is no PMP: that is, monetary policy follows the conventional output-
stabilization policy in (13) in state s = 1. The next result characterizes the equilibrium and
illustrates the e¤ect of macroprudential policy. To state the result, suppose the leverage limit
in the boom state can be written as a function of optimists' wealth share, ! t;1 = ! 1 (                                                       t;1 ).
This ensures       t;1   is the only state variable. We denote the equilibrium variables as functions of
optimists'wealth share and the leverage limit function :                                         t;2   =      2(       ; ! 1 ( )) denotes optimists'
wealth share after transition when their current wealth share is                                             t;1   =     and the leverage limit is
described by ! t;1 = ! 1 (      t;1 )   for each t. We use the notation                                2(     ; 1) to denote the equilibrium
when there is no leverage limit: ! 1 ( ) = 1 for each .


                                                                              18
Proposition 2. Suppose A1­A3 hold and there is no PMP: the planner follows the traditional
                                                                                 f       f
monetary policy in (13). Then, the boom state features positive interest rates, rt; 1 = r1 ( ; ! 1 ) >
0, and e¢ cient asset prices, Qt;1 = Q .
            Suppose ...rst there is no leverage limit, ! 1 = 1. Optimists have an above-average leverage
ratio, ! o
         1 ( ; 1) > 1. If there is transition to recession, optimists' wealth share shrinks:

                                                                  o
                                                                  1
                                              2(    ; 1) =                < .                                      (29)
                                                                 1(   )
                                                                                                        p   o
If there is no transition, optimists' wealth share grows: d ( _ t;1 =            t;1 )   = (1      )(   1   1)   > 0.
            Now suppose there is a leverage limit. Consider                2 (0; 1) such that the leverage limit
binds, ! 1 ( )          !o
                         1 ( ; 1). Decreasing the leverage limit (via macroprudential policy) increases
                                                                 d 2 ( ;! 1 )
optimists'wealth share after transition to recession:            d( ! 1 ( )) > 0. It     also slows down the growth
                                                                      d( _ 1 = t;1 )
rate of optimists' wealth share if there is no          transition, d( t;!    1 ( ))
                                                                                     <   0.

            The ...rst part of Proposition 2 shows that, under appropriate parametric conditions (As-
sumption A2), the equilibrium in the boom state without PMP features an e¢ cient price level.
            The second part considers the case in which there is no leverage limit. Optimists take on
above-average leverage. Consequently, their wealth share declines if there is a transition to
recession-- as this is associated with a price decline-- but grows if there is no transition. These
wealth-share dynamics follow from Lemma 3.
            The last part of the proposition shows that macroprudential policy that tightens optimists'
leverage limit improves optimists' wealth-share after transition,                    t;2 .    Hence, macroprudential
policy achieves prudential bene...ts.7 To see how, consider the characterization of equilibrium
when the leverage limit binds. Eq. (20) implies

                                 2(   ; !1)                          Q1
                                              = 1     (! 1 ( )    1)       1 ,                                     (30)
                                                                     Q2
                                where Q1 = Q            and      Q2 = Q2 ( 2 ( ; ! 1 )) :

The ...rst line is the microfounded version of Eq. (2) from the introduction. The second line
features the microfounded version of Eq. (1). As illustrated by Figure 1 in the introduction, the
equilibrium can be visualized as the intersection of two increasing relations. Under appropriate
regularity conditions (Assumption A3), there is a unique solution that satis...es                           2(   ; !1) 2
[   2(        ; 1) ; ]. Moreover, tightening the leverage limit ! 1 ( ) shifts Eq. (30) upward: that is, it
increases optimists'wealth share,             2(   ; ! 1 ), given a price level in the recession Q2 < Q . This
creates a virtuous cycle that results in a higher optimists'wealth share and higher asset prices,
    2   and Q2 (see the left panel of Figure 1).
        7
    On the other hand, the result also illustrates potential dynamic costs of macroprudential policy. A tighter
limit slows down the growth of optimists'wealth share if the recession is not realized. We return to this point in
Section 6.



                                                          19
 4.2.     Prudential monetary policy
We now assume that macroprudential policy is inexible: the planner cannot change the existing
leverage limits. We ask whether PMP can achieve similar prudential bene...ts. Formally, suppose
the planner does not follow the rule in (13) in state s = 1 but instead sets the interest rate to
target an asset price level that might be lower than the e¢ cient level, Qt;1                                   Q . We assume
the planner's price target can be written as a function of optimists'wealth share:

                                                Qt;1 = Q1 (       t;1 )          Q .

We denote the equilibrium variables as functions of the PMP function (in addition to the earlier
variables):   2(   ; ! 1 ( ) ; Q1 ( )) denotes optimists'wealth share after transition, when monetary
policy is described by Qt;1 = Q1 (           t;1 )   for each t.8

 4.2.1.    PMP without a leverage limit

First consider the case without a leverage limit, ! 1 = 1. In this case, we establish a negative
result: PMP does not achieve its prudential objectives.

Proposition 3. Suppose Assumptions A1­A3 hold. Suppose there is some PMP, Q1 ( ), but
no leverage limit, ! 1 = 1. Optimists' wealth share dynamics are the same same as in the
benchmark without prudential policy. In particular, PMP does not a¤ ect optimists'wealth share
after transition to recession,       t;2 .

    This result says that, absent a leverage limit PMP, does not provide prudential bene...ts. To
see why, note that Lemma 3 applies in this case. As long as the leverage limit does not bind,
                                                                             o    t;1       p1   t;1
investors'portfolio optimality condition (21) implies                        1    t;2
                                                                                        =   11   t;2
                                                                                                       regardless of asset prices
                                                              o
or returns. This implies       t;2   =    2(    ; 1) =        1
                                                                      . Intuitively, as the planner changes the asset
                                                             1(   )
price Q1 (and asset returns), investors retrade the asset to equate (as before) their perceived
probabilities multiplied by marginal utilities.
    It is also instructive to consider how investors trade to undo the e¤ects of PMP. Note that
optimists'leverage ratio is determined by the following analogue of Eq. (30):

                        2(   ; 1)                                                    Q1 ( )
                                     =1        (! o
                                                  1 ( ; 1; Q1 )           1)                             1 .
                                                                                 Q2 ( 2 ( ; 1))

A decline in Q1 ( ) results in a smaller price drop after transition (the term inside the brackets).
Therefore, optimists'wealth share after transition (                    2)     remains unchanged because they increase
their leverage ratio,   !o
                         1(   ; 1; Q1 ) >        !o
                                                  1(     ; 1). Optimists increase their leverage because they
perceive the transition to recession as less risky but they desire the same portfolio risk as before.
   8
     We use the same notation as in the previous section to denote the equilibrium in the benchmark in which
the planner follows the conventional output-stabilization policy: e.g., 2 ( ; ! 1 ) denotes the equilibrium when
monetary policy is described by Qt;1 = Q for each t.


                                                             20
4.2.2.          PMP with a leverage limit

The previous discussion suggests that PMP can a¤ect investors'equilibrium exposures if opti-
mists are constrained by some leverage limit. We next present our main result, which formalizes
this intuition and shows that monetary policy can replicate the prudential e¤ects of tightening
the leverage limit.

Proposition 4. Suppose Assumptions A1-A3 hold. Consider the benchmark equilibrium without
PMP, Q1 ( ) = Q . Fix a level                2 (0; 1) that is associated with some leverage limit, ! 1 ( ) < 1
(that might or might not bind). Consider an alternative leverage limit !
                                                                       ~ 1 ( ) that agrees with
! 1 ( ) everywhere except for and that satis...es ! ~ 1 ( ) < min (! 1 ( ) ; ! o
                                                                               1 ( ; 1)), and a PMP
~ 1 ( ) that agrees with Q1 ( ) everywhere except for . Then:
Q
     (i) There exists Q~ 1 ( ) < Q such that the PMP (with the original leverage limit) gener-
ates the same e¤ ect on optimists' wealth share after transition as the alternative leverage limit
(without PMP):
                                               2
                                                         ~1 =
                                                   ; !1; Q          2(   ;!
                                                                          ~ 1) .
                                                                                          ~1( )
                                                                                         @Q
Targeting a lower e¤ ective limit requires targeting a lower asset price,                @!
                                                                                          ~ 1( )      > 0.
     (ii) PMP requires setting a higher interest rate than the benchmark without policy:

                                              f          ~ 1 > rf ( ; ! 1 ) :
                                             r1    ; !1; Q      1

                                                                                               f        ~1)
                                                                                             @r1 ( ;!1 ;Q
Targeting a lower e¤ ective limit requires setting a higher interest rate,                       @!
                                                                                                  ~ 1( )      < 0.


     The ...rst part of Proposition 4 shows that monetary policy can replicate the prudential e¤ects
of tightening the leverage limit that we established in Proposition 2. To see the intuition, consider
a situation in which there is a limit that binds for optimists so that ! o
                                                                         1 ( ; ! 1 ; Q1 ) = ! 1 ( ). Then,


                         2(   ; ! 1 ; Q1 )                               Q1 ( )
                                             =1    (! 1 ( )    1)                               1 .                  (31)
                                                                    Q2 ( 2 ( ; ! 1 ; Q1 ))

Recall that tightening the leverage limit mitigates optimists' wealth decline by reducing their
leverage ratio, !
                ~ 1 < ! 1 . For a given asset price Q2 , monetary policy can achieve the same
wealth decline for optimists at the leverage limit, ! 1 = ! 1 , by reducing the asset price decline,
~1
Q        Q
Q2   <   Q2 .   Unlike in Proposition 3, optimists cannot undo the e¤ects because the policy pushes
their leverage ratio against the limit, ! 1 = ! 1 . Note also that, once the policy increases the
price level in the recession, Q2 , it generates a similar virtuous cycle as a policy that directly
tightens the leverage limit (see the right panel of Figure 1).
     The second part of Proposition 3 shows that PMP requires raising the interest rate above
the conventional policy benchmark with output stabilization. As expected, targeting a lower
asset price requires a higher interest rate.


                                                              21
     Proposition 4 is essentially static: it considers a policy change at a particular instant while
leaving the policy at other times unchanged. This is useful for illustrating how PMP works,
but it does not impact the dynamic equilibrium. We next establish a dynamic version of this
result, which we use for numerical illustration as well as for welfare analysis. To state the result,
we parameterize the leverage limit function, ! ( ; l) where l 2 L                     R+ , and lower levels of l
                                                @! ( ;l)
correspond to a tighter leverage limit,           @l       > 0 for       2 (0; 1). An example is the simple
leverage limit function
                                      ! 1 ( ; l) = l with l 2 L = (1; 1) .                                          (32)

Here, the leverage limit doesn'
                              t depend on             and a lower l corresponds to a tighter limit for all
 . Whenever we parameterize the leverage limit function, we simplify the notation by denoting
the corresponding equilibrium variables with               2(    ; l; Q1 ) (as opposed to    2(   ; ! 1 ( ; l) ; Q1 )).

Proposition 5. Consider the setup of Proposition 4. Suppose there is a leverage limit function,
! 1 ( ; l), parameterized so that lower levels of l correspond to a tighter limit. For each ~
                                                                                            l < l
su¢ ciently close to l, there exists a PMP, denoted by Q1                ;~
                                                                          l , such that optimists'wealth share
after transition is the same as when the leverage limit is given by ! 1                 ;~
                                                                                         l without PMP:


                          2     ; l; Q1    ;~
                                            l   =     2         ;~
                                                                 l for each     2 (0; 1) .

Numerical illustration. We next illustrate PMP with a numerical example. Optimists'and
                                                                                                         o
pessimists' beliefs about the probability of a transition to recession are given by                      1   = 0:09 <
 p
 1   = 0:9. The remaining parameters are as described in Appendix A.6. Suppose optimists are
subject to the simple leverage limit function in (32). We set the current limit so that it barely
binds when optimists have half of the wealth share: l = ! o   1 (0:5; 1) = 9:03. The planner would
                                         ~
like to tighten this limit by a quarter, l = 0:75l = 6:77, but she cannot control the leverage limit
directly. Instead, the planner implements the replicating prudential policy, Q1                       ;~
                                                                                                       l .
     Figure 4 plots the equilibrium functions for three di¤erent policy speci...cations over the
range    2 [0:4; 0:9]. The red dashed lines correspond to the case with the current leverage limit
l but no prudential policy of any kind. The black dash-dotted lines correspond to tightening the
leverage limit directly, ~
                         l = 0:75l. Finally, the blue solid lines correspond to implementing this
tightening via PMP, Q1         ;~
                                l .
     The top left panel illustrates optimists' leverage ratio as a function of their wealth share
for each speci...cation. Optimists have an above-average leverage ratio. The current leverage
limit restricts optimists' leverage ratio only slightly (not visible in the ...gure). The proposed
tightening would restrict their leverage ratio considerably more. PMP raises optimists'leverage
ratio (over the range     > 0:5) as it pushes them against the leverage limit.
     The top middle panel illustrates optimists'wealth share after transition normalized by their
current wealth share,     2(   ) = . Optimists'wealth share declines after transition,                  2(   ) = < 1.
PMP replicates the e¤ect of tightening the leverage limit and therefore increases optimists'

                                                           22
     9.5                                     0.8                                     0.5

                                                                                    0.45
                                             0.7
       9
                                                                                     0.4
                                             0.6
     8.5                                                                            0.35

                                             0.5                                     0.3
       8
                                             0.4                                    0.25

     7.5                                                                             0.2
                                             0.3
                                                                                    0.15
       7
                                             0.2
                                                                                     0.1

     6.5                                     0.1                                    0.05
        0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9




       1                                       1                                     0.1


                                                                                    0.09
    0.98                                    0.98
                                                                                    0.08

    0.96                                    0.96
                                                                                    0.07


                                                                                    0.06
    0.94                                    0.94

                                                                                    0.05
    0.92                                    0.92
                                                                                    0.04


     0.9                                     0.9                                    0.03
        0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9




Figure 4: Equilibrium functions in the boom state s = 1 for di¤erent speci...cations of the
leverage limit and PMP.


wealth share after transition. The top right panel illustrates that this e¤ective tightening slows
down the growth of optimists'wealth share if there is no transition.
   The bottom left panel illustrates the equilibrium asset price in the boom state normalized by
the e¢ cient level. The leverage limit (its current level or hypothetical tightening) leaves the asset
price equal to its e¢ cient level. In contrast, PMP reduces the asset price by around 2%. This
relatively small decline is able to replicate the e¤ects of a large reduction in optimists'leverage
ratio because optimists'initial leverage ratio is high. With high and constrained leverage, small
changes in asset prices have large e¤ects on optimists'balance sheets [cf. (31)].
   The bottom middle panel illustrates the price after a transition to recession normalized by
the e¢ cient level. PMP increases the asset price during the recession. We can gain intuition
for this result by comparing this panel with the bottom left panel. By lowering the asset price
during the boom, PMP reduces the asset price decline after a transition to recession. This
smaller decline supports optimists'balance sheets and thus improves the asset price level during
the recession by around 2%.
   The bottom right panel illustrates the equilibrium interest rate. The leverage limit reduces
the policy interest rate because it reduces optimists'e¤ective asset demand. In contrast, PMP
increases the policy interest rate (by less than 2 percentage points). This reduces the asset price,
as illustrated by the bottom left panel, which results in a smaller asset price decline when there
is a transition to recession.


                                                            23
          1

        0.8

        0.6

        0.4

        0.2

          0
              0         0.1     0.2       0.3     0.4        0.5     0.6     0.7      0.8     0.9      1




          1

       0.98

       0.96

       0.94

       0.92

        0.9
              0         0.1     0.2       0.3     0.4        0.5     0.6     0.7      0.8     0.9      1




        0.1

       0.08

       0.06

       0.04

       0.02

          0
              0         0.1     0.2       0.3     0.4        0.5     0.6     0.7      0.8     0.9      1




Figure 5: Simulation of the equilibrium path starting with a0 = 0:85 and s = 1 for di¤erent
speci...cations of the leverage limit and PMP.


   Figure 5 simulates the equilibrium variables over time (for each policy speci...cation) for a
particular initial wealth share for optimists,          0,   and a particular realization of uncertainty. We
take    0         = 0:85 and consider a path in which the economy transitions into the recession at
t = 0:4 (other choices lead to qualitatively similar e¤ects). The plots illustrate that PMP raises
the asset price in the recession at the cost of reducing the asset price in the boom.


 5.      Welfare equivalence of prudential policies
We have so far established that PMP can achieve similar prudential bene...ts as macroprudential
policy. However, compared to macroprudential policy, PMP is associated with some costs be-
cause it reduces asset prices and output during the boom [cf. Figures 4 and 5]. In this section,
we develop a formal welfare criterion and evaluate both the costs and bene...ts of PMP. We show
that, for small changes, PMP achieves the same welfare e¤ects as macroprudential policy.
   We evaluate welfare with the gap value function that we ...rst introduced in Caballero and
Simsek (forthcoming). This function captures the welfare loss due to demand recessions. It is
an exact version of the approximate quadratic loss function typically used in the New Keynesian
literature. We ...rst introduce our welfare criterion and discuss its properties.

A gap value criterion.                We assume the planner has her own beliefs (which can be di¤erent
from optimists'and pessimists'beliefs) and let the superscript pl denote the planner'
                                                                                    s beliefs. For


                                                        24
                     i;pl
i 2 fo; pg, we use Vt;s   ai
                           t;s to denote type i investors'equilibrium value calculated according
to the planner'
              s beliefs. In view of log utility, the value function takes the form

                                       i;pl            log ai
                                                            t;s =Qt;s         i;pl
                                     Vt;s   ai
                                             t;s =                         + vt;s  .

                               i;pl
The normalized value function vt;s  captures the value when the investor holds one unit of the
capital stock (or wealth, ai
                           t;s = Qt;s ). We further decompose this term as

                                                i;pl    i ;pl    pl
                                               vt;s  = vt;s   + wt;s .                                          (33)

                                 i ;pl
The frictionless value function vt;s   obtains in a counterfactual economy where the evolution
of wealth shares are left unchanged but asset prices are equal to the frictionless level, Qt;s =
Q for each t; s. This captures all determinants of welfare (including the bene...ts/costs from
                                                                           pl
speculation) except for suboptimal factor utilization. The residual term, wt;s , corresponds to
the gap value function that captures the losses from suboptimal utilization.
       Speci...cally, in the appendix we show that the gap value function solves the following di¤er-
ential equation:

                                     pl
                            pl     @wt;s                           pl    pl       pl
                           wt;s             = W (Qt;s ) +          s    wt;s 0   wt;s ,                         (34)
                                    @t
                                                       Qt;s    1          Qt;s
                       where W (Qt;s )           log                                      ( ) .
                                                       Q                  Q

Here, W (Qt;s ) is strictly concave with a maximum, Qt;s = Q , and maximum value, W (Q ) = 0
(cf. Eq. (16)). This function captures the instantaneous welfare losses when the asset price
                                                                                                 pl
(and factor utilization) deviates from its e¢ cient level, Qt;s 6= Q . Therefore, the gap value wt;s
corresponds to the present discounted value of expected welfare losses due to demand recessions.
       Our welfare criterion posits that the planner maximizes the gap value evaluated with her own
         pl
belief, wt;s . In contrast, the standard Pareto criterion would focus on the total value function
                                                  i;i
evaluated with each investor's own belief (i.e., vt;s ). In our context, the gap value criterion
has several advantages. First, it sidesteps questions about whether speculation increases or
reduces welfare (see Brunnermeier et al. (2014) for further discussion). Second, it aligns with
the mandates of monetary policy in practice: the planner exclusively focuses on minimizing
output gaps relative to a frictionless benchmark (similar to Kocherlakota (2014) and Stein
(2014)). Third, the gap value does not depend on i 2 fo; pg: it is the same for optimists and
pessimists [cf. Eq. (34)]. Therefore, the gap value does not require Pareto weights. Intuitively,
an improvement in aggregate demand bene...ts all investors by the same (proportional) amount.9
       Following Brunnermeier et al. (2014), we also assume the planner's beliefs are in the convex
   9
    In our setup, investors have heterogeneous wealth share dynamics (driven by their heterogeneous leverage ).
                                                                                            i ;pl
The resulting heterogeneous welfare e¤ects are captured by the ...rst-best value function, vt;s   . Given their wealth
share dynamics, all investors are a¤ected equally by a change in the path of asset prices and output.


                                                          25
                                                                pl            o     p               pl          p    o
hull of optimists' and pessimists' beliefs:                     1    2 [      1;    1]   and        2    2 [    2;   2 ].    Our results are
qualitatively robust to the choice of the planner'
                                                 s beliefs in these sets. As before, the planner'
                                                                                                s
                                                                   pl     pl
gap value can be written as a function of optimists'wealth share, wt;s = ws  (                                              t;s ).


Aggregate demand externalities. We next characterize the gap value function in the re-
cession and formalize the aggregate demand externalities that motivate policy intervention.

Lemma 4. Consider the setup of Proposition 5 (without PMP). In the recession state, the gap
value function satis...es

                                                   pl
                                pl               dw2  ( )
                               w2  ( ) < 0 and            > 0 for each                             2 (0; 1) .                             (35)
                                                   d

   As expected, the gap value in the recession is strictly negative. Moreover, a greater wealth-
share for optimists increases the gap value. Optimists' wealth share improves welfare because
it increases asset prices and aggregate demand, which brings the economy closer to e¢ cient
output. Importantly, this e¤ect is an aggregate demand externality. Since optimists' wealth
share is an aggregate state variable, individual investors do not take into account the e¤ect of
their decisions on the gap value (regardless of the planner's belief). This neglect motivates the
prudential policy interventions in the boom that we analyzed earlier.

Equivalence of prudential policies. We next consider the gap value function in the boom.
We establish our main result in this section: for small changes, PMP can replicate the welfare
bene...ts of macroprudential policy.

Proposition 6. Consider the setup of Proposition 5. For small policy changes, the welfare
e¤ ects of PMP are the same as the welfare e¤ ects of tightening the leverage limit directly:

                                    pl                                              pl
                                  dw1     ; l; Q1       ;~
                                                         l                        dw1         ;~
                                                                                               l
                                                                 j~
                                                                  l=l =                             j~
                                                                                                     l=l :                                (36)
                                           d~
                                            l                                            d~
                                                                                          l

   To show this result, note that the policies ~
                                               l and Q1                              ;~
                                                                                      l lead to identical equilibrium allo-
cations except for the asset price in the boom state. Using this observation and the de...nition
of the gap value in (34), the welfare di¤erence between the two policies can be written as
                                                 Z      1                pl
     pl                            pl                                +        t
    w1          ; l; Q1   ;~
                           l      w1     ;~
                                          l =               e            1
                                                                                   W Q1                   ~
                                                                                                     t;1 ; l         W (Q ) dt.           (37)
                                                    0

Here,     t;1   denotes optimists' wealth share when the economy starts with                                                0;1   =   , follows
policy ~
       l, and reaches time t without transitioning into recession. Since W (Qt;1 ) < W (Q ) for
Qt;1 < Q , this expression implies that PMP always yields lower welfare than the equivalent
tightening of the leverage limit. However, since W (Qt;1 ) is maximized at Qt;1 = Q , these
welfare di¤erences are second order when the prudential policy is used in small doses (so that

                                                                26
             -0.008




             -0.009




              -0.01




             -0.011




             -0.012




             -0.013




                      9     8          7          6          5          4          3




Figure 6: The planner'   s gap value as a function of the e¤ective leverage ratio starting with
a0 = 0:85 and s = 1 for a direct tightening (dashed line) and an equivalent tightening via PMP
(solid line). The vertical dotted line illustrates the leverage tightening studied earlier.


Qt;1 remains close to Q ). Therefore, as formalized by Eq. (36), the two policies have identical
...rst-order e¤ects on welfare.
   Figure 6 illustrates this result for the numerical example in Section 4.2.2. We take the
                                                                             pl        o       p
       s beliefs to be the average of optimists'and pessimists'beliefs,
planner'                                                                     s    =(   s   +   s ) =2.   The
black dash-dotted line in Figure 6 illustrates that, if feasible, a direct tightening of the leverage
limit would improve the gap value. The solid blue line illustrates that an indirect tightening via
PMP also increases the gap value. In fact, for small policy changes, PMP has the same welfare
impact as a direct tightening.
   Intuitively, PMP and macroprudential policy both increase optimists'wealth share if there
is a transition to recession. This mitigates output gaps and improves welfare. Relative to
macroprudential policy, PMP slows down the economy in the boom. Starting from an e¢ cient
output, these costs are second order, whereas the bene...ts of improving output in the recession
are ...rst order. Therefore, PMP achieves similar welfare bene...ts as macroprudential policy.


 6.    Optimal prudential monetary policy
So far, we have established that monetary policy can have prudential bene...ts by e¤ectively
tightening an existing leverage limit. In this section, we analyze the determinants of optimal
PMP in our setting. We ...rst characterize the optimal prudential policy as the solution to a



                                                 27
recursive optimization problem. We then solve the problem numerically and investigate the
comparative statics of optimal policy.
       For each   , suppose the planner sets an arbitrary price level Q1                                    Q subject to the re-
striction that the price level weakly declines after the transition. Given Q1 , optimists' wealth
share after transition is determined by the function                            2(    ; ! 1 ; Q1 ) 2 [0; 1]. This is a continuous
and piecewise di¤erentiable function that is equal to                            2(    ; 1) if optimists'leverage limit does
not bind (that is, if          !o
                                1(   ; 1; Q1 ) < ! 1 ( )) and is equal to the solution to (31) if the limit
binds. Using this notation, we can recursively formulate the planner'
                                                                    s optimization problem in
the boom state s = 1 as
                                                                                             pl
                        pl      pl                                                         dw1  ( )          pl pl
                  +     1      w1  ( ) = max W (Q1 )                         W (Q ) +               _ +      1 w2     (   2)             (38)
                                                Q1                                           d
                                                 (1      ) p 1                  2
                              where _      =                     1
                                                  1      2
                                      2    =    2 ( ; ! 1 ; Q1 )

                               and Q1      2 [Q2 (        2(       ; ! 1 ; Q1 )) ; Q ] :

The second line uses Eq. (23) to describe the evolution of optimists' wealth share absent a
                   d    t;1
transition, _ =        dt     , as a function of their induced wealth share after transition,                                  2   =   t;2   (as
well as their current wealth share,              =                 10
                                                          t;1 ).
       The analytical solution to problem (38) is complicated. However, a numerical solution is
straightforward. Moreover, we can glean some intuition by considering the local optimality
conditions. Speci...cally, for an interior solution Q1 2 (Q2 ; Q ), the optimality condition (for
decreasing Q1 further) can be written as
                                                                   "                                         #
                                                                             pl              pl
                              dW (Q1 )             d 2                  pl dw2 ( 2 )   d _ dw1  ( )
                                            =                           1            +                                                   (39)
                                dQ1             d ( Q1 )                     d 2       d 2 d
                                     d_               p    (1           )2
                            where           =         1                   2:
                                     d 2                  (1            2)

       The left-hand side of Eq. (39) captures the costs of the policy via its impact on the output
gap in period 1. This term is positive since Q1 < Q : decreasing the asset price in the boom
below the e¢ cient level worsens the output gap. The right-hand side captures the welfare e¤ects
                                                                                                  d 2
of the policy via its impact on optimists'wealth share. We have                                 d( Q1 )   > 0: lowering the asset
                                                                                                            pl
                                                                                                          dw2  ( 2)
price increases optimists' wealth share after transition. We also have                                      d 2       > 0: increasing
optimists'wealth share after transition mitigates the output gaps in the recession. Hence, the
...rst term inside the brackets is positive and captures the bene...ts of PMP.
                                                     d_
       On the other hand, we also have               d 2    < 0: if there is no transition, the policy slows down
  10
    In problem (38), we ignore the zero lower bound constraint on the interest rate. In numerical solutions
(described subsequently), we check and verify that this constraint doesn't bind at the optimal solution.



                                                                        28
            1                                                                         10

                                                                                         8

                                                                                         6

                                                                                         4

        0.995                                                                            2

                                                                                         0
                                                                                             0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1




                                                                                         1
         0.99
                                                                                     0.8

                                                                                     0.6

                                                                                     0.4

                                                                                     0.2
        0.985
                                                                                         0
                                                                                             0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1




                                                                                   0.01

         0.98                                                                      0.008

                                                                                   0.006

                                                                                   0.004

                                                                                   0.002

        0.975                                                                        0
                0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9   1             0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1




Figure 7: Equilibrium with optimal PMP (blue solid line) and without PMP (red dashed line)
given the leverage limit l. The green dotted line in the left panel illustrates the minimum price
decline necessary to make optimists'leverage limit bind.


the accumulation of optimists'wealth share. This illustrates potential dynamic costs of PMP.
In a dynamic setting, optimists' wealth share can also be useful in future recessions and thus
prudential policies always involve a trade-o¤-- even when they do not a¤ect the output gap in
the boom.11

Numerical illustration. Figure 7 illustrates the optimal monetary policy corresponding to
the numerical example in Section 4.2.2. As a benchmark, the red dashed lines illustrate the
equilibrium without PMP but with the simple leverage limit ! 1 ( ; l) = l = 9:03. Recall that
this leverage limit is chosen so that (absent PMP) it binds for optimists when                                < 0:5 but not
when                0:5. The green dotted line in the left panel illustrates the minimum price decline
necessary to make the leverage limit bind for optimists-- price reductions smaller than this level
have no prudential bene...ts since they are undone by endogenous risk adjustments by optimists.
       The blue solid line in the left panel of Figure 7 illustrates the optimal price that solves problem
(38). With this parameterization, the planner does not use monetary policy for prudential
purposes when                   < 0:33. In this range, the leverage limit is already tight, and tightening it
  11
    In Caballero and Simsek (forthcoming), we investigate this trade-o¤ in the context of macroprudential policy.
We show that the bene...ts from an immediate transition to recession are often larger than the costs of deepening
future recessions (in view of discounting). In particular, under regularity conditions and starting from a no-policy
benchmark, adopting some macroprudential policy improves welfare.



                                                                  29
            1
                                                             0.982

                                                            0.9815
        0.995
                                                             0.981

         0.99                                               0.9805

                                                              0.98
        0.985
                                                            0.9795

                                                             0.979
         0.98

                                                            0.9785

                14   13   12    11    10     9     8                 0.4   0.45   0.5    0.55    0.6




        0.014                                               0.011

        0.012                                               0.0105

                                                             0.01
         0.01
                                                            0.0095
        0.008
                                                            0.009

        0.006
                                                            0.0085

        0.004                                               0.008

                                                            0.0075
        0.002
                                                            0.007
            0
                14   13   12    11    10     9     8                 0.4   0.45   0.5    0.55    0.6




Figure 8: Comparative statics of the optimal PMP price level (top panels) and the interest rate
(bottom panels) for = 0:85 with respect to changing the parameter on the x-axis. The vertical
dotted lines illustrate the benchmark parameters (used in earlier ...gures).


further via PMP does not create large enough bene...ts to compensate for the costs imposed
by slowing down the accumulation of optimists' wealth share [cf. Eq. (39)]. In contrast, the
planner uses PMP over the range            2 [0:33; 0:99]. Moreover, the degree of tightening relative to
the conventional policy benchmark is non-monotonic in optimists'wealth share. In particular,
the planner tightens the policy more as optimists'wealth share increases toward                 = 0:85 and
tightens it less beyond this level. Hence the policy is most useful when optimists'wealth share
lies in an intermediate range. Two forces make the policy relatively less attractive for large .
First, since optimal private leverage drops as          rises, the policy becomes costlier as the planner
needs to reduce the price even further to make optimists'leverage limit bind and gain traction
(as illustrated by the green dotted line). Second, the policy is less useful because there is less
speculation. In fact, for      ' 0:99, these countervailing forces are strong enough that the planner
stops using the policy altogether (as illustrated by the jump in the blue solid line).
   Figure 8 illustrates the comparative statics of the optimal policy. To facilitate exposition, we
describe the e¤ects for a particular level of optimists'wealth share,             = 0:85 (the same wealth
share we considered in the previous section). The top panels display the change in the optimal
price level as we vary a single parameter. The bottom panels display the change in the optimal
interest rate relative to the conventional policy benchmark with output stabilization.
   The left panels show the e¤ect of changing the leverage limit, l. When the leverage limit is
very loose, the planner does not use prudential policy because it is easily undone by optimists,
illustrating Proposition 3. There is a threshold leverage limit below which the planner uses



                                                       30
monetary policy. Once the leverage limit is below this threshold, tightening it further makes the
planner use PMP less. Hence, the leverage limit and PMP are complements in the high-l range
but they become substitutes in the low-l range.
   The right panels illustrate the e¤ect of changing the planner'
                                                                s belief about the probability
                                pl
of transition into recession,   1.   As expected, when the planner believes the recession is more
likely, she utilizes PMP more and reduces the asset price by a greater amount. Recall that in
our model the recession is driven by a decline in asset valuations. Hence, the planner should
calibrate PMP by monitoring the tail risk in asset prices -- the chance of a su¢ ciently large
decline in asset valuations to trigger a demand recession.


 7.    Prudential policies with "shadow banks"
In practice, a major concern with macroprudential policy is that there are lightly regulated
institutions-- typically referred to as shadow banks-- that can circumvent regulatory constraints.
Stein (2013) noted that in these environments PMP might have an advantage over macropru-
dential policy "because it gets in all of the cracks."We next evaluate the performance of macro-
prudential policy and PMP in our model when some of the high-valuation agents can avoid
regulatory leverage limits. We ...nd that whether PMP is more e¤ective than macroprudential
policy depends on the nature of the leverage limits faced by shadow banks.
   First consider the case in which shadow banks face a binding leverage limit, e.g., due to
...nancial frictions or self-imposed limits, even though they are not constrained by the regulatory
limit (see Remark 2). In this case, shadow banks and regular banks are both constrained
(although perhaps for di¤erent reasons), so our earlier analysis for PMP applies. In particular,
PMP can replicate the prudential e¤ects of tightening the leverage limit for all banks, whereas
macroprudential policy is weaker because a direct regulatory tightening of the leverage limit
applies only to regular banks. This broader impact illustrates that PMP can indeed be more
e¤ective than macroprudential policy.
   Next consider the other extreme case in which shadow banks do not face a binding leverage
limit (whereas regular banks face a binding limit). We next analyze this case and ...nd that,
while PMP remains useful, it is weakened by the same general equilibrium forces that weaken
macroprudential policy.
   Formally, suppose a subset of optimists are not subject to the leverage constraint, ! 1;t   ! 1;t .
We refer to these agents as unconstrained optimists ("shadow banks"), and refer to the remaining
fraction of optimists as constrained optimists ("regular banks"). We let       2 (0; 1) denote the
relative fraction of optimists'wealth that is held by unconstrained optimists. Hence, the wealth
share of unconstrained and constrained optimists is given by, respectively,      and   (1      ). As
before, the total wealth share of optimists (including both types) and pessimists is given by,
respectively,   and 1     . The rest of the model is unchanged.
   In Appendix A.5, we characterize the equilibrium and generalize our earlier results, Propo-


                                                 31
sitions 2 and 4, to this extended setting (see Propositions 7 and 8). Here, we illustrate our
...ndings with a numerical example.
       Speci...cally, consider the same example we analyzed in Section 4.2.2. In particular, the
current leverage limit barely binds when optimists have half of the wealth share. The planner
would like to tighten the existing limit by a quarter, ~
                                                       l = 0:75l. The di¤erence is that a fraction
  of optimists are unconstrained. Figure 9 plots the equilibrium functions for three di¤erent
policy speci...cations over the range        2 [0:4; 0:9] and     2 [0; 1]. The lines corresponding to         =0
match the earlier equilibria without unconstrained optimists (also plotted in Figure 4). The rest
of the surfaces illustrate the e¤ect of unconstrained optimists.
       In this setting, macroprudential policy that tightens the leverage limit has smaller pruden-
tial bene...ts compared to the earlier analysis (cf. Proposition 2 in the appendix). To see this,
compare the benchmark with the current limit (illustrated with red lines) with a direct tight-
ening of the limit (illustrated with black lines). The top two left panels show constrained and
unconstrained optimists' leverage ratios, respectively. In the benchmark, constrained and un-
constrained optimists have similar leverage ratios (since the leverage limit barely binds). The
proposed tightening of the leverage limit reduces constrained optimists' leverage ratio while
raising unconstrained optimists'leverage ratio. The top right panel illustrates optimists'wealth
share after a transition to recession. Macroprudential policy improves optimists' wealth share
in the recession but less so than in the case without unconstrained optimists ( = 0).
       Intuitively, tightening the leverage limit reduces ...nancial stability risk, since it increases
asset prices after transition to recession. Unconstrained optimists respond by taking greater
risks. This reduces (but does not fully eliminate) the e¤ectiveness of macroprudential policy.
Consequently, macroprudential policy improves asset prices in the recession but less so than in
the case without unconstrained optimists.
       In this setting, while PMP can still replicate the prudential bene...ts of macroprudential policy
(cf. Proposition 8 in the appendix), it is weakened by the reaction of unconstrained optimists.
To see this, consider the equilibrium with PMP that replicates the prudential e¤ects of a direct
tightening of the leverage limit (illustrated with blue lines). The two panels on the right show
the prudential bene...ts of PMP: it achieves the same wealth share for optimists after transition to
recession, and the same asset prices in recession as a direct tightening of the leverage limit. The
two panels in the bottom left show that, as before, PMP achieves these outcomes by increasing
the interest rate and lowering asset prices during the boom. The two panels in the top left show
that PMP increases the leverage ratio of constrained optimists (since it pushes them against the
leverage limit) and the leverage ratio of unconstrained optimists.12
       These results illustrate that, when some high-valuation agents are not subject to any (regula-
tory or non-regulatory) leverage limit, PMP is subject to similar limitations as macroprudential
  12
    In fact, unconstrained optimists increase their leverage ratio even more than when the planner directly tightens
the leverage limit. These agents obtain the same wealth share after transition as in direct tightening. However,
they now achieve this outcome by taking on greater leverage since the price drop after transition is smaller.



                                                        32
                                                                                     0.8
       16                                     16
                                                                                     0.6
       14                                     14

       12                                     12                                     0.4

       10                                     10
                                                                                     0.2
         8                                      8
                                                                                       0

             0.8                         1          0.8                         1          0.8                         1
                   0.6             0.5                    0.6             0.5                    0.6             0.5

                         0.4   0                                0.4   0                                0.4   0




       0.1                                      1                                   0.96


      0.08
                                             0.99                                   0.94

      0.06

                                             0.98                                   0.92
      0.04


      0.02                                   0.97                                    0.9

             0.8                         1          0.8                         1          0.8                         1
                   0.6             0.5                    0.6             0.5                    0.6             0.5

                         0.4   0                                0.4   0                                0.4   0




Figure 9: Equilibrium functions in the boom state s = 1 with unconstrained optimists for
di¤erent speci...cations of the leverage limit and PMP. is the fraction of optimists'wealth held
by unconstrained optimists.


policy: unconstrained agents respond to either policy by increasing their leverage and risk tak-
ing. This ...nding is consistent with recent empirical evidence showing that a contractionary
monetary policy shock increases lending by shadow banks (see Elliott et al. (2019); Drechsler
et al. (2019)).


 8.          Final remarks
We propose a model of asset price booms with speculation that, under some conditions, justi...es
using PMP to reduce the severity of future recessions. PMP aims to reduce the social cost of
concentrating risk in leveraged, high-valuation agents ("optimists" or "banks"). PMP achieves
this goal by lowering the asset price during the boom, which reduces the asset price decline
after a transition to recession. This reduction supports highly-levered agents'balance sheets in
the recession, which in turn raises asset prices (and hence further reduces the price drop) and
softens the recession.
   In our model, PMP sets the interest rate in the boom higher than "rstar." In contrast,
a recent literature on forward guidance suggests that, in a recession with constrained interest
rates, the central bank could stimulate the economy by promising to keep the interest rates in the
boom lower than "rstar." These policies can be reconciled by observing that forward guidance
largely concerns the "recovery" phase of the boom immediately after the recession. The central

                                                                33
bank can ful...ll its forward guidance promises during the recovery and switch to PMP later in
the boom if levered speculation becomes prevalent. Our comparative statics results suggest this
strategy is more valuable if the probability of a risk-centric recession rises as the boom persists.
   We have simpli...ed the analysis by assuming prices are fully sticky. If prices are somewhat
exible, then a natural concern is that PMP could also exert downward pressure on ination
in the boom-- in addition to creating negative output gaps. Two considerations mitigate this
concern. First, while PMP creates negative output gaps in the boom, it also mitigates the
negative output gaps in the recession. If price-setting agents are forward looking, as in the
standard New Keynesian model, then the anticipation of smaller output gaps in the recession
would reduce their incentive to cut prices in response to PMP. Second, the central bank could in
principle apply PMP in the boom in time-varying fashion to mitigate its side-e¤ects on ination.
In particular, combining PMP with forward guidance (as we discussed earlier) can be especially
valuable as the two policies are likely to have opposing e¤ects on ination.
   In our setup, the economy transitions from boom to recession with an exogenous probability.
In practice, policymakers are concerned that raising interest rates in the boom can endogenously
trigger a recession that could otherwise be avoided. These concerns suggest ampli...cation mech-
anisms induced by a hike in interest rates. One possibility is that the interest rate hike comes
as a surprise and damages the balance sheets of high-valuation investors (as in Kekre and Lenel
(2019)). This mechanism suggests PMP is still useful but should be pre-announced or be part of
a policy rule (as in our model). Alternatively, investors can have extrapolative beliefs, in which
case an interest rate hike can lower asset prices and exacerbate pessimism. This mechanism
suggests PMP can back...re when asset prices have been steady or declining, but it can be even
more powerful when asset prices have been increasing. In the latter case, PMP would mitigate
the excessive optimism in the boom driven by extrapolative beliefs, in addition to reducing the
price crash once the optimism subsides.
   In our model, there is a single risky asset, which we interpret as a weighted average of all
risky assets according to their weights in banks' portfolios (see Remark 1). This bank-centric
perspective suggests PMP should primarily monitor bond prices, and to some extent also house
prices, but not necessarily stock prices. Speci...cally, the central bank can stabilize bond yields
by raising the policy rate when the (term or credit) spreads are low and cutting it when spreads
spike. In fact, if markets are somewhat segmented, then the central bank might be able to
stabilize bond yields even without changing the policy interest rate : by selling bonds when the
spreads are compressed and purchasing them when the spreads rise. We leave a formal analysis
of targeted PMP along these lines for future work.



References
Acharya, V., Naqvi, H., 2018. On reaching for yield and the coexistence of bubbles and negative bubbles.
  Journal of Financial Intermediation.


                                                  34
Acharya, V. V., Plantin, G., 2019. Monetary easing, leveraged payouts and lack of investment. NBER
  Working Paper No. 26471.

Adrian, T., de Fontnouvelle, P., Yang, E., Zlate, A., 2017. Macroprudential policy: a case study from a
  tabletop exercise. Economic Policy Review 23 (1), 1âA¸¼ S30.

Adrian, T., Duarte, F., 2016. Financial vulnerability and monetary policy.

Adrian, T., Liang, N., 2018. Monetary policy, ...nancial conditions, and ...nancial stability. International
  Journal of Central Banking.

Adrian, T., Shin, H. S., 2010. Financial intermediaries and monetary economics. In: Handbook of mon-
  etary economics. Vol. 3. Elsevier, pp. 601­ 650.

Allen, F., Barlevy, G., Gale, D., 2019. Asset price booms and macroeconomic policy: a risk-shifting
  approach. In: 2019 Meeting Papers. No. 587. Society for Economic Dynamics.

Bailey, M., Dávila, E., Kuchler, T., Stroebel, J., 2019. House price beliefs and mortgage leverage choice.
  The Review of Economic Studies 86 (6), 2403­     2452.

Berger, D. W., Milbradt, K., Tourre, F., Vavra, J., 2018. Mortgage prepayment and path-dependent
  e¤ects of monetary policy. NBER working paper No. 25157.

Bernanke, B. S., Kuttner, K. N., 2005. What explains the stock market'
                                                                     s reaction to federal reserve
  policy? The Journal of ...nance 60 (3), 1221­1257.

Bigio, S., Zilberman, E., 2019. Speculation-driven business cycles. working paper.

Borio, C., Zhu, H., 2012. Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing link in the
  transmission mechanism? Journal of Financial stability 8 (4), 236­251.

Borio, C. E., 2014. Monetary policy and ...nancial stability: what role in prevention and recovery?

Borio, C. E., Drehmann, M., 2009. Assessing the risk of banking crises­revisited. BIS Quarterly Review,
  March.

Boroviµ
      cka, J., 2020. Survival and long-run dynamics with heterogeneous beliefs under recursive prefer-
  ences. Journal of Political Economy 128 (1), 000­000.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Simsek, A., Xiong, W., 2014. A welfare criterion for models with distorted beliefs.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1753­ 1797.

Caballero, R. J., Simsek, A., forthcoming. A risk-centric model of demand recessions and speculation.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Campbell, J. Y., 2014. Empirical asset pricing: Eugene fama, lars peter hansen, and robert shiller. The
  Scandinavian Journal of Economics 116 (3), 593­  634.

Cao, D., 2017. Speculation and ...nancial wealth distribution under belief heterogeneity. The Economic
  Journal.

Cochrane, J. H., 2011. Presidential address: Discount rates. The Journal of ...nance 66 (4), 1047­1108.

Collard, F., Dellas, H., Diba, B., Loisel, O., 2017. Optimal monetary and prudential policies. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (1), 40­      87.

Curdia, V., Woodford, M., 2010. Credit spreads and monetary policy. Journal of Money, credit and
  Banking 42, 3­35.


                                                    35
Dávila, E., Korinek, A., 2017. Pecuniary externalities in economies with ...nancial frictions. The Review
  of Economic Studies 85 (1), 352­ 395.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2019. How monetary policy shaped the housing boom. NBER
  working paper no. 25964.

Elliott, D., Meisenzahl, R. R., Peydró, J.-L., 2019. Nonbanks, banks, and monetary policy: Us loan-level
  evidence since the 1990s.

Farhi, E., Werning, I., 2016. A theory of macroprudential policies in the presence of nominal rigidities.
  Econometrica 84 (5), 1645­  1704.

Fostel, A., Geanakoplos, J., 2008. Leverage cycles and the anxious economy. The American Economic
  Review 98 (4), 1211­1244.

Geanakoplos, J., 2010. The leverage cycle. NBER macroeconomics annual 24 (1), 1­66.

Gertler, M., Karadi, P., 2015. Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic activity. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1), 44­   76.

Gilchrist, S., López-Salido, D., Zakrajsek, E., 2015. Monetary policy and real borrowing costs at the zero
  lower bound. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1), 77­       109.

Gourio, F., Kashyap, A. K., Sim, J. W., 2018. The trade o¤s in leaning against the wind. IMF Economic
  Review 66 (1), 70­115.

Hanson, S. G., Stein, J. C., 2015. Monetary policy and long-term real rates. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 115 (3), 429­ 448.

Heimer, R., Simsek, A., 2019. Should retail investors'leverage be limited? Journal of Financial Economics
  132 (3), 1­21.

Iachan, F. S., Nenov, P. T., Simsek, A., 2015. The choice channel of ...nancial innovation. NBER working
   paper no. 21686.

IMF, 2015. Monetary policy and ...nancial stability. IMF Sta¤ Report.

Jordà, Ò., Schularick, M., Taylor, A. M., 2013. When credit bites back. Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking 45 (s2), 3­ 28.

Kekre, R., Lenel, M., 2019. Monetary policy, redistribution, and risk premia. Princeton University working
  paper.

Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J., 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of political economy 105 (2), 211­248.

Kocherlakota, N., 2014. Discussion of 2014 usmpf monetary policy report. Tech. rep., Federal Reserve
  Bank of Minneapolis.

Korinek, A., Simsek, A., 2016. Liquidity trap and excessive leverage. American Economic Review 106 (3),
  699­738.

Lian, C., Ma, Y., Wang, C., 2018. Low interest rates and risk taking: Evidence from individual investment
  decisions. Review of Financial Studies.

Lorenzoni, G., 2008. Ine¢ cient credit booms. The Review of Economic Studies 75 (3), 809­833.

Maddaloni, A., Peydró, J.-L., 2011. Bank risk-taking, securitization, supervision, and low interest rates:
 Evidence from the euro-area and the us lending standards. the review of ...nancial studies 24 (6),
 2121­ 2165.

                                                   36
Martinez-Miera, D., Repullo, R., 2019. Monetary policy, macroprudential policy, and ...nancial stability.

Mian, A., Straub, L., Su..., A., 2019. Indebted demand. Harvard University working paper.

Morris, S., Shin, H. S., 2014. Risk-taking channel of monetary policy: A global game approach. Unpub-
 lished working paper, Princeton University.

Rajan, R. G., 2006. Has ...nance made the world riskier? European Financial Management 12 (4), 499­533.

Rognlie, M., Shleifer, A., Simsek, A., 2018. Investment hangover and the great recession. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10 (2), 113­   53.

Scheinkman, J. A., Xiong, W., 2003. Overcon...dence and speculative bubbles. Journal of political Econ-
  omy 111 (6), 1183­1220.

Shiller, R. J., 2014. Speculative asset prices. American Economic Review 104 (6), 1486­1517.

Simsek, A., 2013a. Belief disagreements and collateral constraints. Econometrica 81 (1), 1­53.

Simsek, A., 2013b. Speculation and risk sharing with new ...nancial assets. The Quarterly journal of
  economics 128 (3), 1365­1396.

Smets, F., 2014. Financial stability and monetary policy: How closely interlinked? International Journal
  of Central Banking 10 (2), 263­   300.

Stein, J., 2012. Monetary policy as ...nancial stability regulation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  127 (1), 57­ 95.

Stein, J., 2013. Overheating in credit markets: Origins, measurement, and policy responses: speech given
  to the symposium on restoring household ...nancial stability after the great recession, federal reserve
  bank of st. louis, st. louis, missouri, february 07, 2013. Tech. rep.

Stein, J., 2014. Incorporating ...nancial stability considerations into a monetary policy framework: a
  speech at the international research forum on monetary policy, washington, dc, march 21, 2014. Tech.
  rep.

Svensson, L. E., 2017. Cost-bene...t analysis of leaning against the wind. Journal of Monetary Economics
  90, 193­213.

Svensson, L. E., 2018. The future of monetary policy and macroprudential policy. In: The Future of
  Central Banking: An ECB Colloquium Held in Honour of Vitor Constancio.

Weidmann, J., 2018. The relationship between monetary and macroprudential policies - black and white
 or shades of grey?: dinner speech at the annual meeting of the cebra, frankfurt am main, 20 august
 2018. Tech. rep., Central Bank Research Association (CEBRA).

Woodford, M., 2012. Ination targeting and ...nancial stability. NBER working paper no. 17967.




                                                   37
 A.      Appendix: Omitted results and derivations
This appendix presents the analyses omitted from the main text. Sections A.1-A.4 present the deriva-
tions and proofs omitted from Sections 2-5, respectively. Section A.5 characterizes the equilibrium with
unconstrained shadow banks and presents the results omitted from Section 7. Section A.6 presents the
details of the numerical exercise.


 A.1.     Omitted derivations in Section 2
We start by deriving the investors'optimality conditions. We then prove Lemmas 1-3.
    Recall that we allow for a leverage limit only in the boom state s = 1 (cf. Eq. (6)). To unify the
notation, we derive the optimality conditions for a slightly more general problem that might feature a
leverage limit also in the other states. Our results concern the special case with ! t;s = 1 for s 6= 1.
    Recall that the investor' s portfolio problem is given by (7). The corresponding HJB equation is

                                                    i
                 i
                                                 @Vt;s       f               f
               Vt;s ai
                     t;s = max log c +                 ai
                                                        t;s rt;s + ! rt;s   rt;s   c                                    (A.1)
                                 c;!              @a
                                   i
                                @Vt;s  ai
                                        t;s                             Qt;s0 Qt;s
                            +                    + i    i     i
                                                    s Vt;s0 at;s 1 + !
                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                     Vt;s ai
                                                                                                           t;s
                                     @t                                     Qt;s
                   s.t. !       ! t;s .

    In view of log utility, the solution has the functional form

                                             i
                                                            log ai
                                                                 t;s =Qt;s
                                           Vt;s ai
                                                 t;s =
                                                                                     i
                                                                                  + vt;s .                              (A.2)

The ...rst term in the value function captures the e¤ect of holding a greater capital stock (or greater
wealth), which scales the investor'   s consumption proportionally at all times and in all states. The second
         i
term, vt;s , is the normalized value function when the investor holds one unit of the capital stock (or
wealth, ai t;s = Qt;s ). This functional form also implies

                                                          i
                                                       @Vt;s   1
                                                             = i .
                                                        @a     at;s

The ...rst order condition for c then implies

                                                           ci      i
                                                            t;s = at;s .                                                (A.3)

The ...rst order condition for ! implies

                           i                                       i    i
                        @Vt;s                     f         i
                                                                @Vt;s0 at;s0      Qt;s0 Qt;s
                              ai rt;s            rt;s +                      ai                      0,
                         @a t;s                             s
                                                                     @a       t;s
                                                                                      Qt;s
                                                                i              i
                                                             @Vt;s          @Vt;s 0
with equality if ! = ! t;s . After substituting for           @a      and    @a       and rearranging terms, this implies

                                                               i
                                                   f        i at;s    Qt;s0 Qt;s
                                          rt;s    rt;s +    s i                          0,                             (A.4)
                                                              at;s0       Qt;s



                                                                 38
with equality if ! = ! t;s .

Proof of Lemma 1. Combining Eq. (A:3) with Eq. (9) implies that aggregate consumption is a
constant fraction of aggregate wealth,

                                                         p
                                                 co
                                                  t;s + ct;s = Qt;s kt;s :


Combining this result with the goods market clearing condition (12), we obtain Eq. (14).
    Next note that combining Eqs. (11) and (14), the e¢ cient level of utilization solves (16), which we
replicate here:
                                            0
                                              ( ) = .

This equation has a unique and positive solution because the left-hand side is strictly increasing with
lim !1 0 ( ) = 1 (since is strictly increasing and convex).
    Combining Eqs. (14) and (16), we obtain Eq. (17). Finally, Substituting Eq. (14) into Eq. (5), we
obtain Eq. (15).

Proof of Lemma 2. Recall that the investors' portfolio optimality condition is given by Eq. (A:4).
After substituting ai      i
                    t;s = t;s Qt;s kt;s [cf. Eq. (19)], this gives Eq. (21) in the main text.
    Eq. (22) holds by the de...nition of investors'wealth shares. Note also that Eq. (22), together with
Eqs. (19) and (20), implies the asset market clearing condition (9). Therefore, the asset market is in
equilibrium as long as Eq. (22) holds.
    Finally, consider the evolution of investors' wealth shares in (23). After substituting optimal con-
sumption from (A:3) into the budget constraint in (7), type i investors'wealth evolves according to

                                 dai
                                   t;s =dt    f                                     f
                                           = rt;s + !i
                                                     t;s rt;s                      rt;s      .
                                   ait;s


Combining this with Eq. (9), aggregate wealth evolves according to

                                d (Qt;s kt;s ) =dt    f                              f
                                                   = rt;s + rt;s                    rt;s         .
                                    Qt;s kt;s

                                     i            ait;s
Combining these expressions with     t;s   =     Qt;s kt;s    [cf. Eq. (19)], we obtain:

                                       _i
                                        t;s                                         f
                                           i
                                                 = !i
                                                    t;s             1       rt;s   rt;s .            (A.5)
                                           t;s


    Next recall that the portfolio optimality condition (21) holds with equality for pessimists. Applying
this equation, we obtain:
                                                       p
                                           f       p t;s Qt;s0     Qt;s
                                    rt;s rt;s =    s p                  .                           (A.6)
                                                      t;s0   Q t;s0



Likewise, applying Eq. (20) for type i investors, we obtain:
                                                                        !
                                                             i
                                                             t;s0                Qt;s0
                                   !i
                                    t;s      1=              i
                                                                        1                .           (A.7)
                                                             t;s              Qt;s0 Qt;s

Substituting Eqs. (A:6) and (A:7) into Eq. (A:5), we obtain Eq. (23).

                                                                39
                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                           o   t;s
Proof of Lemma 3. Since Eq. (21) holds as equality for both types of investors, we have                    s   o      =
                                                                                                               t;s0
     p
 p   t;s
 s   p      . Combining this Eq. (9), we obtain (24). Substituting this into Eq. (23), we obtain (25). Finally,
     t;s0
substituting it into Eq. (21), we obtain the risk balance condition (26).


 A.2.         Omitted derivations in Section 3
As we describe in the main text, for the rest of the analysis we often simplify the notation by dropping
the subscript o from optimists'wealth share:

                                                                        o
                                                            t;s         t;s .


Pessimists'wealth share is the complement of this expression, p   t;s = 1   t;s .
    We characterize the equilibrium starting in the recession state under the following parametric restric-
tions:
                                        i
Assumption A1.            (0)      +    2   < g2 < ( )                 < g3 :

Proof of Proposition 1. Under Assumption A1, we conjecture an equilibrium in which the recovery
                                                                                                        f
state s = 3 features positive interest rates, e¢ cient asset prices, and e¢ cient factor utilization, rt; 3 >
0; Qt;3 = Q and t;3 = . The recession state s = 2 features an interest rate of zero, lower asset prices,
                                    f
and ine¢ cient factor utilization, rt; 2 = 0; Qt;2 < Q and t;2 <    . We also establish Eq. (27): that is, the
equilibrium price in the recession state can be represented as a strictly increasing function of optimists'
wealth share: Qt;2 = Q2 ( t;2 ) where Q2 ( ) is a strictly increasing function.
    Note that for s 2 f2; 3g the leverage limit doesn'   t bind. Therefore, Lemma 3 applies and facilitates
the analysis.
    First consider the recovery state. There is no speculation since i    3 = 0 for each i. Substituting this
                                                     f
transition probability into Eq. (26), we obtain, rt;3 = rt;3 . After substituting for the market return from
Eq. (15), and using Q _ t;3 = 0 (since Qt;3 = Q is constant), we obtain:

                                                f
                                               rt; 3 =      + g3          ( ) > 0.                             (A.8)

The inequality follows from Assumption A1. Hence, in the recovery state, the interest rate is constant
and strictly positive and the equilibrium asset price and factor utilization levels are e¢ cient.
    Next consider the recession state. There is some speculation since investors have heterogeneous beliefs,
 o     p
 2 > 2 [cf. Assumption 1]. Substituting Eq. (15) into Eq. (26) and using the conjecture Qt;3 = Q , we
                                                                 f
obtain Eq. (28) in the main text. Substituting the conjecture rt;  2 = 0, we further obtain:


                                               Qt;2             _ t;2
                                                                Q                           Qt;2
                                 + g2                       +         +         t;2   1             = 0.       (A.9)
                                               Q                Qt;2                        Q

    Next consider the extreme cases t;2 2 f0; 1g. These cases are the same as if there is a single belief
type i 2 fo; pg. In particular, since there is no speculation, the price is constant within the state, that is:
Qt;2 Qi               _
         2 and thus Qt;2 = 0. Therefore, Eq. (A:9) can be written as


                                                      Qi2                i            Qi2
                                        + g2                       +     2      1            = 0.
                                                      Q                               Q



                                                                  40
                                                                                   o    p
Under Assumption A1, there exists a solution that satis...es Qi 2 2 (0; Q ). Using 2 > 2 (Assumption 1),
                                 p
it is easy to check that Qo2 > Q2 . In particular, the price is greater under optimists'beliefs than under
pessimists'beliefs.
     Next consider the intermediate cases, t;2 2 (0; 1). In this case we combine Eq. (A:9) with Eq. (25)
for state s = 2 to obtain a system of di¤erential equations for ( t;2 ; Qt;2 ):

                                            Qt;2              _ t;2
                                                              Q                              Qt;2
                               + g2                       +         +          t;2   1               = 0,                (A.10)
                                             Q                Qt;2                           Q
                                                               o           p
                              _ t;2 =    t;2 (1        t;2 ) ( 2           2) :


    This is similar to the di¤erential equation system for the recession state in Caballero and Simsek
(forthcoming). Following similar steps, the system is saddle path stable: for any t;2 , there exists a
unique equilibrium price level Qt;2 2 [Qp      o
                                          2 ; Q2 ) such that the solution satis...es limt!1 t;2 = 0 and
                 p
limt!1 Qt;2 = Q2 . Since the system is stationary, the solution can be written as a function of optimists'
wealth share, Qt;2 = Q2 ( ). In Caballero and Simsek (forthcoming), we show that Q2 ( ) is strictly
increasing in . Since Qp        o
                          2 < Q2 < Q , this establishes Eq. (27) in the main text and completes the
proof.

   To facilitate a numerical solution, we also convert the di¤erential equation in (A:10) into a di¤erential
equation in -domain. In particular, di¤erentiating Qt;2 = Q2 ( t;2 ) with respect to time, we obtain:

                                              _ t;2 = Q0
                                              Q        2(          t;2 )   _ t;2 .

Combining this with Eq. (A:10), we obtain:

            Q0
             2( )               1                                   Q2 ( )                                  Q2 ( )
                   =                o    p         + g2                                  +    2   ( ) 1              .
            Q2 ( )      (1     )(   2    2)                          Q                                       Q

The equilibrium price function is the solution to this system subject to the boundary conditions Q2 (0) =
Qp                o
 2 and Q2 (1) = Q2 . Figure 3 in the main text illustrates the solution for a particular parameterization.



 A.3.     Omitted derivations in Section 4
This section presents the proofs omitted from Section 4. Section A.3.1 concerns the equilibrium in the
boom state in a benchmark case without PMP (analyzed in Section 4.1). Section A.3.2 concerns the case
with PMP (analyzed in 4.2).


A.3.1.     Equilibrium in the boom without PMP
We characterize the equilibrium under the following parametric restriction.
                f;p                                p   Q
Assumption A2. r1            + g1       ( )        1   Qp
                                                                 1 > 0.
                                                        2

Here, Qp 2 = Q2 (0) < Q denotes the asset price in the recession state when pessimists dominate the
economy. Assumption A2 ensures that the boom features a positive interest rate even if pessimists
dominate.
    When there is no leverage limit, ! 1 = 1, Assumption A2 is su¢ cient to characterize the equilibrium.
We ...rst characterize the equilibrium in this case and derive Eq. (29). We then consider the case with


                                                            41
a leverage limit. We characterize the equilibrium under a stronger assumption and prove Proposition 2.
Throughout, we conjecture that the equilibrium outcomes can be described as a function of optimists'
wealth share, t;1 (as well as the leverage limit function, ! 1 ( )). In particular, we denote the wealth-
weighted average belief with
                                        1( )=
                                                   o
                                                   1 + (1    ) p 1.

We also denote optimists'wealth share after transition with                                        t;2   =        2   (   t;1 ; ! 1 ).


Equilibrium in the boom state s = 1 without a leverage limit. Suppose ! 1 = 1. Under
                                                                                         f
Assumption A2, we conjecture an equilibrium in which the interest rate is positive, rt;    1 > 0, and the
asset price is at its e¢ cient level, Qt;1 = Q .
    First consider the corner cases t;1 = 0 and t;1 = 1. Equivalently, i   t;1 = 1 for some belief type i.
Using Eq. (21), which applies as equality for type i investors, we obtain:

                                       f;i                                               i       Q
                                      r1   =          + g1             ( )               1                   1 :                                         (A.11)
                                                                                                 Qi2

Here, we substituted rt;1 from Eq. (15). Under Assumption A2, there exists a solution that satis...es
 f;i                                       p               f;o     f;p
r1   > 0 for each i 2 fo; pg. Since o1 < 1 , we also have r1   > r1    : the equilibrium interest rate is
greater when optimists dominate the economy.
     Next consider the intermediate cases, t;1 2 (0; 1). Note that Lemma 3 applies (since ! 1 = 1).
Using Eq. (24), we obtain Eq. (29) in the main text, which we replicate here:
                                                                                    o
                                                                                    1
                                                      2   ( ; 1) =                           < .
                                                                                1   ( )

Using Eq. (25), we obtain
                                                                                     p           o
                                           _ t;1 =        t;1   = (1        )(       1           1)      > 0.

Using Eq. (26), we also solve for the equilibrium interest rate as

                        f                                                                         Q
                       r1 ( ; 1) =          + g1                ( )       1     ( )                                               1 .                    (A.12)
                                                                                             Q2 ( 2 ( ; 1))

                       f
Under Assumption A2, r1  ( ; 1) > 0 for each .
   Finally, we combine Eqs. (29) and (20) to solve for the corresponding leverage ratio in closed form:
                                                                                             o
                                                                            1                1
                                                                                            1( )
                                          !o
                                           1 ( ; 1) = 1 +                       Q
                                                                                                          > 1.                                           (A.13)
                                                                                        o
                                                                                        1
                                                                                                    1
                                                                        Q2
                                                                                    1( )



As expected, optimists have above-average leverage during the boom, which induces a decline in their
wealth share after transition to the recession.

Equilibrium in the boom state s = 1 with a leverage limit. Next consider the case with
the leverage limit. In this case, we need additional regularity conditions that ensure Eq. (30) has a
unique solution in the relevant range.
                                                                                                                  o                          o
                                  Q       Q2 (   2)
Assumption A3. Q0
                2(       2)   <       1               for        2   2 (0; 1); and Q2                             1
                                                                                                                          >Q             1   1
                                                                                                                                             p   for   2 (0; 1).
                                             2                                                               1(       )                      1




                                                                       42
These conditions concern the price function in the recession state. They are satis...ed by our numerical
solutions (they are also su¢ cient conditions, i.e., they can be relaxed further). The ...rst part says that
the slope of the price function is not too large. Since Q2 (1) = Qo  2 < Q , this condition will always hold
if Q2 ( 2 ) is a linear function. Therefore, it holds as long as Q2 ( 2 ) does not deviate from linearity too
much. The second part requires that either the price decline after transition to the recession is not too
large, or the extent of speculation during the boom is not too large. For instance, when            = 1, the
                                   o
                    o                                  o                       o
requirement is Q2 > Q 1            1
                                   p . This holds if Q2 is close to Q or if 1 is not substantially smaller
                                   1
         p
than 1 .
      Assumption A3 is useful to establish the following lemma, which we use to prove Proposition 2. We
...rst state and prove the lemma. We then prove Proposition 2.

Lemma 5. Consider the following function:

                                                                         2                              Q
                                    f(     2;     ; !1 ) = 1                      (! 1       1)                     1 ,
                                                                                                      Q2 (    2)


where ; ! 1 are parameters such that                    2 (0; 1) ; ! 1                 !o
                                                                                        1 ( ; 1). Under Assumption A3, f (                    2)   = 0 has
a unique solution that satis...es 2 2 [               2 ( ; 1) ; ).


Proof. We ...rst show that there exists a solution that lies in the desired interval. We have

                                                     2   ( ; 1)                                          Q
                f(    2   ( ; 1))     =     1                             (! 1          1)                            1
                                                                                              Q2 (       2 ( ; 1))

                                                     2   ( ; 1)                                                 Q
                                            1                             (! o
                                                                             1 ( ; 1)                 1)                             1 = 0.
                                                                                                           Q2 ( 2 ( ; 1))

Here, the inequality in the second line follows since ! 1     !o
                                                               1 ( ; 1) and Q2 (                                               2   ( ; 1)) < Q , and the
                                           o
equality follows from the de...nition of ! 1 ( ; 1). We also have

                                                                                        Q
                                            f( )=           (! 1             1)                        1 < 0.
                                                                                      Q2 (    2)


It follows that there exists a solution in [ 2 ( ; 1) ; ).
     We next show that the derivative of f is strictly negative at each zero of f :

                               f0 (   2)   < 0 for each             2   2[        2   ( ; 1) ; ) and f (            2)      = 0.                    (A.14)

This establishes that f has a unique zero in the desired interval. To establish this claim, we ...rst evaluate
the derivative
                                           1                 Q
                               f 0 ( 2) =    + (! 1 1)                0
                                                                   2 Q2 ( 2 ) .
                                                         (Q2 ( 2 ))
Hence, f 0 (   2)   < 0 as long as
                                                                          Q           Q0
                                                                                       2(         2)
                                                     (! 1      1)                                      < 1.
                                                                        Q2 (      2 ) Q2 (        2)

Note that we require this to hold when f (                     2)   = 0. This implies

                                                           Q                                             Q
                                           (! 1     1)                   =(                  2)                         .
                                                         Q2 (       2)                            Q      Q2 (      2)




                                                                              43
Combining the last two displayed equations, we need to show

                                                                  Q         Q2 (         2)   1          2 Q2 (            2)
                                                 Q0
                                                  2(     2)   <                                                                 .                                      (A.15)
                                                                       1          2                      2   Q

         Using the ...rst part of Assumption A3, we have

                                                                                 Q            Q2 (       2)
                                                              Q0
                                                               2(     2)   <                                  .                                                        (A.16)
                                                                                         1          2

Using the second part of Assumption A3, we also have

                                             1       2 ( ; 1) Q2 ( 2 ( ; 1))                              1            2 Q2 (           2)
                                        1                                                                                                    .                         (A.17)
                                                     2 ( ; 1)      Q                                                   2   Q
                                                                                                                                                     p
                                                                                                          1       2(       ;1)
Here, the ...rst inequality follows from Assumption A3 since                                                      2(       ;1)      =            p
                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                            after substituting
                                                                                                                                             (   1
                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                         1)
                        o
    2   ( ; 0) =        1
                                [cf. Eq. (29)]. The second inequality follows since                                        2   ( ; 1)                2   implies 1 2  ( ;1)
                                                                                                                                                                     2 ( ;1)
                   1(       )
1
    2
      and Q2 ( 2 ( ; 1)) Q2 ( 2 ). Combining Eqs. (A:16) and (A:17) establishes Eq. (A:15). This in
         2


turn establishes Eq. (A:14) and shows that there is a unique solution.

Proof of Proposition 2. We characterized the equilibrium without a leverage limit earlier in this
section. Suppose there is a leverage limit. For the corner cases, t;1 = 0 or t;1 = 1, or the intermediate
cases in which the leverage limit doesn't bind, the equilibrium is the same as before.
    Consider the remaining cases: that is, t;1 2 (0; 1) and the leverage limit binds ! 1 ( ) ! o 1 ( ; 1).
In these cases, optimists'leverage ratio is determined by the limit:

                                                                  !o
                                                                   1 ( ; !1 ) = !1 ( ) :                                                                               (A.18)

Substituting this into Eq. (20) for the boom state s = 1, we obtain Eq. (30) in the main text, which we
replicate here:

                                             2   ( ; !1 )                         Q1
                                                                 =    1         (! 1 ( )
                                                                                       1 ,          1)
                                                                                  Q2
                                            where Q1             = Q and Q2 = Q2 ( 2 ( ; ! 1 )) :

The solution to this equation corresponds to the zero of the function, f ( 2 ; ; ! 1 ), de...ned in Lemma 5.
Therefore, under Assumption A3, there is a unique solution that satis...es 2 ( ; ! 1 )        2 ( ; 1).
    This characterizes optimists' wealth share after transition to recession, 2 ( ; ! 1 ). Next consider
the comparative statics of the solution with respect to the leverage limit. Implicitly di¤erentiating the
equation f ( 2 ; ; ! 1 ) = 0 with respect to ! 1 ,

                                                                             Q
                                                                 d 2        Q2 (      2)
                                                                                                1
                                                                      =                             < 0.
                                                                 d! 1        f0      (     2)

                                                     Q
Here, the inequality follows since                  Q2 (    2)
                                                                     1 > 0 and f 0 (                2)   < 0 [cf. Eq. (A:14)]. It follows that the
                                                                      d    2(   ;! 1 )
solution is strictly decreasing in ! 1 , that is,    < 0. In particular, decreasing the leverage limit
                                                                          d! 1 ( )
increases optimists'wealth share after transition.
    Next consider optimists'wealth share growth if there is no transition to recession, _ t;1 = t;1 . Using


                                                                                 44
Eq. (23), we obtain:

                    _ t;1       p           1        t;1                      2   (   t;1 ; ! 1 )                       p    o
                            =   1                                    1                                   (1     t;1 ) ( 1    1) .            (A.19)
                      t;1           1           2(   t;1 ; ! 1 )                       t;1


Here, the weak inequality is satis...ed as equality when the leverage limit doesn'           t bind (i.e., when 2 is
given by Eq. (29)). It is also easy to see that _ t;1 = t;1 is a decreasing function of 2 : if optimists obtain
a greater wealth share after transition to recession, then their wealth share grows more slowly if there
                                                                                             d( _ t;1 = t;1 )
is no transition. Combining this observation with d d!     2 ( ;! 1 )
                                                              1( )
                                                                       < 0, we also ...nd d!        1( )
                                                                                                              < 0. Hence,
decreasing the leverage limit slows down the growth of optimists'wealth share absent transition.
    Finally, consider the equilibrium interest rate. Using Eq. (21), which holds as equality for pessimists,
we obtain
                   f                               p      1                     Q
                  r1 ( ; ! 1 ) = + g1     ( )      1                                              1 .              (A.20)
                                                     1      2  ( ; !  1 ) Q 2 ( 2 ( ; ! 1 ))

Here, we substituted rt;1 from Eq. (15) and Qt;1 = Q ; Qt;2 = Q2 ( t;2 ). This is the risk balance
condition according to pessimists (cf. Eq. (26)). The condition characterizes the output-stabilizing
                                                                          f
interest rate given investors'wealth shares. Assumption A2 ensures that r1  ( ; ! 1 ) > 0 also in this case.
This characterizes the equilibrium with a leverage limit and completes the proof of the proposition.


 A.3.2.      Equilibrium in the boom with PMP
Proof of Proposition 3. Provided in the main text.

Proof of Proposition 4. First consider the e¤ect of the leverage limit, !    ~ 1 . Since !
                                                                                         ~ 1 ( ) < ! 1 ( ; 1),
optimists'wealth share, 2 ( ; !
                              ~ 1 ), is characterized as the unique solution to the following equation (see
the proof of Proposition 2):

                                    2   ( ;!
                                           ~ 1)                                               Q
                                                     =1            (~
                                                                    !1 ( )        1)                                1 .                      (A.21)
                                                                                         Q2 ( 2 ( ; !
                                                                                                    ~ 1 ))

    We will show (constructively) that there exists a PMP that replicates the wealth share. Let ~ 2 =
 2
             ~ 1 denote optimists'wealth share after transition with PMP. In the conjectured equilibrium,
      ; !1 ; Q
optimists'leverage limit binds (since ~ 2 = 2 ( ; !~ 1 ) > 2 ( ; 1)). Therefore, optimists'wealth share is
the solution to                                           "            #
                                  ~2                        Q~1 ( )
                                     = 1 (! 1 ( ) 1)                  1 .                          (A.22)
                                                            Q2 (~ 2 )

We next claim that, for appropriately chosen Q~ 1 ( ), this equation holds for ~ 2 =                                         2   ( ;!
                                                                                                                                    ~ 1 ).
                    ~ 1 ( ) denote the unique solution to
   To this end, let Q
                                        "                                 #
                                       ~1 ( )
                                       Q                                                                        Q
                  (! 1 ( )      1)                                       1 = (~
                                                                              !1 ( )                1)                           1 .         (A.23)
                                   Q2 ( 2 ( ; !
                                              ~ 1 ))                                                     Q2 (   2( ;!
                                                                                                                    ~ 1 ))

Hence, Q~ 1 ( ) is the asset price that replicates optimists'wealth decline after accounting for the endoge-
nous price adjustment in the recession. After rearranging this expression, we can solve for Q       ~ 1 ( ) in
closed form:
                      ~ 1 ( ) = Q2 ( 2 ( ; !          !
                                                      ~1 ( ) 1         Q
                     Q                     ~ 1 )) 1 +                               1 .                (A.24)
                                                      ! 1 ( ) 1 Q2 ( 2 ( ; !~ 1 ))


                                                                              45
Since !~ 1 ( ) < ! 1 ( ), it is easy to check that Q    ~ 1 ( ) < Q . Since !~ 1 ( ) > 1, we also have Q      ~1 ( ) >
Q2 ( 2 ( ; !                                                    ~
             ~ 1 )). In particular, there exists a unique Q1 ( ) 2 (Q2 ( 2 ( ; !        ~ 1 )) ; Q ) that satis...es Eq.
(A:23).
    We next substitute Eq. (A:23) into Eq. (A:21), which proves our claim that Eq. (A:22) holds with
~2 = 2 ( ; !    ~ 1 ). We can also check that (under Assumption A3) this equation has a unique solution.
                                                                                  ~1( )
This proves 2 ; ! 1 ; Q    ~1 = 2 ( ; !  ~ 1 ). Note that Eq. (A:24) implies @    Q
                                                                                  ~ 1 ( ) > 0, which completes the
                                                                                 @!
proof of the ...rst part of the proposition .
    Next consider the interest rate corresponding to PMP. Since the policy applies only at an in...nitesimal
instant, it does not a¤ect the price drift, Q    _ t;1 = 0. In particular, the instantaneous return to capital is
                             Q~1( )
given by r ~1 = + g1           Q       [cf. Eq. (15)]. Combining this with Eq. (21) for pessimists, we obtain
the following analogue of Eq. (A:20):
                                                                 !                                                                                  !
                       f
                                                     ~1 ( )
                                                     Q                      p          1                                  ~1 ( )
                                                                                                                          Q
                     r
                     ~1    =      + g1                                      1                                                                   1 .
                                                      Q                         1          2     ( ;!
                                                                                                    ~ 1)              Q2 ( 2 ( ; !
                                                                                                                                 ~ 1 ))

Using Eq. (A:22) to substitute for the price decline, we can rewrite this as
                                                                        !
                              f
                                                           ~1 ( )
                                                           Q                        p1                            2   ( ;!
                                                                                                                         ~ 1)      1
                            r
                            ~1    =       + g1                                      1                                                           .                     (A.25)
                                                            Q                                            1        2   ( ;!
                                                                                                                         ~ 1 ) !1 ( )       1

    Absent prudential policy, the interest rate is characterized by Eq. (A:20). After substituting for the
price decline from (20), we can rewrite this expression as

                            f                                               p1                       2   ( ; !1 )                1
                           r1 ( ; !1 ) =            + g1       ( )          1                                                                       .                 (A.26)
                                                                                                 1          2 (  ; ! 1 ) ! 1 ( ; !1 )        1

Here, ! 1 ( ; ! 1 ) denotes the equilibrium leverage ratio.
                         Q~1( )                                                                                                       2(   ;!
                                                                                                                                            ~1)             2(   ;! 1 )
   Next note that                  < ( ) since Q  ~ 1 ( ) < Q . Note also that                                                                      <                     since
                           Q                                                                                                      1   2(    ~1)
                                                                                                                                           ;!           1   2(   ;! 1 )
                                                                        1                      1
 2      ~ 1) >
     ( ;!        2   ( ; ! 1 ). Finally, note that                  !1 ( ) 1            ! 1 ( ;! 1 ) 1 since ! 1 ( ; ! 1 )                          ! 1 ( ). Combining
                                                                                                f      f          ~ 1 > rf
these observations with Eqs. (A:25) and (A:26) proves                                  that r ~1   = r1    ; !1 ; Q
                                                                                           ( ; ! 1 ): PMP raises           1
the interest rate.
    Finally, consider how raising the target leverage limit !~ 1 ( ) a¤ects the interest rate. Since raising the
                                                                                       Q~1( )
                         ~
leverage limit increases Q1 ( ), it also increases the e¤ective depreciation rate,                . Since raising
                                                                                         Q
                                                                                                                      2(   ;!
                                                                                                                            ~ 1)
the leverage limit reduces                 2      ~ 1 ), it also increases the term
                                               ( ;!                                                          1        2(    ~ 1 ) . Combining these observations
                                                                                                                           ;!
                                                                                                                                  @r f ( ;! 1 ;Q
                                                                                                                                               ~1)
with (A:25) proves that raising the leverage limit decreases r  ~1 , that                                                  is: 1 @ !    ~ 1( )     < 0. In particular,
targeting a lower e¤ective leverage limit !
                                          ~ 1 ( ) requires a higher interest rate, completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition 5. We have the following closed-form solution for the price function:
                  8
                  >
                  <                                                 Q                                                             if ! 1     ;~
                                                                                                                                              l < !1             ;~
                                                                                                                                                                  l
     Q1    ;~
            l =                                              ! 1 ( ;~
                                                                    l) 1                                                                                                   .
                  >
                  : Q2                2        ;~
                                                l     1+                               Q
                                                                                                              1            <Q     if ! 1     ;~
                                                                                                                                              l = !1             ;~
                                                                                                                                                                  l
                                                             ! 1 ( ;l) 1        Q2 (     2   (   ;~
                                                                                                  l))
                                                                                                       (A.27)
Here, the ...rst line corresponds to the case in which the leverage limit does not bind under ~
                                                                                              l. In this case,
the monetary authority does not use PMP. The second line corresponds to the case in which the leverage
limit binds. In this case, the monetary authority uses PMP. Moreover, Eq. (A:24) provides a closed-form


                                                                                46
solution for the asset price level.
    One di¤erence from Proposition 4 concerns the characterization of the interest rate. Since the policy
                                         _ t;1 , is not necessarily zero, which a¤ects the level of the interest
is applied dynamically, the price drift, Q
rate. To characterize this e¤ect, note that:

                                          @Q1     ;~
                                                   l
                              _ t;1
                              Q       =                _ t;1
                                             @+
                                          @Q1     ;~
                                                   l          1
                                                        p                   t;1
                                      =                 1 t;1                     (   t;1    t;2 )
                                             @+                     1       t;2

                                          @Q1     ;~
                                                   l                                   2    ;~
                                                                                             l
                                                        p
                                      =                 1      (1       )                        .         (A.28)
                                             @+                             1               ;~
                                                                                             l
                                                                                      2


Here, the second line substitutes the evolution of optimists'wealth share from Eq. (23) and the third line
                                                            @Q1 ( ;~
                                                                   l)
substitutes t;1 = and t;2 = 2 ; ~       l . The expression            corresponds to the right-derivative of
                                                                        @+
                                                                                  @Q1 ( ;~
                                                                                         l)
the function characterized in (A:27).13 We can check that the right-derivative, @+          , is continuous in
~
l and equal to 0 when ~  l = l (because Q1 ( ; l) = Q for each ). Consequently, when viewed as a function
of ~                   _ t;1 , is also continuous in ~
   l, the price drift, Q                             l and equal to 0 when ~
                                                                           l = l.
    Next note that, following similar steps as in the proof of Proposition 4, the interest rate in this case
can be written as
                                  0              1                    0                      1
                                    Q1 ; ~  l               1              Q1 ; ~  l
           r
           ~1f
               = + g1 + Q _ t;1   @              A     p
                                                       1
                                                                      @                     1A ,
                                        Q                1        ;~
                                                                   l     Q2 2 ; ~    l
                                                              2


         _ t;1 is given by Eq. (A:28). When viewed as a function of ~                         f
where Q                                                                l, the interest rate r
                                                                                            ~1  is continuous
   ~                                                  f             ~
in l, and it is equal to the benchmark interest rate r1 ( ; l) when l = l. Recall that the benchmark rate
                                                                       f
is strictly positive for each 2 (0; 1) [cf. Section 4.1]. Therefore, r
                                                                     ~1   > 0 for each 2 (0; 1) as long as
~
l is in a su¢ ciently small neighborhood of l. In particular, PMP doesn'     t violate the zero lower bound
constraint on the interest rate.


 A.4.     Omitted derivations in Section 5
We ...rst present a general characterization of investors' expected values. We then prove Lemma 4 and
Proposition 6.
    Let the superscript b 2 fpl; o; pg denote the belief corresponding to either the planner or the corre-
sponding investor type. Our analysis in the main text requires only the planner'   s belief, b = pl. Here, we
characterize investors'value function also with respect to their own belief b = o or b = p (as this would
be required for other welfare criteria, e.g., the standard Pareto criterion).
                          i;b
    For i 2 fo; pg, let Vt;s  ai                                                                i
                               t;s denote type i investors'expected value when she has wealth at;s , evaluated

  13
     Note that the function is piecewise di¤erentiable so the right-derivative always exists. The equation depends
on the right-derivative (as opposed to left) because _ t;1 > 0, so t;1 grows over time.




                                                        47
according to belief b. In view of log utility, we conjecture the following version of Eq. (A:2):

                                                          i;b                     log ai
                                                                                       t;s =Qt;s         i;b
                                                        Vt;s  ai
                                                               t;s =                                  + vt;s .                                                (A.29)

                                                       i;b
                                                    @Vt;s            1
Note that this function implies                      @a      =      ai
                                                                         .   Using this expression as well as the investors'consumption
                                                                     t;s

choice,   ci
           t;s   =   ai
                      t;s ,   we obtain the following version of the HJB equation (A:1):

                                          i;b
                   i;b                 @Vt;s   ai
                                                t;s              1 f                  f
                 Vt;s  ai
                        t;s                         = log ai
                                                           t;s +   rt;s + ! i
                                                                            t;s rt;s rt;s                                                                     (A.30)
                                            @t
                                                           i;b             Qt;s0 Qt;s                                                  i;b
                                                    + b          i
                                                       s Vt;s0 at;s 1 + !                                                            Vt;s  ai
                                                                                                                                            t;s      :
                                                                                Qt;s

Note that this expression evaluates the value function along the equilibrium path and according to
transition probability with respect to belief b, b
                                                 s.
    Substituting Eq. (A:29) into Eq. (A:30), we obtain a di¤erential equation for the normalized value:

            i;b
                                                                                                                                                                          !
  i;b     @vt;s                    1                                             _ t;s
                                                                                 Q                                       f           b             Qt;s0 Qt;s
 vt;s           = log + log Qt;s +                           rt;s                      + !i
                                                                                          t;s        1       rt;s       rt;s    +    s   log 1 + !
           @t                                                                    Qt;s                                                                 Qt;s0
                       b       i;b      i;b
                 +     s      vt;s 0   vt;s .

                                                                                             _ t;s
                                                                                             Q                      Qt;s
    To simplify this expression, we substitute rt;s =                                    +   Qt;s    + gs           Q                using Eq. (15). We also
                                                     f             _i                                                                                    Qt;s0 Qt;s
substitute for ! i
                 t;s             1     rt;s         rt;s =          t;s
                                                                    i      from Eq. (A:5). Finally, we substitute for 1 + !                                 Qt;s0     =
                                                                    t;s
 i
 t;s0
  i     using Eq. (20). After these substitutions, we obtain:
  t;s


                         i;b
                                                                                                                                                !!
              i;b      @vt;s                    1                                        Qt;s                _i
                                                                                                              t;s         b
                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                                         t;s0
             vt;s            = log + log Qt;s +                              gs                          +    i
                                                                                                                    +     s    log       i
                                                                                                                                                              (A.31)
                        @t                                                               Q                    t;s                        t;s

                                       b    i;b          i;b
                                  +    s   vt;s 0       vt;s .

                                                                     i;b
    We have thus characterized the normalized value function, vt;s       , as a solution to the di¤erential
equation in (A:31). This equation applies for any belief b 2 fo; p; plg, including investors' own belief
b = i, and it applies regardless of whether the leverage limit binds. The terms that feature Qt;s capture
potential welfare losses due to ine¢ cient factor utilization. The term gs captures the welfare e¤ect of
                                                                          i
                                           _i
                                            t;s          b                t;s0
expected growth. The term                     i     +    s   log           i      captures the welfare e¤ect of speculation that reshu- es
                                              t;s                          t;s

investors'wealth shares across states.
    As we describe in the main text, we decompose the normalized value into two components [cf. (33)]:

                                                                           i;b    i ;b    i;b
                                                                          vt;s = vt;s  + wt;s ,

         i ;b
Here, vt;s    is the frictionless value function, which is found by solving Eq. (A:31) with Qt;s = Q for
each t; s. This captures all determinants of welfare except for suboptimal factor utilization (including the
                                                     b
bene...ts/costs from speculation). The residual, wt;s  , corresponds to the gap value function. This captures
the welfare losses due to suboptimal factor utilization.



                                                                                    48
                                                       i;b      i ;b
    To further characterize the gap value, note that vt;s  and vt;s  both solve Eq. (A:31) with Qt;s and
                                                                               i;b    i;b  i ;b
Qt;s = Q , respectively. Taking the di¤erence of these equations, and using wt;s   = vt;s vt;s  , we obtain

                                          b
                                b
                                        @wt;s                                        b    b            b
                               wt;s                    = W (Qt;s ) +                 s   wt;s0        wt;s ,
                                         @t
                                                                     Qt;s        1             Qt;s
                          where W (Qt;s )              =       log                                               ( ) .
                                                                     Q                         Q

                                        b       i;b
Here, we have simpli...ed the notation wt;s   wt;s  since the gap value depends on the belief type b but
not the investor type i.
    Applying this equation for the planner' s belief b = pl gives Eq. (34) in the main text. Integrating
Eq. (34) forward, we also obtain:
                                           Z   1
                                                               b
                                                   e (             )(t
                                 pl                        +         ~ t)                             pl pl
                                wt;s   =                       s
                                                                             ~;s +
                                                                          W Qt                        s wt
                                                                                                         ~;s0
                                                                                                                  ~.
                                                                                                                 dt           (A.32)
                                           t

Hence, the gap value captures an appropriately discounted present value of instantaneous welfare gaps.
Note that W (Qt;s ) is a strictly concave function maximized at Qt;s = Q with maximum value W (Q ) =
                                          pl
0. Therefore, Eq. (A:32) also implies wt;s     0 for each t; s.

Proof of Lemma 4. Next consider the gap value in the steady state. Since the model is stationary, the
gap value is a function of optimists'wealth share,

                                                             pl      pl
                                                            wt; 2 = w2 (         t;s ) ;

                   pl
for some function w2  ( ). Di¤erentiating this expression, we have:

                                   pl                    pl
                                 @wt;s                 dw2  ( t;s )
                                               =                    _ t;s
                                  @t                       d
                                                            pl
                                                        dw2    ( t;s )                                 o        p
                                               =                         t;2 (1                t;2 ) ( 2        2) .
                                                             d
              pl
Note that wt;  3 = 0 since Qt;3 = Q . Finally, recall that we have Qt;2 = Q2 ( ) < Q , where Q2 ( ) is a
strictly increasing function. Substituting these expressions into Eq. (34) for state s = 2, we characterize
the gap value as the solution to a di¤erential equation in -domain:
                                                          pl
                                pl      pl              dw2  ( )                           o       p
                           +    2      w2  ( )+                  (1                  )(    2       2)   = W (Q2 ( )) .
                                                          d
We analyze the solution to this di¤erential equation in Caballero and Simsek (forthcoming). In particular,
                                                                     pl
since W (Q2 ( )) is strictly increasing in (since Q2 ( ) < Q ), w2      ( ) is also strictly increasing in .
               pl
We also have w2   ( ) < 0 for each [cf. (A:32)]. This proves Eq. (35).

                                                                  s gap value with policy ~
Proof of Proposition 6. Using Eq. (A:32), we can write the planner'                       l as
                                                   Z   1               pl
                           pl
                          w1               ~
                                     0;1 ; l =             e (     +   1    )t W (Q ) +            pl pl
                                                                                                   1 wt;2   (   t;2 )   dt.   (A.33)
                                                   0

Here,   t;2   denotes optimists'wealth share if the economy transitions to recession at time t. Likewise, we


                                                                            49
write the planner'
                 s gap value with policy Q1                            ;~
                                                                        l as

                                                        Z    1             pl
                 pl
                w1         0;1 ; l; Q1      ;~
                                             l     =             e (   +   1    )t W Q
                                                                                      1              ;~
                                                                                                      l     +   pl pl
                                                                                                                1 wt;2   (   t;2 )   dt.         (A.34)
                                                         0

       Next note that, using Proposition 5, optimists' wealth share after transition, t;2 (conditional on
                                         ~
   t;1 ), is the same under policies l and Q1       ;~
                                                     l . Combining this observation with Eq. (23), we also
...nd that the evolution of optimists' wealth share absent transition, _ t;1 = t;1 , is the same under both
policies. Consequently, optimists'wealth share follows an identical path under both policies. In view of
this observation, after taking the di¤erence of Eqs. (A:34) and (A:33), we obtain Eq. (37) in the main
text.
       Next note that Eq. (A:27) implies (for a given 2 (0; 1)) that the prudential asset price level is
di¤erentiable in ~  l with a ...nite derivative. Note also that Q1 ( ; l) = Q . Therefore, taking the derivative
of Eq. (37) with respect to ~     l and evaluating at ~
                                                      l = l , we obtain:

          pl
        dw1      ; l; Q1       ;~
                                l                  pl
                                                 dw1         ;~
                                                              l                   Z    1                             dQ1 t;1 ; ~
                                                                                                                               l
                                     j~                           j~       =               e (   +   pl
                                                                                                          )t dW (Q )             j~
                                                                                                                                  l=l dt
                                                                                                     1
                                      l=l                          l=l
                   d~
                    l                                   d~
                                                         l                         0                          dQt;1     d~
                                                                                                                         l
                                                                           =      0.

                                                                                                                                      dW (Q )
Here, the ...rst line applies the chain rule and the second line uses the observation that                                             dQt;1    = 0 [cf.
Eq. (34)]. Rearranging this expression establishes Eq. (36) and completes the proof.


 A.5.     Omitted results in Section 7
This section presents the results omitted from Section 7. In particular, we characterize the equilibrium
in which a fraction of optimists are unconstrained. We establish Propositions 7 and 8 that generalize
Propositions 2 and 4 to this extended setting. We relegate the proofs to the end of the section.


 A.5.1.        Prudential policies with shadow banks
Recall that we assume a subset of optimists (unconstrained optimists ) are not subject to the leverage
constraint, ! 1;t   ! 1;t . The remaining optimists (constrained optimists ) are subject to the leverage
constraint as before. We view the unconstrained optimists in this exercise as the model counterpart to
"shadow banks"that circumvent the regulatory limit and also do not face non-regulatory limits (whereas
the constrained optimists are the model counterpart to "banks"       ). We let 2 (0; 1) denote the relative
fraction of optimists'wealth that is held by unconstrained optimists. Hence, the wealth share of uncon-
strained and constrained optimists is given by, respectively,      and (1      ). As before, the total wealth
share of optimists (including both types) and pessimists is given by, respectively, and 1          . The rest
of the model is unchanged.
    To characterize the equilibrium, consider ...rst the recession state s = 2. Conditional on the total
mass of optimists, 2 , the equilibrium is the same as before. This is because we assume optimists face
no constraints from state 2 onwards, which implies that constrained and unconstrained optimists are
e¤ectively the same from this point forward. In particular, the equilibrium price in the recession can be
written as Qt;2 = Q2 ( t;2 ) ; where Q2 ( ) is the price function characterized in Proposition 1.
    Next consider the equilibrium in the boom state, s = 1. In this case, there are two state variables: the
total mass of optimists, 2 (0; 1), and the fraction of unconstrained optimists, 2 (0; 1). Therefore, we


                                                                           50
denote the equilibrium variables as functions of two state variables, in addition to the leverage limit and
PMP functions. In particular, 2 ( ; ; ! 1 ( ) ; Q1 ( )) and 2 ( ; ; ! 1 ( ) ; Q1 ( )) denote, respectively, the
total mass of optimists and the fraction of unconstrained optimists that obtain if there is an instantaneous
transition to recession. To simplify the notation, we suppress the dependence of these functions on some
or all of their arguments as long as the appropriate arguments are clear from the context.
    Much of our earlier analysis applies in this setting. In particular, Eq. (23), which characterizes
the growth rate of agents'wealth shares absent a state transition, applies for all agents. Applying this
equation for constrained and unconstrained optimists (in state s = 1), we obtain:

                            d ( (1    )) =dt                       p 1                                2   (1          2)
                                                      =            1                      1                                (A.35)
                                 (1    )                             1            2                       (1          )
                                  d ( ) =dt                        p 1                                2 2
                                                      =            1                      1
                                                                     1            2


Solving these equations for _ and _ , we characterize the wealth dynamics as follows:

                                           _              p 1                             2
                                                  =       1                   1                   ;                        (A.36)
                                                            1          2
                                           _              p 1                 2                   2
                                                  =       1                           1                   .
                                                            1          2


Given 2 , optimists'total wealth share follows the same equation as before (cf. Eq. (A:19)). Given 2
and 2 , the relative wealth share of unconstrained optimists follows a similar equation. Below, we will
verify that the equilibrium features 2 < and 2 < . Combining this observation with (A:36) implies
_ > 0 and _ > 0. Optimists' total wealth share (resp. unconstrained optimists' relative wealth share)
grows absent transition to recession, because these agents take on greater risk and earn higher returns
compared to pessimists (resp. constrained optimists).
    It remains to characterize the functions 2 and 2 . To this end, note that the portfolio optimality
condition (21) holds as equality for unconstrained optimists and as a weak inequality for constrained
optimists. Combining these observations, we obtain:

                                      o          (1   )                o                      p   1
                                      1                                1              =       1                   .        (A.37)
                                               2 (1   2)                     2 2                  1           2


Note also that Eq. (20) ; which relates agents'wealth shares after transition to their leverage ratio, applies
for all agents. Using this condition for constrained and unconstrained optimists, we obtain:

                             2   (1    2)                                                Q1
                                                 =    1       (1           ! o;reg
                                                                             1     )             1                         (A.38)
                                 (1    )                                               Q2 ( 2 )
                                      2 2                                                  Q1
                                                 =    1       (1           ! o;unreg
                                                                             1       )             1 :                     (A.39)
                                                                                        Q2 ( 2 )

Given current , the current price level Q1 and the price function after transition Q2 ( ), the equilibrium
levels of 2 ; 2 (as well as those for ! o;reg
                                        1     ; ! o;unreg
                                                  1       ) can be characterized by solving Eqs. (A:37 A:39).
    Consider the case in which constrained optimists' leverage constraint binds (the other case is the
same as in the previous section without a leverage limit). In this case, we have ! o;reg1    = ! 1 . Substituting




                                                                   51
this into Eq. (A:38), we obtain:

                                    2   (1       2)                           Q1
                                                      =1       (! 1   1)                     1 .            (A.40)
                                        (1       )                          Q2 ( 2 )

As before, this expression describes constrained optimists' relative wealth share as a function of the
leverage limit and the price drop after transition. Solving for 2 from Eq. (A:37), and substituting into
Eq. (A:40), we further obtain:
                                             o
                              1     2        1       1     2                             Q1
                                             p                  =1      (! 1     1)                 1 .     (A.41)
                          1                  1       1                                 Q2 ( 2 )

This equation generalizes Eq. (30) (which we analyzed extensively in previous sections) to cases with
  > 0. In particular, the equation characterizes 2 given Q1 ; Q2 ( 2 ) and ! 1 .
    Note also that the left-hand side of Eq. (A:41) is an increasing function of 2 . Hence, as before the
equation can be visualized as the intersection of two increasing relations between 2 and Q2 .
    Our next result summarizes this characterization for the benchmark case without PMP, Q1 = Q , and
establishes the comparative statics with respect to . Importantly, the result also establishes the compar-
ative statics with respect to the leverage limit ! 1 and generalizes our earlier result about macroprudential
policy (Proposition 2) to this setting.

Proposition 7. Suppose Assumptions A1-A3 hold and that a fraction, 2 (0; 1), of optimists' wealth
is held by unconstrained optimists that face no leverage limits. Consider the benchmark equilibrium
without PMP, Q1 ( ) = Q . Fix levels ; 2 (0; 1) that are associated with some binding leverage limit,
! 1 ( ; ) < ! o;reg
                1    ( ; ; 1). Absent transition to recession, and follow the dynamics in (A:36). After
transition, 2 is characterized as the solution to Eq. (A:41) and 2 is characterized as the solution to
(A:37). In equilibrium, 2 < ; 2 < and _ > 0; _ > 0: optimists'total wealth share and unconstrained
optimists'relative wealth share shrink after transition to recession and grow absent transition. Moreover,
  2 satis...es the following comparative statics:
     (i) Increasing the relative wealth share of unconstrained optimists, , decreases optimists'wealth share
after transition, d 2 ( d; ;! 1 ( ))
                                     < 0. In the limit as ! 1, optimists' wealth share approaches its level in
the equilibrium without leverage limits, 2 ( ; 1).
     (ii) Macroprudential policy that decreases the leverage limit increases optimists' wealth share after a
transition to recession, d 2     ( ; ;! 1 ( ))
                               d! 1 ( ; )      < 0. Increasing the relative wealth share of unconstrained optimists,
                                                                       @ d 2 ( ; ;! 1 ( ))
 , reduces the e¤ ectiveness of macroprudential policy,               @    d! 1 ( ; )        > 0.

    This result veri...es the conventional wisdom that the presence of less constrained agents reduces the
strength of macroprudential policy. The ...rst part shows that, as the relative wealth share of unconstrained
optimists grows, optimists take on greater risk and their wealth share declines by a greater magnitude
after transition to recession. The second part shows that (as long as some optimists are constrained,
   < 1) macroprudential policy that tightens leverage limits mitigates the decline in optimists' wealth
share but less so than in the earlier setting without unconstrained optimists.
    Next consider PMP that lowers the current asset price level, Q1 ( ; ) Q . As illustrated by Eq.
(A:40), PMP reduces constrained optimists'exposure to recession. As illustrated by Eq. (A:41), this in
turn increases the wealth share of optimists after transition to recession, 2 . Eq. (A:41) further suggests
that, as before, PMP a¤ects the equilibrium in much the same way as a decrease in ! 1 . Our next



                                                                52
result veri...es this intuition. Speci...cally, we generalize our main result showing that monetary policy can
replicate the prudential e¤ects of directly tightening a leverage limit (cf. Proposition 4).
Proposition 8. Suppose Assumptions A1-A3 hold and that a fraction, 2 (0; 1), of optimists' wealth
is held by unconstrained optimists that face no leverage limits. Fix some ; 2 (0; 1) and consider the
setup of Proposition 4. In particular, consider an alternative leverage limit !  ~ 1 ( ) that agrees with ! 1 ( )
                                                ~ 1 ( ; ) < min (! 1 ( ; ) ; ! o;reg
everywhere except for ( ; ) and that satis...es !                              1     ( ; 1)). Then:
                      ~
    (i) There exists Q1 ( ; ) < Q such that the PMP (with the original leverage limit) generates the
same e¤ ect on constrained and unconstrained optimists' wealth shares after transition as the alternative
leverage limit (without PMP):

                    2
                                  ~1 =
                         ; ; !1 ; Q             2        ~ 1 ) and
                                                    ( ; ;!                 2
                                                                                         ~1 =
                                                                                ; ; !1 ; Q             2        ~ 1) :
                                                                                                           ( ; ;!

                                                                                              ~
Targeting a lower e¤ ective limit requires targeting a lower asset price, @
                                                                          @!
                                                                            Q1 ( ; )
                                                                            ~ 1 ( ; ) > 0.
   (ii) PMP requires setting a higher interest rate than the benchmark without policy:

                                            f                 ~ 1 > rf ( ; ; ! 1 ) :
                                           r1        ; ; !1 ; Q      1

                                                                                            f           ~1)
                                                                                          @r1 ( ; ;!1 ;Q
Targeting a lower e¤ ective limit requires setting a higher interest rate,                    @!
                                                                                               ~ 1( ; )            < 0.

   This result follows from the same steps as in Proposition 4. In particular, the monetary authority can
choose Q~ 1 so that optimists' total wealth share and the equilibrium price in the recession settle at the
same level as if the regulator had directly tightened the leverage limit. In fact, conditional on optimists'
wealth share 2 , the replicating Q~ 1 that the planner needs to set is characterized as the solution to the
same equation (A:23) as in our earlier analysis.

 A.5.2.     Omitted derivations
We ...rst state and prove a generalization of Lemma 5, which implies that Eq. (A:41) has a unique solution
(when Q1 = Q ). We then prove Propositions 7 and 8.
Lemma 6. Consider the following function:
                                                                                                           o
                                                             Q                       1    2                1   1    2
               f(   2;   ; ; !1 ) = 1      (! 1       1)                    1                              p             ,
                                                           Q2 (     2)           1                         1   1

where ; ; ! 1 are parameters such that ; 2 (0; 1) ; ! 1 ! o 1 ( ; ; 1). Under Assumption A3, f (                             2)   =
0 has a unique solution that satis...es 2 2 ( 2 ( ; 1) ; ).
Proof. Following similar steps as in Lemma 5, it is easy to check that f ( 2 ( ; 1)) > 0 and f ( ) < 0.
This establishes that there exists a solution that lies in the desired interval, 2 2 ( 2 ( ; 1) ; ).
   We next show that the derivative of f is strictly negative at each zero of f , that is:

                           f0 (   2)   < 0 for each        2   2(   2    ( ; 1) ; ) and f (       2)   = 0.

This establishes that f has a unique zero in the desired interval. To prove the claim, we ...rst evaluate
the derivative                                                           o
                                          Q                   1    1     1    1
                   f 0 ( 2 ) = (! 1 1)              0
                                                 2 Q2 ( 2 )          + p            .
                                       (Q2 ( 2 ))           1            1  1

                                                                    53
Hence, f 0 (   2)   < 0 as long as
                                                                                                                               o
                                   !1 1 Q                                                        1            1                1            1
                                                             Q0
                                                              2(          2)         <                                +        p                         .
                                   Q2 ( 2 ) Q2 (     2)                                  1                                     1       1

Note that we require this to hold when f (                       2)      = 0. This implies:
                                                                                                                                   o
                           !1 1                     1                                            1                2                1       1         2
                                    =                                        1                                                     p                          .
                           Q2 ( 2 )   Q             Q2 (         2)                      1                                         1       1

Combining the last two displayed equations, we need to show

                                                                             Q               Q2 (            2)   Q2 (         2)
                                           Q0
                                            2(       2)          <                                                                     g(       2;   ; )
                                                                                     1               2              Q
                                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                         1         1                        1
                                                                             (1              2) 1                         +        1
                                                                                                                                   p
                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                   1
                              where g (    2;    ; )             =                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                 1                                 1
                                                                                 1           1
                                                                                                              2            1
                                                                                                                           p
                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                           1



Note that, in the proof of Lemma 5, we already established this inequality for = 0 (under Assumption
A3). Hence, it su¢ ces to show that g ( 2 ; ; ) g ( 2 ; ; 0). This inequality holds because,

                                                                 1               2                                    1            2
                         g(   2;    ; )>                                             o
                                                                                                              >                        = g(          2;      ; 0) .
                                           1         1               2               1
                                                                                     p
                                                                                             1       2                1            2

                                                 1                                   1       1

                                                                                         o
                                                             1           1                           1                 1
Here, the ...rst inequality follows because              1                   +           1
                                                                                         p
                                                                                                 1                <        . The second inequality follows because
                                                                                         1
                               o                                             o                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                                                         1                1
 2> 2 ( ; 1) = o +(1 ) p implies 1 2 2 >
                               1
                                                1    , which in turn implies 1
                                                                             p
                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                  2   1
                                                                                                                                                                      p
                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                  >   2
                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                     1       1                                               1                                                                                        1
This establishes the claim and completes the proof of the lemma.

Proof of Proposition 7. First consider the characterization of 2 . Earlier, we established that
Eq. (A:41) characterizes 2 . Lemma 6 implies that there exists a unique solution that satis...es
 2 2 ( 2 ( ; 1) ; ). Combining this with Eq. (A:36) also implies _ > 0.
    Next note that Eq. (A:37) characterizes 2 conditional on 2 . Note also that 2 > 2 ( ; 1) =
        o                     o                                                   o
                                                                                      =(1 )
            p implies       > p   . Combining this with Eq. (A:37), we obtain 2 = p          < 1.
        1               2     1                                                   1
  o +(1               1         1
  1       ) 1             2   1                                                   1 2 =(1 2)

This proves                                                      _
                < . Combining this with Eq. (A:36) also implies > 0.
                2
    Next consider the comparative statics of 2 with respect to . Recall that 2 is characterized as
the unique solution to the equation, f ( 2 ; ; ; ! 1 ) = 0, where f ( ) is de...ned in Lemma 6. Implicitly
di¤erentiating the equation with respect to , we obtain:

                                                d    2               @f ( 2 ; ; ; ! 1 ) =@
                                                          =                                                                    ,
                                                d                    @f ( 2 ; ; ; ! 1 ) =@                                 2


where the derivatives are evaluated at the solution. From the proof of Lemma 6, we also know that
f 0 ( 2 ; ; ; ! 1 ) < 0 when f ( 2 ) = 0. Hence, dd
                                                    2
                                                      < 0 as long as @f ( 2 ; ; ; ! 1 ) =@ < 0. The latter




                                                                                     54
inequality holds because:
                                                                                                                 o
                      @f (   2;      ; ; !1 )                     @               1              2               1        1             2
                                                    =                                                            p
                                @                                @        1                                      1        1
                                                                                                                 o                                      o
                                                                  @               1              2               1   1   2                              1   1           2
                                                    =                                                            p                              +       p
                                                                 @        1                                      1    1                                 1   1
                                                                                      o
                                                                      2               1   1          2                @  1
                                                    =                                 p                                                             < 0.
                                                                                      1   1                          @ 1
                                                                      o
                                                                          1                                                                                      @  1
Here, the last inequality follows since                      2
                                                                 >    1
                                                                      p
                                                                          1
                                                                                  2
                                                                                          (since             2   >         2   ( ; 1)) and                      @ 1             > 0. This proves
                                                                      1
d
 d
     2
         < 0.
         Next consider the limit as           ! 1. For any                    2   >        2   ( ; 1), we have
                                                                          2                                      h                           i              o
                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                      Q                                         1
                                                                              1           (! 1           1)          Q2 (      2)
                                                                                                                                            1 +             1
                                                                                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                        2

                      lim f (       2;   ; ; !1 )       =        lim 4                                                              o
                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                            1               5
                       !1                                            !1                                  1             2            1               2
                                                                                                                                    p
                                                                                                     1                              1       1
                                                        =            1
                                                                 o
                                          1 1
Here, the last line follows because 2 > p      2
                                                 and lim !1 1 1 = 1. This also implies lim !1 2 =
                                          1 1

  2 ( ; 1) because 2 is characterized as the unique solution to the equation, f ( 2 ; ; ; ! 1 ) = 0, over
the range 2 2 ( 2 ( ; 1) ; ).
     Next consider the comparative statics with respect to the leverage limit, ! 1 = ! 1 ( ; ). Following
similar steps, we obtain:

                           d 2                 @f ( 2 ; ; ; ! 1 ) =@! 1
                                         =
                           d! 1               @f ( 2 ; ; ; ! 1 ) =@ 2
                                                                                   Q
                                                                                  Q2 (      2)
                                                                                                         1
                                         =                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                                < 0.
                                                                  Q         0                                1            1                         1
                                             (! 1       1) (Q            2 Q2         (     2)           1                     +        1
                                                                                                                                        p
                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                 2 ( 2 ))                                                               1



Here, the ...rst equality evaluates the partial derivatives and the second inequality uses
@f ( 2 ; ; ; ! 1 ) =@ 2 < 0.
                                                                  d 2
    Finally, consider the sign of the cross-partial derivative @@ d! 1
                                                                       . We have

                                                                                                                      o
                                   @ d 2                                   @  1                      1                1             1
                      sign                          = sign                                                   +        p
                                  @ d! 1                                  @ 1                                         1        1
                                                                                                                      o                                 o
                                                                           @  1                      1                1         1                       1           1
                                                    = sign                                                   +        p                                 p
                                                                          @ 1                                         1    1                            1   1
                                                                                                                      o
                                                                           @  1                      1                1        1
                                                    = sign                                                   +        p                             > 0.
                                                                          @ 1                                         1    1

                  @ d 2
This proves      @ d! 1   > 0 and completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 8. The proof follows similar steps to Proposition 4. Using Eq. A:41,                                                                                                      2
corresponding to the alternative leverage limit is characterized as the unique solution to:
                                                         o
                                    1         2          1       1        2                                                      Q
                                                         p                            =1         (~
                                                                                                  !1                 1)                                 1 .                              (A.42)
                              1                          1       1                                                             Q2 (         2)




                                                                                      55
Likewise,   2   corresponding to the PMP (with the current leverage limit) is characterized as the solution
to:                                                                                                                    "                               #
                                     1                2
                                                               o
                                                               1    1       2
                                                                                                                      ~1
                                                                                                                      Q
                                                               p                    =1              (! 1         1)                                1 .                          (A.43)
                                 1                             1    1                                               Q2 ( 2 )

                                                                                         ~ 1 that ensures
   Next note that the proof of Proposition 4 establishes that there is a unique level of Q
                      ~ 1 denote this level, that is:
Eq. (A:23) holds. Let Q
                                                           "                    #
                                                            ~1
                                                            Q                                                         Q
                                           (! 1        1)                       1 = (~
                                                                                     !1                 1)                                   1 .                                (A.44)
                                                          Q2 ( 2 )                                                  Q2 (            2)


Substituting Q ~ 1 into Eq. (A:43) ensures that this equation is the same as Eq. (A:42). Therefore, the
solutions are the same. Hence, there exists a PMP that replicates 2 that results from the alternative
leverage limit. Recall also that 2 is characterized by Eq. (A:37) conditional on 2 . Thus, the same
PMP also replicates 2 that results from the alternative leverage limit. Note also that Eq. (A:44) implies
@Q~1
  ~ 1 > 0. This completes the proof of the ...rst part.
 @!
     Next consider the interest rate corresponding to PMP. Note that Eq. (21) continues to hold as
equality for pessimists. This implies that the interest rate is given by:
                                                                                !                                                              !
                                       f
                                                                     ~1
                                                                     Q                      p   1                        ~1
                                                                                                                         Q
                                     r
                                     ~1    =          + g1                                  1                                                 1 .
                                                                     Q                          1           2          Q2 ( 2 )

Using Eq. (A:38) (that describes the wealth share after transition for constrained optimists) to substitute
for the price decline, we obtain:
                                                                     !
                         f
                                                               ~1
                                                               Q                p   1                                  2   (1            2)            1
                       r
                       ~1    =           + g1                                   1                       1                                                          .            (A.45)
                                                               Q                    1           2                          (1            )     !1              1

    For the benchmark without any prudential policy, following similar steps we obtain:
                                                                                            0                                            1
                                                                                                                b                    b
                                                                              1                                 2      1             2             1
                         f;b
                        r1           =       + g1              ( )        p
                                                                          1
                                                                                            @1                                           A                     .                (A.46)
                                                                              1         b                           (1               )        !b           1
                                                                                        2                                                      1


            b
Here, b           b
        2 ; 2 ; ! 1 denote the equilibrium variables in the benchmark, which are potentially di¤erent than
the equilibrium with PMP. In particular, recall from Proposition 7 that 2 > b     2 . Combining this with Eq.
(A:37), we further obtain 2 < b     2 . PMP decreases the fraction of optimists'wealth  held by unconstrained
optimists, because they react to the policy by increasing their risks more than constrained optimists.
    Next note that the wealth shares satisfy the following identity:

                                                                                                                2 (1           2)
                   1                              2   (1       2)
                                                                                                    1            (1            )
                                     1                                  =       (1              )
                   1         2                        (1       )                                        1              2

                                                                                                                           2             1         2
                                                                        =       (1              ) 1                                                            1       .        (A.47)
                                                                                                                1              2         (1            )

Here, the term in the brackets is positive because 2 < . This identity holds for the pair, (                                                                               2;    2 ), as
                    b   b                                                      b                                                                                           b
well as the pair,   2 ; 2 . Combining the identity with the inequalities, 2 > 2 and 2 <                                                                                    2    (which



                                                                                    56
                         b
implies 1     2   >1     2 ),   we further obtain:
                                                                           0                         1
                                                                                      b          b
                          1                       (1                                      1
                                                          2)     1
                                              2                                       2          2
                                        1                      <           @1                        A.
                          1                       (1      )      1     b                  (1     )
                                  2                                    2


                                                                                           ~1
Note also that      1         1
                                      since ! b        ! 1 . Finally, we also have        Q
                                                                                                     <              ~1 < Q .
                                                                                                          ( ) since Q
                  !1 1      !b                1                                           Q
                             1 1
                                                                                     f;b     f
Combining these inequalities with Eqs. (A:45) and (A:46) proves                  > r1    : that is, PMP sets a
                                                                                      that r
                                                                                           ~1
higher interest rate than in the benchmark without prudential policies.
    Finally, consider how raising the target leverage limit !      ~ 1 a¤ects the interest rate corresponding
                                                       ~
to PMP. Since raising the leverage limit increases Q1 , it also increases the e¤ective depreciation rate,
   ~1
   Q
   Q      . Since raising the leverage limit reduces 2 , it also increases 2 (and reduces 1 2 ). Combining
                                                                                          1     2 (1 2)
this with the identity in (A:47) implies that raising the leverage limit raises the term, 1 2
                                                                                              1   (1 )  .
Combining these observations with (A:45) proves that raising the target leverage limit decreases the
                          ~f
                         @r
interest rate, that is: @ !
                          ~ 1 < 0. In particular, targeting a lower e¤ective leverage limit !
                           1
                                                                                            ~ 1 requires setting
a higher interest rate, completing the proof.


 A.6.       Details of the numerical exercise
For depreciation, we use the functional form

                                                                       1+1="
                                        ( )= +                                  for                                   (A.48)
                                                                  1 + 1="

(and ( ) = for < ) given some constants ; (                 ); ; " > 0. This functional form implies that
decreasing factor utilization below the e¢ cient level, , reduces the depreciation rate until < , but it
has no e¤ect on depreciation beyond this level. Raising factor utilization above the e¢ cient level increases
capital depreciation.
    In our numerical examples, we set

                                            = 0:97;       = 0:04; = 0:087; " = 20.

These choices ensure that the e¢ cient factor utilization and the corresponding depreciation rate are given
by [cf. Eq. (16)] with
                                           = 1 and ( ) = 0:041.

In particular, we normalize the e¢ cient factor utilization to one. The choice of = 0:97 (together with a
relatively high elasticity, " = 20) implies that underutilizing capital by up to 3 percent is not too costly,
since it is compensated by a relatively large decline in depreciation. Underutilizing capital beyond this
level is much costlier as there is no compensation in terms of reduced depreciation. In our examples, this
means that underutilizing capital in the recession is much costlier than underutilizing capital during the
boom.
    For the discount rate, we set
                                                    = 0:04.

This choice (together with the speci...cation for the depreciation function) ensures that Assumption 2



                                                                57
holds. For the productivity level, we set A = 1. This does not play a role as it scales all variables. These
choices imply that the e¢ cient asset price level is given by [cf. Eq. (17)]:

                                                         A
                                              Q =                = 25.

    For the productivity growth rates, we set

                               g3 = g1    =   0:1     (          ( )) = 0:101
                                     g2   =       0:05       (      ( )) =      0:049:

These choices satisfy g2 < min (g1 ; g3 ). They also imply that, with no state changes or belief disagreements
and if capital were perfectly utilized, then the (risk-adjusted) return to capital would be equal to 10% in
the boom and the recovery states and -5% in the recession state [cf. (15)]. In particular, the transition
from the boom to the recession represents a 15% shock to asset valuations.
    For beliefs, we set

                                          o                        p
                                          1   =     0:09 and       1   = 0:9
                                          o                        p
                                          2   =     4:97 and       2   = 0:49

              p
(and o 3 = 3 = 0). These beliefs satisfy Assumption 1: compared to pessimists, optimists assign a
smaller probability to a transition from boom to recession but a greater probability to a transition from
recession to recovery. When combined with the remaining parameters, these values satisfy Assumptions
A1-A2, the regularity conditions we need in order to obtain an equilibrium with a positive interest rate
in the boom state and a zero interest rate (and suboptimal asset price level) in the recession state.
    Recall that we also need Assumption A3 (which is a regularity condition) to ensure that there is a
unique equilibrium when optimists'leverage limit binds (cf. Appendix A.3.1). This condition depends on
the equilibrium price function in the recession, Q2 ( ). Figure 3 plots the price function corresponding
to the parameters described above. We verify that, when combined with the remaining parameters, this
function satis...es Assumption A3.




                                                          58
