                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         ACCOUNTING FOR THE IMPACT OF MEDICAID ON CHILD POVERTY

                                      Sanders Korenman
                                       Dahlia K. Remler
                                      Rosemary T. Hyson

                                      Working Paper 25973
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25973


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




This paper was originally prepared as a background paper commissioned by the National
Academy of Sciences for its Committee on Building an Agenda to Reduce the Number of
Children in Poverty by Half in 10 Years. The paper was submitted in October 2017 and
embargoed until the release of the Committee's report, A Roadmap to Reducing Child Poverty,
2019. DOI https://doi.org/10.17226/25246. This version includes minor clarifications and a
correction. It appears in the NBER working paper series with permission from the National
Academy of Sciences, Courtesy of the National Academies Press, Washington, D.C. We thank
members of the Committee for their questions and suggestions and the Russell Sage Foundation
for support for the further development of the Health Inclusive Poverty Measure. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 National Academy of Sciences, circulated with permission. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Accounting for the Impact of Medicaid on Child Poverty
Sanders Korenman, Dahlia K. Remler, and Rosemary T. Hyson
NBER Working Paper No. 25973
June 2019
JEL No. H51,H53,I13,I14,I32

                                         ABSTRACT

US Census Bureau poverty measures do not include an explicit need for health care or insurance
nor do they consider health insurance benefits to be resources. Consequently, they cannot
measure the direct impact of health insurance benefits on poverty. This paper reviews conceptual
and practical considerations in incorporating health benefits and needs into poverty measures. We
analyze the advantages and disadvantages of various approaches including variants of the Official
Poverty Measure (OPM); the Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM); using a threshold with
medical out-of-pocket (MOOP) expenditures; a Medical Care Expenditure Risk (MCER) Index;
willingness to pay (WTP) for Medicaid; and the Health-Inclusive Poverty Measure (HIPM;
Korenman and Remler 2016). We present estimates of Medicaid's impacts on child poverty,
based on the HIPM. This paper was prepared as a background paper for the Committee on
Building an Agenda to Reduce the Number of Children in Poverty by Half in 10 Years, of the
Board of Children, Youth and Families of the National Academy of Sciences. The paper was
submitted in October 2017 and embargoed until the release of the Committee's report, A
Roadmap to Reducing Child Poverty, in March of 2019.


Sanders Korenman                                Rosemary T. Hyson
Marxe School of Public and                      Marxe School of Public and
International Affairs                           International Affairs
Baruch College                                  Baruch College
City University of New York                     City University of New York
One Bernard Baruch Way                          One Bernard Baruch Way
Box D-901                                       Box D-901
New York, NY 10010                              New York, NY 10010
and NBER                                        and CUNY Institute for Demographic Research
sanders.korenman@baruch.cuny.edu                Rosemary.Hyson@baruch.cuny.edu

Dahlia K. Remler
Marxe School of Public and
International Affairs
Baruch College
City University of New York
One Bernard Baruch Way
Box D-901
New York, NY 10010
and NBER
Dahlia.Remler@baruch.cuny.edu


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25973
                                           Contents

I. Why Consider the Role of Medicaid in Alleviating Child Poverty?

II. Overview of Difficulties of Incorporating Health Care and Insurance Benefits in Poverty
Measures

III. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact Using the Official Poverty Measure (OPM)


IV. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact Using OPM and Health Insurance Values in
Resources


V. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact Using the Supplemental Poverty Measure
(SPM)


VI. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact Using Medical Out-of-Pocket (MOOP)
Expenditures in the Threshold


VII. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact Using a Medical Care Expenditure Risk
(MCER) Index


VIII. Estimates of Willingness to Pay (WTP) for Medicaid


IX. Health-Inclusive Poverty Measure (HIPM)


X. Results: Impact of Medicaid on Child Health-Inclusive Poverty


XI. Figure


XII. Tables


XIII. References




                                                                                              2
I. Why Consider the Role of Medicaid in Alleviating Child Poverty?

Poverty is the state of having insufficient resources to achieve a minimally adequate standard of

living. If a family unit is poor by this definition, all individuals in the unit are considered poor.

Conceptually, considering Medicaid is important if health care is part of a minimally adequate

standard of living and if Medicaid helps children and their families receive minimally adequate

care. Medicaid is by far the largest benefit program (in terms of expenditures) for low-income

families with children. It has also grown substantially since its inception in 1965, in eligibility, in

real expenditures per beneficiary and in real per capita expenditures relative to other programs.

Conceptual importance: consistent and complete poverty measurement

Whether basic health care is part of the basic standard of living (i.e., a "basic need") is partly a

matter of philosophy and social norms. Evidence that it is widely considered so includes that:

nearly all higher-income countries have a form of national health insurance or care; an explicit

goal of the Affordable Care Act was to achieve universal access to affordable health insurance;

the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms health care as a basic right.



If health care is part of a minimally adequate living standard, Medicaid benefits directly alleviate

child poverty by helping meet that need. The 1995 NAS/NRC report, Measuring Poverty: A New

Approach (Citro and Michael 1995), recommended inclusion of in-kind benefits as resources, yet

could find no valid way to include health insurance benefits. The report acknowledged that its

treatment of health care was a fundamental weakness of its recommended approach. Most

importantly, "...it does not explicitly acknowledge a basic necessity, namely medical care, that is

just as important as food or housing. Similarly, the approach devalues the benefits of having

health insurance, except indirectly" (p. 236).

                                                                                                        3
Program size

As of July 2017, 75 million people were enrolled in Medicaid (including CHIP), more than 1 in 5

Americans, nearly half of whom were children. 1 Medicaid is means-tested, and therefore targeted

on the low-income population. As a result, nearly half the noninstitutionalized population

covered by Medicaid/CHIP had family income below the federal poverty line, and 81% had

income below twice the poverty line (MACPAC 2016 Exhibit 2, p. 6). Of the over $500 billion

spent on Medicaid (MACPAC 2016, Exhibit 16, p. 46), about $90 billion each was spent on low-

income adults and children. 2As a result of means-testing and large expenditures per beneficiary,

Medicaid has become the largest transfer program for the non-elderly low-income population.

The $180 billion spent annually on low income children and adults through Medicaid eclipses

expenditures on any other means-tested benefit such as SNAP (Food Stamps) or refundable tax

credits such as the EITC, at roughly $70 billion each. 3

II. Overview of Difficulties of Incorporating Health Care and Insurance Benefits in Poverty

Measures



Ideally, a poverty measure should be able to show:

(1) whether or not children and their families have inadequate health care;

(2) whether or not children and their families have an inadequate material standard of living due

to their obtaining adequate health care; and


1
  https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/program-information/medicaid-and-chip-enrollment-data/report-
highlights/index.html. Accessed October 1, 2017.
2
  See www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/medicaid-spending-by-enrollment-
group/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel={"colId":"Location","sort":"asc"}. Accessed October 1, 2017.
This last figure covers the period October 1, 2013 through September 30, 2014, and so does not reflect 12 full
months of ACA Medicaid expansion spending, nor does it include spending on CHIP.
3
  https://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap and
https://www.jct.gov/publications.html?func=startdown&id=4971.

                                                                                                                 4
(3) the extent to which Medicaid reduces the occurrence of those two conditions.



With these goals in mind, we assess different approaches to constructing a measure to estimate

the impact of Medicaid on child poverty. The more general goal is to incorporate the need for

health care in the poverty threshold and include health insurance benefits as resources to help

meet that need. Poverty scholars long struggled to find a valid way to include an explicit need for

health care in the poverty threshold and health insurance in resources but could not do so.

Instead, they have used various indirect approaches or have relied on measures of non-health,

material poverty (Moon 1993; Citro and Michael 1995). The difficulties they faced result from

the distinct natures of health care needs and health insurance benefits. This section draws

substantially from Moon (1993), Citro and Michael (1995) and Korenman and Remler (2013,

2016).



The distinct nature of health care needs

The fundamental challenge to putting health care in the poverty threshold is the nature of the

need for health care. How much and what kind of health care people need depends on their

health condition. One person may need no or little care, while another person, in otherwise

identical economic circumstances, may need a great deal. Someone may need no health care in

one year but a great deal the following year. The need for health care is both substantially

unpredictable from one year to the next (stochastic) and substantially predictable from one year

to the next (auto-correlated; see Hirth et al. 2016). The cross-sectional variation in health care

needs is demonstrated by the skewness of total expenditures on care from any source: 5% of




                                                                                                     5
people consume about 50% of health care expenditures (Mitchell 2016). 4 Therefore, using any

summary measure of total health care needs--mean, median, 33rd percentile or other--will result

in substantial errors in both directions. Even summary measures conditioned on limited health

status indicators will be substantially wrong much of the time (Meier 2016).



Health care needs, therefore, contrast dramatically with other needs, such as food needs.

Essentially, everyone needs food in every period. Food needs do not vary nearly as much as

health care needs either across individuals or across time for the same individual.



The distinct nature of health insurance benefits

Health insurance benefits also differ in nature from other in-kind benefits such as SNAP (Food

Stamps). As an in-kind benefit, health-insurance benefits can be used only for health care, just as

food assistance programs such as the SNAP can be used only for food purchases. However, since

all people consume a substantial amount of food every month, a good share of SNAP replaces

food expenditures that would occur in the absence of the benefit, and therefore it frees-up cash

for other uses. But because most people need health care only occasionally, health insurance

benefits are unlikely to free-up much cash that would have been spent on medical care in the

absence of health insurance. Thus, health insurance benefits are not very fungible. Moreover,

differences between food assistance benefits provided and food consumption will be small in

comparison to the differences between thousands of dollars of Medicaid insurance benefits and

the low medical care consumed by most beneficiaries in most periods. In other periods or for




4
  While the magnitude of the variability and skewness of health care needs is smaller for children than adults, it is
still present. Moreover, children's economic well-being is affected by the well-being of adults in their household.

                                                                                                                        6
other people, total expenditures on care will vastly exceed Medicaid benefits. That is the nature

of health, health care and health insurance.



Difficulties of including a need for Medical Out-of-pocket Expenditures (MOOP) in the poverty

threshold

An alternative to including a health care need in the poverty threshold is to include a need for

out-of-pocket expenditures on medical care (MOOP) instead. However, this approach faces

many of the same difficulties as putting health care in the threshold due to the irregular nature of

the need for spending on health care linked to the irregular need for health care.



Moreover, making MOOP the basic need greatly limits the poverty measure's ability to account

for the direct impact of Medicaid or other insurance benefits on poverty. Medicaid provides the

poor health care with essentially no out-of-pocket payments. If the MOOP need is conditioned

on insurance type, then Medicaid recipients will have no MOOP need. In this case, Medicaid can

have no direct impact on poverty by meeting their MOOP need (because that need is zero).



Another possibility would be to make the MOOP need the average out-of-pocket spending of the

uninsured. This can show a meaningful MOOP reduction impact of Medicaid. But to the extent

that the uninsured do not get needed care, this approach understates the need for care (or for

MOOP that would pay for needed care), in turn understating the impact of Medicaid and other

health insurance benefits on poverty. In essence, this approach would not show how insurance

increases the consumption of needed care--the access value of care. (Nyman 2003, 2004;

Sommers, Gawande and Baicker 2017).



                                                                                                    7
Finally, another possibility is to make the MOOP need the average MOOP expenditure in the

population. To the extent that much of the population has health insurance benefits that lower

MOOP, again, the full value of Medicaid in meeting care needs would not be measured. With

this approach it would, however, be possible to measure how Medicaid impacts poverty by

reducing MOOP from the average value to zero. As noted, all of the MOOP reduction impacts on

poverty would also fail to capture the access-to-care value of Medicaid.



A possible solution: include a health insurance need in the poverty threshold

Another approach is to consider the primary health care need to be a need for health insurance. A

sufficiently good health insurance policy can ensure that all health care needs are met, however

big or small. Moreover, that health insurance policy also meets the need for ex ante risk

reduction--both financial (material) risk and health status risk (by providing access to care).



Designating health insurance as the fundamental health care need eliminates the problems of

including care in the threshold, provided health insurance prices do not vary substantially with

health conditions. Health insurance resources and health insurance needs must still be calculated

in a consistent manner. Because health insurance cannot be used to purchase food or other

material needs, health insurance benefits should never be valued above health insurance needs. If

these conditions are met, it becomes possible to estimate the impact of Medicaid and other health

insurance benefits on poverty, as we will describe later.




                                                                                                   8
To sum up, it is difficult to determine a need for health care for the purpose of poverty

measurement, because care needed varies greatly among individuals and over time for a given

individual. The same is true for the need for medical out-of-pocket spending (MOOP).

Additionally, if the health care need is a need for medical out-of-pocket spending only, then the

estimated direct impact of Medicaid on poverty will understate the MOOP reduction value of

Medicaid and miss entirely its access-to-care value. Lastly, because of their distinct non-

fungibility, health insurance benefits can only be counted in resources if there is a consistent

health care/insurance need in the threshold.

We will refer to the issues summarized in this overview in describing problems with considering

Medicaid's role in child poverty using different poverty measures




III. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact Using the Official Measure (OPM)



The OPM resource measure includes only cash income and excludes all in-kind benefits. Thus,

without modification, the OPM as such cannot be used to account for the direct impact of health

insurance benefits such as Medicaid on poverty through meeting of health care needs.



The OPM needs threshold is defined as three times the cost of USDA Thrifty Food Plan in the

early 1960s, adjusted annually for overall price inflation. Thus, it does not include an explicit

budgetary component ("need") for either health care or for out-of-pocket expenditures for care or

insurance. However, through the "three times" multiplier, the OPM threshold does include an

implicit need for out-of-pocket health care and insurance expenses. This budget share for out-of-




                                                                                                    9
pocket expenses has been estimated to be in the range of 4% to 7% of the poverty threshold. 5

Thus, the health care need implicit in the OPM threshold is for out-of-pocket spending only; it

does not include a need for medical expenses that could be covered by insurance (NAS p. 226).



Because the OPM threshold includes only out-of-pocket expenditures, it cannot be used to

validly measure the full impact of Medicaid or other health insurance benefits in meeting a need

for out-of-pocket payments and for accessing care, as discussed in Section II.



Even as a measure of the need for out-of-pocket medical spending, the OPM threshold has

several weaknesses. The OPM threshold assigns all families of the same size and age

composition the same need for out-of-pocket spending. An uninsured family has the same need

for medical out-of-pocket expenses as an otherwise identical insured family. That need is also

not adjusted for differences across even crude categories of risk for out-of-pocket expenditures

such as age or insurance type. Moreover, within risk categories, health care needs and out of

pocket expenditures depend on health status, and are skewed.



Another potential problem often noted (e.g., Citro and Michael 1995 p. 231) is that the 4% to 7%

implicit budget share for medical expenses from the 1960s may be out of date. On the one hand,

the cost of health care has grown tremendously. On the other hand, a higher portion of medical

expenditures is paid by third-party payers, especially following the establishment of Medicare

and Medicaid in 1965. As a result, the average budget share of medical expenditures is still


5
 According to the NAS report (Citro & Michael, 1995, p. 226): "Median [out-of-pocket] expenses accounted for 4
percent of median income in 1963 (Moon, 1993: 3); 7 percent of total expenditures in the 1960-1961 CEX (Jacobs
and Shipp, 1990: Table 1); and 5 percent of personal consumption expenditures in the 1960-61 NIPA (CEA, 1992:
Table B-12)"; See also Burtless and Seigel (2004, page 123).

                                                                                                             10
around 8%. 6 Nonetheless, because real family income has grown since the early 1960s, real

average medical out-of-pocket expenditures are much higher today. Since the OPM poverty

thresholds are fixed in real terms, the $4,500 spent by the average family on medical out of

pocket expenses today is large relative to the OPM poverty line: 23% for a family consisting of

one adult and two children and 18% for a family with two adults and two children.




IV. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact Using OPM and Health Insurance

Values in Resources



The size and rapid growth of flows to low-income households of in-kind benefits, particularly

food, housing and medical assistance, motivated attempts to include them in the OPM resource

measure (Smeeding 1977, p. 366). Various modifications of the OPM resource measure have

been used to assess the impact of in-kind benefits on poverty counts, rates or gaps. We review

the various approaches to adding a value for Medicaid and other health insurance benefits to

OPM Resources.



A key limitation of all these approaches is that, despite modifications, the resource measures

continue to be inconsistent with the health care need in the OPM threshold. Moreover, the health

care need in the OPM threshold is an implicit amount for out-of-pocket expenses through the

"three times" multiplier and does not include a need for care that could be paid by insurance.




6
 In 2014, household spending on health care and insurance as a percent of total expenditures reached 8% and the
average expenditure was nearly $4,500 (Foster, 2016).


                                                                                                                  11
Therefore, no approach that adds a value for Medicaid to the OPM resource measure is

consistent with the need for out-of-pocket spending implicitly incorporated in the OPM

threshold. In recognition of the importance of these issues, the first recommendation included in

the 1995 NAS report's chapter on resources (Citro and Michael, p. 206, emphasis in original)

was:



"Recommendation 4.1 In developing poverty statistics, any significant change in the

definition of family resources should be accompanied by a consistent adjustment of the

poverty thresholds."



The report continued "...to add the value of health insurance benefits to income (in whole or in

part) but not to add any amount to the poverty thresholds--to allow either for medical care needs

that would be covered by insurance or for higher out-of-pocket medical expenses--is to ignore

completely the increased costs of medical care and to assume the fungibility of medical care

benefits. This approach is perverse, particularly for people with high health care needs (who may

also have above-average out-of-pocket costs). As we recommend above (Recommendation 4.1),

poverty estimates of this type are not appropriate."



Needs and resources must be consistent. Moreover, as explained in Section II, if needs are only

for MOOP, then the poverty measure cannot show the full value of Medicaid. It will understate

the direct impact that Medicaid has in reducing MOOP, and miss entirely the value of Medicaid

in ensuring access to needed care.




                                                                                                12
Approaches to valuing health insurance for OPM resources

In a technical report for the US Census Bureau, Smeeding (1982) compared different approaches

to valuing in-kind benefits including a market value, recipient (cash equivalent) value and

poverty budget value. 7 Subsequently, the Census Bureau has made available a "fungible value"

of health insurance, to approximate the recipient (cash equivalent) value. Each of these is

discussed in turn.



The market value is simply the amount paid for the equivalent good in the market (e.g., the price

of a health insurance policy or the actuarial value of health insurance benefit including

government benefits). 8 Studies that have presented results using this approach to valuing

Medicaid include (CBO 2012 p. 18-21 Ben-Shalom, Moffitt, and Scholz 2012; Burkhauser,

Larrimore and Simon 2012, 2013).



The distinct nature of the health care needs and the resulting much lower fungibility of health

insurance than other in-kind benefits, described in Section II, raised questions about this

approach. The major objection to including the full market value in resources was the

implication that the poor could use Medicaid to meet non-health needs, such as food.

Furthermore, the magnitude of the resulting poverty impact implied that many poor families

could nearly escape poverty on the basis of health insurance alone. For example adding a market


7
  Smeeding (1982) also estimated a poverty budget share approach that caps the value of an in-kind benefit at the
share spent on the item by families near the poverty threshold in 1960-61, prior to the expansion of major federal
food and Medical insurance programs. Since out-of-pocket expenditures were a small percent of spending at the
poverty line in the early 1960s, this method results in very small values of health insurance programs. To our
knowledge, this approach has not been widely used, and will not be discussed here further. See also Smeeding
(1977).
8
  We use the terms "market value" and "actuarial value" interchangeably. The actuarial value is the expected or
average medical cost of care paid by the insurer for a defined pool of insured. For private insurance, the market
value is the actuarial value plus "loading" (administrative costs and profits).

                                                                                                                     13
value of Medicaid and Medicare to the OPM resource measure reduced the 1986 poverty rate for

children from 20.5 to 16.1 percent and for persons over age 65 from 12.4 to 4.1 percent (Citro

and Michael, Table 4-2). Smeeding (1982, Table 14) showed that the market value of Medicare

and Medicaid alone (excluding institutional care) amounted to 40 percent and 64 percent of the

poverty threshold for one- and two-person households, respectively, in 1979.



Analysts who use market values sometimes have expressed ambivalence. For example, Ben-

Shalom, Moffitt and Scholz (2012) wrote: "...OASI, Medicaid, and Medicare have the largest

impact at all poverty levels...The fact that two of these programs are less valuable than cash

must temper this conclusion." The large values of health insurance benefits compared to the

small budget share for out-of-pocket medical expenditures of low-income households in the

needs threshold suggested to many that the market value approach is invalid on its face.



The recipient cash-equivalent value is the "amount of cash income needed to induce families to

forgo a particular in-kind benefit" (Smeeding, 1977, p. 364); this is sometimes referred to as the

recipient "willingness to pay" for the benefit. Attempts have been made to estimate willingness

to pay by modeling utility-based family economic welfare, though as Smeeding (1982) noted:

"Even though recipient cash equivalent value is the theoretically preferred measure, it is quite

difficult to estimate, especially for medical care." 9      10




9
  This may be the theoretically correct measure for use in aggregating cash and in-kind benefits for income
distribution measures, but whether or not it is the theoretically preferred method for use in poverty measurement
depends on whether and how the need for health care is incorporated in the poverty threshold.
10
   See Finkelstein, Hendren and Luttmer (2016) for a recent example of valuing Medicaid using this approach, and a
discussion of modeling issues.

                                                                                                               14
Rather than specifying a family utility function, Smeeding (1977, 1982) estimated the cash

equivalent value of Medicaid to a recipient family by observing the spending of observationally

equivalent reference families that have cash income equal to the recipient family's cash plus

market value of insurance. The recipient value of insurance is equal to the smaller of the market

value of insurance and the expenditure of the reference family on medical care and insurance.

For example, suppose a recipient family has $10,000 cash income and a Medicaid policy with a

market value of $4,000. The method calculates the average expenditures on health care and

insurance of families with cash income of $14,000 and no Medicaid or other insurance. If, on

average, the reference families spent $2,000 on medical care and insurance, then the cash

equivalent value of the policy to the recipient family is $2,000. If the average reference family

spends more than $4,000, the cash equivalent value of Medicaid is the market value, $4,000. 11



For 30 years the Census Bureau has calculated a "fungible value" for Medicare and Medicaid

for alternative poverty estimation (e.g., Census 1988a, 1988b). The fungible value approach

assumes that health insurance has value only to the extent it frees up cash that would have been

spent on other necessities. Essentially, it assumes that no expenditures on health care and

insurance would be made unless food and shelter needs are met. After those needs are met,

potentially all remaining cash income could be spent on health insurance or care. As a result, for

families with cash income plus food and housing assistance income less than a food and shelter

need standard, the fungible value of Medicaid is zero. For families with cash and food and

shelter assistance income in excess of the food and shelter standard, the fungible value of



11
   This calculation ignores the fact that the uninsured reference family might have been willing to spend $4,000 on
an equivalent insurance policy but, because of pre-existing conditions, they were unable to buy a policy at that price;
in this situation, they may also spend less by foregoing needed care.

                                                                                                                    15
Medicaid is the difference between the market value of Medicaid and the food and shelter need

standard, up to the full market value of Medicaid (Census, 1993, page viii). Census' fungible

value approach has been used by many analysts including Meyer and Sullivan (2012); CBO

(2011); and Hoynes, Page and Stevens (2006).



Not surprisingly, using a fungible or recipient value for health insurance yields poverty rates that

fall between those based on either a zero value or the full market value of health insurance

transfers to low-income families. For example, Census (1988a) estimated that, in 1987, among

children under 6, the official poverty rate would fall by 5.1 or 1.3 percentage points using market

or recipient value, respectively. 12 For children aged 6 to 17, these impacts were 4.7 and 1.3

percentage points. Similarly, when a fungible or recipient value was used, Medicaid and

Medicare reduced child poverty modestly in 1986, from 20.5% to 19.2% or 19.0%, respectively

(Citro and Michael, Table 4-2). For those over 65, the poverty rate was lowered from 12.4% to

9.1% or 8.2% using, respectively, a fungible or recipient value for Medicare and Medicaid.



Meyer and Sullivan (2012; 2013) showed that adding a fungible value of health insurance to

consumption has only a trivial effect on the trend in consumption poverty rates between 1980

and 2010. 13 (The consumption poverty rate is the fraction of the population consuming below

the poverty threshold.) The small impact on the consumption poverty trend is surprising given

the enormous increase in real expenditures on Medicaid, Medicare and CHIP, the expansion of

eligibility for these programs, and, more generally, the increased cost of health care over this



12
  The impacts of health insurance were calculated after non-health in-kind benefits were added to resources.
13
 See Meyer & Sullivan (2012) and on-line appendix, Meyer & Sullivan (2013). The consumption deep poverty rate
was 1.8% in 1980 and under 1 percent in 2010, whether or not resources include health insurance benefits.

                                                                                                          16
period. For example, inflation-adjusted spending on Medicaid in 2006 was nearly five times

what it was in 1980, and the number of recipients more than doubled (Scholz et al., 2009 Table

8A.1 and 8A.2).



In contrast, including health insurance in resources has a large impact on the trend in

consumption near-poverty (consumption <150% of the federal poverty level); instead of falling 7

percentage points (from 34.8% in 1980 to 28.0% in 2010), the near-poverty rate falls 19

percentage points (Meyer and Sullivan 2013, Appendix Table 13). The larger impact of health

insurance on trends in consumption near-poverty than consumption poverty is likely the result of

the use of the fungible values for Medicare and Medicaid, which assigns much lower values of

insurance at lower levels of income. 14



While more modest poverty impact estimates such as these might suggest that a fungible or cash-

equivalent value has more face validity for poverty measurement than a market value, the

fungible value method also has weaknesses.



First, it underestimates the value of insurance in many cases. Smeeding's (1977) cash equivalent

method places a zero value on Medicaid above the expenditure share of the reference family.

Martin Feldstein, in discussing Meyer and Sullivan's presentation at the Brooking Institution

noted that "very poor households have little cash to free up, so the [fungible value] calculation

results in Medicaid appearing to have little value for them" (Meyer and Sullivan, p. 196).


14
  Winship (2016) estimated the impact on child poverty of adding 25% of the market value of employer insurance,
Medicaid and Medicare to OPM family resources as a conservative estimate of the cash-equivalent value of health
insurance. Compared to not valuing health insurance benefits at all, valuing them at 25% of market value lowered
the child poverty rate from 20.5% to 18.9% in 1996 and from 19.5% to 17.0% in 2014.

                                                                                                               17
Kaestner and Lubotsky (2016, p. 62) argued that, even among families with income below the

food and shelter need standard for whom the fungible value of health insurance is zero, health

insurance raises consumption of health services and must, therefore, have value.



The difference between actuarial and fungible valuation of health insurance provided through

Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP is enormous, about $200 billion in 2009 (CBO, 2012 p. 18-20);

using a market rather than fungible value "...increased CBO's estimate of average income for

households in the bottom quintile of the before-tax income distribution by roughly $4,600 (or

nearly 25 percent) and for households in the second quintile by roughly $1,600."



Second, even if the fungible value is regarded as a reasonable compromise between excluding

health insurance from resources and including their full market value, it (again) is conceptually

inconsistent with the OPM's implicit health need, which is a need for out-of-pocket expenses.

Thus, Moon (1993, p. 6) observed that "...even creative ways of adjusting downward the value

of health benefits received merely masks the [inconsistency] problem rather than resolving it."



V. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact using the Supplemental Poverty Measure



The Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM), first published by the Census Bureau in 2011,

implemented many of the recommendations of the NAS Report (Fox 2017; Citro and Michael

1995). The SPM thresholds are intended to define non-health needs: food, clothing, shelter and

utilities (FCSU) and "a little more." The SPM resource measure includes values for in-kind




                                                                                                    18
benefits that meet these needs, but not Medicaid, Medicare or other health insurance benefits.

The SPM is explicitly a non-health, "material" poverty measure.



Rather than include health care or insurance needs in the SPM threshold, the SPM accounts for

the need for only out-of-pocket medical expenses, and does so implicitly, by subtracting out-of-

pocket expenditures on insurance, medical care and over-the-counter medicines from resources.

This deduction is justified by the assumption that all health care expenditures are "non-

discretionary," like taxes, which are also deducted from resources. Thus, this approach implicitly

assumes that whatever a family spends out-of-pocket on health care, OTC or insurance is their

health need: no more and no less. It also assumes that the income spent on MOOP could not be

used to meet the family's other basic needs.



Under this assumption, SPM made the resource and threshold conceptually consistent, but did so

by excluding health care paid for by third parties from both. In recognition of this exclusion, the

NAS report recommended the development of a separate medical care economic risk index

(MCER) that could be used in conjunction with the SPM to provide a more complete description

of needs and resources. We discuss MCER in Section VII.



The SPM treatment of health insurance and care has some disadvantages. As noted, the SPM

excludes health insurance from resources and health insurance needs from the poverty threshold.

With no health insurance need in the SPM threshold, it would be inconsistent to add a value of

Medicaid or other insurance benefits to SPM resources. As a result, the SPM cannot be used to

estimate the direct impact of health insurance benefits on poverty.



                                                                                                  19
The SPM can be used to estimate the indirect, partial impacts of health benefits on material

poverty, through their effects on the MOOP deduction. Sommers and Oellerich (2013) estimated

an impact of Medicaid on SPM child poverty of 1.0 percentage point. Yet, as they note (p.829),

these estimates are indirect impacts of Medicaid on SPM poverty through MOOP reductions and

do not capture Medicaid's "presumed primary benefit of improved access to care and health."



Since the SPM does not include a need for health care, it also cannot detect unmet health care or

health insurance needs. If a low-income uninsured person cannot access needed care, the SPM

does not register his unmet need nor classify him as poor as a result.



As Cogan's (1995) dissent from the 1995 NAS report suggests, the SPM will assign different

poverty statuses to families in identical health and financial circumstances who make different

health care or insurance choices. For example, it will classify as poorer (through the MOOP

deduction) people who, all else the same, choose to get more or better health care or insurance.

Korenman and Remler (2016) noted that this feature of the SPM could also distort the impact of

the Affordable Care Act on poverty. Premium payments for even highly subsidized insurance

can make families appear poorer because the SPM deducts premium payments from resources

but does not add a value to resources for the highly subsidized insurance they receive in return.



VI. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact with Medical-Out-of-Pocket

Expenditures (MOOP) in the Threshold




                                                                                                    20
Although the SPM accounts for medical-out-of-pocket expenditures (MOOP) needs by

subtracting actual MOOP expenditures from the resource measure, an alternative approach that

has received some attention adds an expected need for MOOP to the SPM poverty threshold.

This approach is sometimes referred to as "MOOP in the threshold." Examples include Burtless

and Siegel (2004) and Garner and Short (2010). For brevity, we summarize Garner and Short.



Garner and Short (2010) implemented an SPM-like poverty measure (based on NAS 1995

recommendations) that included a MOOP need in the threshold. They refer to the resulting

thresholds as "FCSUM" indicating that a need for medical expenditures ("M") has been added to

the SPM-like threshold that measures the need for food, clothing, shelter and utilities (FCSU).

Ben-Shalom, Moffitt and Scholz (2012; Table 4) used Garner and Short's thresholds for some of

their analyses; their poverty rate, trend, gap and transfer impact estimates were not very sensitive

to the choice of threshold (FCSUM rather than FCSU).



Garner and Short's approach determines the FCSUM expenditures at the 30th to 35th percentile of

the distribution of expenditures among reference families consisting of "two related adults and

children" (p. 9-11). The method adjusts the FCSU portion of this expenditure upward to account

for additional needs, including non-work transportation, personal care, education and reading

materials. Similar to the SPM, an equivalence scale is applied to the FCSU portion of the

reference family's expenditure to produce a set of FCSU thresholds for families of different sizes

and age compositions.




                                                                                                  21
The MOOP portion of FCSUM for other family types is determined by a set of "medical risk

indexes" linked to family size, age of members and information on health insurance coverage.

These indexes produce ratios of MOOP needed, relative to the MOOP need of the reference

family. These are applied to the FCSU thresholds to produce the full set of FCSUM thresholds. 15



For the reference family (two adults, two children) in 2005, the FCSU and FCSUM thresholds

are, respectively $22,769 and $24,784; the ratio of FCSU/FCSM is 91.9% (Garner and Short,

2010, Table 1) and the two thresholds increased similarly between 1996 and 2005 (Chart 1). 16

This ratio is much smaller than the ratio of the SPM threshold to our Health Inclusive Poverty

Measure threshold for the same family: 71.2% in 2014 (see Table 1 below). The difference in

these ratios reflects differences in the medical portion of the two thresholds. The "M" portion of

FCSUM is out-of-pocket expenses on both care and premiums. In contrast, the health need in the

HIPM threshold is the full cost of health insurance, valued at the unsubsidized premium of a plan

on the ACA Marketplace.



If only a MOOP need is added to the threshold, then a value for health insurance should not be

added to the resource measure, and so the direct impact of Medicaid and other health insurance

benefits cannot be estimated. Discussions of the MOOP-in-the-threshold approach (e.g., National

Research Council 2005, p.17-20) have noted that a need for health insurance for the uninsured

could, in principle, be included in the MOOP need. 17 However, in the absence of guaranteed


15
   MOOP appears to include both premium and non-premium MOOP. While Garner and Short (2010) does not state
this explicitly, it is true for the usual SPM MOOP subtraction and standard in BLS reports (e.g. Foster 2016) based
on the Consumer Expenditure Survey data that Garner and Short (2010) used.
16
   The similarity between FSCU and FCSUM threshold likely explains the insensitivity of Ben-Shalom et al.'s
(2012) results to this choice.
17
   See Burtless and Siegel (2004) for an example.

                                                                                                                 22
issue and community rating regulations such as those required by the ACA, the actual cost of

health insurance to the uninsured could not be determined without very detailed information on

the family's health status, and perhaps not even then (Korenman and Remler 2016).




VII. Difficulties in Considering Medicaid's Impact Using a Medical Care Expenditure Risk

(MCER) Index



The NAS Report (Citro and Michael 1995) acknowledged that the recommended poverty

measure could not show unmet health care needs or the value of health insurance benefits in

meeting them. The panel recommended a measure of medical care economic risk (MCER) be

developed to supplement their recommended material poverty measure. An expert panel

sponsored by the US Department of Health, the National Research Council and the Institute of

Medicine issued a report (O'Grady and Wunderlich 2013) with recommendations on developing

an MCER. The report defined an MCER as "for example, the expected number (or fraction) of

families or their individual members who, as a result of out-of-pocket spending for medical care

services and premiums, would be in poverty or some multiple of poverty as defined by the SPM"

(p. 7). A chapter in the report by Meier and Wolfe, as well as comments by workshop

participants, laid out key components of and challenges in implementing an MCER, many of

which are described here.



Meier (2016) extended this work, by taking the first step of modelling individual health risk as a

function of individual health characteristics. Meier emphasized the importance for an MCER of



                                                                                                23
the richness of the health data: "A model developed using risk score cells would require access to

claims data or the use of an extensive health questionnaire to assign individuals to a risk level

based on a risk score." An alternative approach is to develop a model based on self-reported

health status, which is available in the Current Population Survey (CPS).



Meier used the Medical Expenditure Panel Study (MEPS) 2002-2009 to compare these two

approaches. Specifically, she compared risk classification strategies that used:

1. Self-reported health status as the only health condition or status information;

2. DxCG risk score, a measure of expected (ex ante) total medical expenditures developed for

risk adjustment, calculated from the extensive diagnosis and health information in the MEPS.18

MEPS respondents were allocated to five different risk classification groups with the cut-offs for

DxCG scores chosen to match population shares in self-reported health status. Risk scores were

also conditioned on insurance status: Medicare, Medicaid or private (presumably direct purchase

and employer-sponsored combined). Meier (p.289) found that the two strategies produced

"substantial differences in cell-level classification and attributed expenditure risk."



Abramowitz, O'Hara and Morris (2017) used the CPS to implement an MCER. They estimated

non-premium MOOP expenditures for a family using a Poisson model with random intercepts at

the family-level. Their predictors were: the demographics and self-reported health status of all

individual family members, as well as family structure and income. They did not include health

insurance status in their model, because it is endogenously determined. Risk for a cell (a group

defined by certain characteristics) is modelled as the distribution of family random intercepts in

18
  DxCG is a commercially available algorithm and software widely used for risk adjustment (Society of Actuaries
2016), usually applied to claims data.

                                                                                                              24
that cell. They estimated separate models for families with members under 65 and for families

with members over 65. Abramowitz, O'Hara and Morris' measures of risk are estimated by

health insurance type (9 categories for the under-65 and 3 categories for the 65+).



Abramowitz, O'Hara and Morris defined resources available to pay for non-premium MOOP or

for health insurance (premium MOOP) as income after taxes and tax credits, and they used the

official poverty measure definition of material needs. Using the distribution of MOOP

expenditures for each cell, calculated as the sum of predicted expenditures and the distribution of

random intercepts, they estimated the probability that a family will not have the resources to

meet MOOP expenditures, conditional on its place within the distribution.



Their bottom line estimates are (p. 469): "21.3% of families lack the resources to pay for the

median expenditures for their insurance type, 42.4% lack the resources to pay for the 99th

percentile of expenditures for their insurance type" in 2013. They also estimate how distributions

of expenditures vary by insurance status.



Irrespective of its role in incorporating health care and health insurance benefits into poverty

measurement, the MCER is valuable in estimating the likelihood that families will face difficulty

affording health care expenditures and how different health policies affect that likelihood. From

the perspective of a poverty measure, the MCER clearly could add value to the SPM, but also

presents difficulties.




                                                                                                   25
The MCER can produce a statistic analogous to a poverty rate--the population share with unmet

needs--provided a threshold (acceptable) level of risk is specified. For example, if a 10%

probability of not being able to meet medical care expenditures is chosen, the MCER poverty

rate could be defined as the share of families who lack resources to pay for the 90th percentile of

expenditures.



An MCER poverty rate, however, contrasts with the usual ex post notion of poverty, because, on

average, 10% of the families deemed not poor by this approach will in fact will lack sufficient

resources to pay for medical expenditures. On the other hand, by incorporating a need for care ex

ante (i.e., everyone's ex ante risk), the MCER approach improves upon the entirely ex post

perspective of the SPM.



The MCER is based on empirical health care expenditures. Therefore, it cannot show the extent

to which health care needs go unmet or result from paying for excessive care, care above what

society might define as meeting basic needs.



The MCER has the potential to estimate the value of health insurance benefits in enabling

payment for health care after meeting material needs. However, to date and to our knowledge, no

one has estimated an impact of health insurance benefits, such as Medicaid, on an MCER

poverty rate.



As Meier (2016) demonstrated, current data limitations mean that MCER estimates suffer from

one of two shortcomings:



                                                                                                  26
(1) If the CPS is used: low accuracy of medical care expenditure risk due to limited health

information (self-reported health status), but good income data.

(2) If the MEPS is used: Few measures of income (material resources) and needs but more health

status data and therefore more accurate medical care expenditure risk estimates.



As medical technology and government and market health plan features change, the distribution

of medical expenditures and its relationship to estimating covariates will change. Therefore, it

will not be possible to simply estimate risk scores by covariates and use them for significant

periods. Thus, the considerable data and econometric requirements for the MCER risk scores

estimates are a substantial weakness of the approach.



VIII. Estimates of Willingness to Pay (WTP) for Medicaid



A related yet distinct literature seeks to understand how measures of income inequality and

changes in inequality over time would be affected by valuing health insurance benefits as

income. This literature does not present poverty rates or impacts on poverty. Nonetheless, it also

seeks to value health insurance for the measurement of income and therefore provides insights

for poverty measurement.



A series of recent articles estimate the willingness to pay for health insurance (Finkelstein,

Hendren and Shepard, 2017; Finkelstein, Mahoney and Notowidigdo, 2017; Finkelstein,

Hendren and Luttmer, 2016). Finkelstein, Hendren and Luttmer (2016) use information from the

Oregon Health Insurance Experiment to value willingness to pay for Medicaid among low-



                                                                                                   27
income adults This is one of only a handful of studies that use exogenous variation in prices of

insurance to directly study willingness to pay (see Finkelstein, Hendren and Shepard 2017 page 3

for a summary of evidence of this type). Finkelstein, Hendren and Luttmer (2016) find that

willingness to pay for Medicaid is far below its actuarial value, with a ratio of willingness to pay

to market value typically between 0.2 and 0.5.



Does this mean that OPM-like poverty measures should value Medicaid benefits in resources at

only 20% to 50% of actuarial value? We believe that would be a misapplication of this study

result. First, as noted, adding this recipient value to family resources only makes sense if there is

a "need" for health care in the poverty threshold that is consistent with resources. It is far from

obvious what the appropriate need would be, and whatever that is, it is not currently a part of

either the OPM or the SPM threshold.



Second, Finkelstein, Mahoney and Notowidigdo (2017, p. 16) and Finkelstein, Hendren and

Luttmer (2016, p. 6 & 32) review evidence and conclude that the low willingness to pay for

Medicaid among low-income uninsured families reflects the widespread availability of free

care--a different resource used to meet health care needs. This finding has important

implications for how the WTP should and should not be used in poverty measurement.

More specifically, these papers conclude that extensive free care amounts to substantial implicit

(partial) insurance. This implicit partial insurance takes the form of uncompensated care from

hospitals, free clinics, and uncollected medical debt (e.g., Garthwaite et al. 2015). In the Oregon

Health Insurance Experiment, the uninsured (the "control compliers") got nearly as much care as

those insured by Medicaid as a result of the experiment (the "treatment compliers"), although the



                                                                                                      28
controls also spent somewhat more out of pocket. As a result, the implicit insurance payments to

the uninsured control group were about 60% of those to the experimental Medicaid group. 19



It might be appropriate to value Medicaid at the WTP value among the uninsured (estimated as

20 to 50% of actuarial value) if the intention is to estimate Medicaid's net value above and

beyond implicit insurance provide by free care. However, Medicaid (and subsidized insurance to

low-income persons) is explicitly intended to replace this partial implicit insurance. For example,

in recognition of this goal, the ACA is partly funded by reduction of federal reimbursement to

hospitals for uncompensated care to the uninsured (e.g. Anotonise, Garfield, Rudowitz and

Artiga 2017). Put differently, if we want to account for all the resources of the poor, we would

want to add an actuarial value for implicit insurance to the resources of the uninsured, and, for

Medicaid recipients, either the full actuarial value of Medicaid or the sum of the implicit

insurance value of their free care and their WTP for Medicaid above and beyond implicit

insurance.



Indeed, Finkelstein, Hendren and Luttmer (2016, p. 33) also provide utility-based estimates of

the "value to recipients if the uninsured had no implicit insurance." These estimates, although

speculative (because based on extrapolation out-of-sample), may nonetheless be more relevant

for assessing the value of Medicaid benefits for the incomes of the poor. These estimates range

from $2,233 to $3,875 (in 2009 dollars), and are substantially larger than their estimated WTP

for Medicaid among the uninsured who have access to implicit insurance. Thus, their estimates




19
 The ratio of the economic welfare of the two groups was higher than 60% due to the assumption of diminishing
marginal utility of consumption.

                                                                                                                29
of the value if the uninsured had no implicit insurance range from 62% to 107% of actuarial

value--the midpoint of this range is 85%. These estimates come from a sample of poor adults

who gained (or were denied) eligibility for Medicaid through experimental random assignment.

In Section X, we incorporate their estimate of the implicit insurance payments for the uninsured

into one of our alternative estimates of the impact of Medicaid on child poverty.



IX. Health-Inclusive Poverty Measure (HIPM)



Conceptual basis

Sections II-VIII have described the difficulties poverty analysts faced in incorporating a need for

health care in poverty measures and estimating the impact of Medicaid and other health

insurance benefits on poverty. The key underlying barrier was an inability to include a

comprehensive, valid health need in the poverty threshold. Health care is broadly considered part

of an adequate living standard. However, determining a health care need, in dollars, to add to the

poverty threshold was not possible, because health care needs vary so much, depending on

detailed health condition. A practical solution to this problem is to make health insurance the

primary health need.



Needs are always socially, politically and philosophically determined. The political conflict

about government provision of health insurance demonstrates a lack of clear consensus.

Nonetheless, we appeal to the political authority of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to justify

treating health insurance as the basic health need.




                                                                                                  30
Including a health insurance need in the poverty threshold was not possible in the US prior to the

full implementation of the ACA in 2014. Determining the dollar amount needed to purchase

health insurance often required the kind of medical detail that emerges from medical

underwriting. Knowing which people were subject to such underwriting required details about

employment, employment insurance offers and other circumstances. In 2014, however,

guaranteed issue and community rating regulations of the ACA went into effect. These

regulations allow anyone to purchase health insurance and at a price that does not depend on

health status, making it possible to put a dollar value on health insurance needs.



The HIPM approach is best understood through the idea of a Basic Plan:

"[C]onsider a health care system that makes eligibility universal for basic insurance, the "Basic

Plan." The Basic Plan covers all care deemed essential by society; so it is complete in the events,

treatments and procedures covered. However, it does not fully pay for all essential care. First,

people must pay part of the premium out-of-pocket (premium MOOP). But that premium is not

risk-rated: it does not depend on health status. Second, the Basic Plan includes cost-sharing, such

as deductibles and co-pays (nonpremium MOOP), although it caps cost-sharing payments. In

such a system, all essential health needs can be met with premium MOOP equal to the Basic Plan

premium and nonpremium MOOP less than or equal to the Basic Plan nonpremium MOOP cap.

Any premium MOOP payments above the Basic Plan premium and any nonpremium MOOP

payments above the Basic Plan cap are discretionary, as socially defined." (Korenman and

Remler 2016, Section II)




                                                                                                    31
The ACA created essentially these conditions. Exchange plans have premiums that do not

depend on health status and that cap non-premium MOOP expenditures. Almost everyone can

purchase Exchange plans. Undocumented individuals cannot purchase plans on the exchanges,

but because they can purchase off the exchanges from insurers subject to guaranteed issue and

community rating regulations, their health insurance need is defined. People eligible for

Medicare and Medicaid also cannot purchase on the exchanges but have plans that essentially

meet the criteria.



Still, poverty measurement requires the designation of an ACA Exchange plan as the Basic Plan.

The ACA provides a natural choice for such a plan, the second cheapest Silver plan available in a

household's rating area, because the ACA premium subsidies are calculated to ensure that plan is

affordable. Moreover, ACA cost-sharing reduction subsidies are only available for Silver plans.

Thus, we designate the second cheapest Silver plan, with substantial cost-sharing for some, as

the specific insurance need for most families with children. For consistency, this Silver plan is

the Basic Plan for everyone other than Medicare beneficiaries. For Medicare beneficiaries, we

designate the cheapest available Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug Plan as the Basic Plan. 20



If the universally available Basic Plan fully covered all health care that society deems essential,

putting the health insurance plan premium in the threshold would be sufficient. To the extent,

however, that the insured must pay for cost-sharing, such as deductibles, cost-sharing needs must

also be addressed. Incorporating cost-sharing needs has the problems described in earlier

sections for incorporating health care needs: they vary substantially among people and across

20
  For those over age 65 who are not Medicare recipients, we designate the second-cheapest Silver plan for 64 year
olds as the basic plan since those aged 65 and over are eligible to purchase such plans (e.g., Norris, 2019).

                                                                                                                32
time. The magnitude of these problems is, however, smaller than for the full cost of health care.

Moreover, the ACA includes provisions that cap total cost-sharing payments (non-premium

MOOP) and consequently bound the magnitude of those problems. The lower the caps, the

smaller the magnitude of the problem of incorporating cost-sharing needs. Medicaid has little or

no cost-sharing, so these problems are very small or not present for Medicaid recipients.



With this approach we can create a health inclusive poverty measure (HIPM) which has an

explicit need for health care in the threshold (through the explicit need for health insurance) and

that counts health insurance benefits as resources to meet that need.



HIPM implementation summary

While a HIPM with this conceptual basis could be built on different poverty measures, our HIPM

is a modification of the SPM. The SPM has two essential features for this purpose: in-kind

benefits other than health insurance are counted in resources and all the needs included in the

threshold are made explicit (food, clothing, shelter and utilities and bit more for other non-health

needs). Figure 1 (page 26) outlines the components of the OPM, SPM and our HIPM. Except

where noted, our HIPM methods are the same as the SPM.



The basic HIPM modifications to the SPM are:

1. Add to the threshold health insurance needs (unsubsidized premium of the Basic Plan)

2. Add to resources any health insurance benefits received (any subsidies to, direct payments for,

or direct provision of health insurance by government or employers, net of required premium

payments)



                                                                                                  33
3. Cap the SPM's deduction of MOOP expenditures on care (non-premium MOOP) to address

cost-sharing needs 21



A household (SPM unit) is poor if HIPM resources are less than HIPM needs. Since health

insurance resources cannot be used to purchase food or other necessities, the value of health

insurance resources is never allowed to exceed the health insurance need.



Health insurance needs and health insurance units

Poverty status is determined for SPM units. But often health insurance resources and needs must

be calculated for sub-units, because sub-units, not the entire SPM-unit, hold, or are eligible to

hold, health insurance plans together. For example, a grandmother, mother and child may

comprise an SPM-unit, with each separately insured: the grandmother on Medicare, the mother

purchasing insurance on the exchange and the child receiving health insurance from a father

outside the SPM-unit. Within each SPM unit, we assigned people to health insurance units

(HIUs), based on their health insurance coverage and relationships to one another, as described

in the Appendix. After determining health needs and resources for each HIU, as described below,

we aggregated health insurance needs and resources to determine the SPM unit's HIPM poverty

status.



An HIU's health insurance needs are always the unsubsidized premium required for that HIU to

purchase the Basic Plan. The Basic Plan is the second cheapest Silver plan available, for



21
  In this paper, we do not directly address needs for Over-the-Counter (OTC) expenditures. Sensitivity analysis in
Korenman and Remler's (2016) Massachusetts pilot showed that the HIPM poverty rate increased by 0.3 percentage
points when OTC expenses were deducted.

                                                                                                               34
everyone except those with Medicare coverage, for whom the Basic Plan is the cheapest

available Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug plan. Appendix Section II describes the plan

data and the calculation of Basic Plan premiums.



The HIPM poverty threshold is the sum of the SPM threshold (material needs) and health

insurance needs. On average, for those in SPM-units with children, the health insurance need is

$12,083 and the SPM threshold is $27,662, resulting in a HIPM threshold of $39,745. HIPM

thresholds for different family types are presented in the Section X.



Net health insurance resources

HIPM resources are the sum of health insurance resources and SPM resources, but without the

deduction of MOOP. 22 Those who receive health insurance benefits from government (Medicaid,

CHIP and Medicare) and those who receive employer provided health insurance benefits, have

health insurance resources equal to the value of the Basic Plan. For those who are required to pay

out-of-pocket to receive their health insurance benefits, we deduct required out-of-pocket

premium payments to calculate their net health insurance resources. 23



The premise of the HIPM is that all needed health care is covered and made affordable by the

Basic Plan and subsidies available for it. Therefore, if a family buys a more expensive plan than

the Basic Plan, the HIPM should not deem it poorer. Consequently, we limit the premium MOOP

deduction to that which would be required to purchase the Basic Plan--or a plan at least as good.



22
 Taxes and necessary work expenses (including child care) are deducted.
23
 Since net insurance value is credited only for groups with insurance benefits, only those groups have premium
MOOP deducted.

                                                                                                                 35
For many families, that limit is simply the unsubsidized premium for the Basic Plan--its price in

the market. Others, however, can obtain a plan as good as or better than the Basic Plan at a lower

price (premium) and therefore they are assigned a lower premium MOOP deduction limit. For

Medicaid beneficiaries who pay no out-of-pocket premium, we limit their premium deduction to

zero.



For the individually insured who are eligible for a premium subsidy, health insurance resources

equal the premium subsidy. Individually insured people who are not eligible for premium

subsidies have zero health insurance resources. They must meet their health insurance needs

from their income.



Cost-sharing needs

Health insurance is the primary health need. Nonetheless, to obtain needed health care, insured

people must pay for cost-sharing, such as deductibles or co-insurance. Therefore, the need for

cost-sharing must be incorporated. Several approaches to cost-sharing in a HIPM are possible

and all have weaknesses (Korenman and Remler 2013 pp.23-25). Our treatment of cost-sharing

is like the SPM's treatment of MOOP for health care, but we limit the non-premium MOOP

deduction to a capped amount. The HIPM defines health needs, somewhat tautologically, as the

care and conditions available under the Basic Plan. The HIPM should not designate a family as

poorer because it spends more on health care than the Basic Plan's cap on cost-sharing

expenditures. Therefore, we limit the subtraction of nonpremium MOOP to whatever cap on total

cost-sharing expenditures was available with the Basic Plan or the equivalent or better plan that

the family has available (e.g., Medicaid).



                                                                                                  36
The plans available to individuals determine the applicable cost-sharing limit, such as $6350 for

an individual with a silver plan in 2014. Most importantly for the estimates presented below,

most Medicaid beneficiaries have zero or low cost-sharing provisions, and all Medicaid

beneficiaries have the sum of their premium and non-premium MOOP capped at 5% of

household income (Medicaid.gov n.d.). Lower-income families who purchase Basic Plans on the

exchanges have reduced out-of-pocket maxima, according to a schedule (Kaiser Family

Foundation 2013). More generally, the plans available depend on geographic location, health

insurance coverage, health insurance eligibility, employment status, immigration status, and

other factors, as described fully in the Appendix, particularly Table A.1.




                                                                                                37
HIPM compared to SPM

The following equations summarize the calculation of the HIPM:

 HIPM Needs = SPM Needs + HI Needs

 HIPM Resources = SPM Resources (pre MOOP deduction) + Net HI Resources ­ Cost-sharing Needs


Where:

   Net HI Resources =    Basic Plan Premium (BP)               For those with employer or government
                                                               health insurance benefits
                         ­ premium MOOP (up to cap)


   Net HI Resources =    Premium subsidies                     For those with individual insurance who
                                                               are eligible for subsidies



   Net HI Resources =    0                                     For those who are uninsured and for
                                                               those with individual insured who are
                                                               not eligible for subsidies


   Cost-sharing Needs = Nonpremium MOOP (up to cap)



Premium and nonpremium MOOP caps are determined by the available Basic Plan or an

available plan as good or better. Appendix Table A.1 describes the health insurance resources,

including premium MOOP deduction caps, and the nonpremium MOOP deduction caps for each

health insurance type.



All else the same, adding a health insurance need increases the poverty threshold and therefore

increases HIPM poverty relative to SPM poverty. Adding health insurance benefits to resources

can meet, fully or partially, the higher needs threshold. Together, those two adjustments can

never produce a HIPM poverty rate that is less than the SPM rate. However, the HIPM limit on

MOOP deductions, the third factor, can make HIPM poverty less likely than SPM poverty.

                                                                                                  38
Accounting for the impact of Medicaid on poverty with the HIPM

To account for a social program's impact on the poverty rate, a counterfactual poverty rate is

calculated by subtracting the program's benefit amount from household resources (e.g. Fox

2017). The impact of the benefit on the poverty rate is the difference between the counterfactual

and actual poverty rates. This approach does not incorporate behavioral responses to removing

social programs, such as changes in labor supply.



We estimated how much higher the child poverty rate would be if Medicaid were eliminated but

nothing else changed. Our main estimates include the impact of CHIP together with Medicaid.

However, we also present separate estimates for the impacts of CHIP, full-year Medicaid and

part-year Medicaid.



Advantages of the HIPM

1. The HIPM incorporates health care needs through inclusion of an explicit health insurance

need in the poverty threshold.



2. The HIPM need for health insurance also captures the need for ex ante risk reduction.

(Korenman and Remler 2016, p. 28)



3. The HIPM can show the direct impact of Medicaid and other health insurance benefits on

poverty, because health insurance needs are directly incorporated in the threshold and health

insurance benefits are incorporated in resources in a way consistent with the threshold.



                                                                                                 39
4. The HIPM rate is one measure, the share of the population that does not have basic needs

(health and material needs) met, rather than separate measures of material and health care

deprivation.



5. Adding the full cost of health insurance to needs and resources in a poverty measure does not

have the same problems as adding it to distributions of income (see Kaestner and Lubotsky, 2106

for a review). Even if health insurance costs are excessive for any reason (e.g., inefficiencies,

low recipient valuation, an adversely selected risk pool), the HIPM adds the same amount to both

resources and needs. The excessive amounts therefore cancel in poverty status calculations for

anyone receiving health insurance benefits. While the excessive amounts do not cancel in HIPM

status calculations for those not receiving health insurance benefits, HIPM status still accurately

reflects that those individuals do not have resources to meet their health insurance needs, given

how the health insurance system and market determine premiums.




6. The HIPM is a practical approach that can be implemented with CPS data used to calculate the

SPM when augmented with information on premiums and cost-sharing for silver plans,

Medicare-Advantage Prescription Drug plans and Medicaid.

7. Unlike the MCER, the HIPM adjusts automatically for changes in medical technology and

health plan features that alter the relationship between expenditures and health status, insurance

plans and other characteristics.




                                                                                                    40
Disadvantages of the HIPM

1. The HIPM can be implemented only under certain health system institutional conditions:

guaranteed issue and community rating, or their equivalents. 24 Without these provisions, it is not

possible to define an amount of money needed to purchase a basic plan (e.g., those with a serious

pre-existing condition may not be able to purchase a plan that covers care for that condition at

any price).

2. Excessive costs of individually-purchased health insurance (due to inefficiencies, adversely

selected risk pool, or low recipient value) inflate the impact of Medicaid (and other health

insurance benefits), both absolutely and relative to non-health-insurance programs.

3. HIPM validity requires that health insurance is considered a basic need. The political debates

in the US make clear that disagreement continues about this assumption. However, there is less

disagreement that health care is a need. We know of no consistent and valid approach to

including health care needs in an overall poverty measure that can assess the impact of health

insurance benefits on poverty.

4. HIPM cost-sharing needs have potential errors in both directions. Cost-sharing needs are

calculated as actual MOOP expenditures on care, up to the available cap. To the extent that cost-

sharing provisions deter needed care, cost-sharing needs are under-estimated. On the other hand,

the HIPM deducts all spending up to the non-premium MOOP cap, even if that spending is on

care that would be deemed unnecessary or excessive. In such cases, HIPM would overstate




24
  While most Americans were subject to these rules only after 2014, Americans aged 65 and older have effectively
had guaranteed issue and community rating since 1965 due to the Medicare program.

                                                                                                              41
implicit cost-sharing needs. 25 Because the non-premium MOOP cap limits the size of these

potential errors, they are another institutional feature that promotes validity of the HIPM.

5. The HIPM cannot calculate the direct impact of ACA cost-sharing reduction subsidies because

cost-sharing needs are not an explicit need incorporated in the threshold. However, cost-sharing

reduction subsidies will reduce HIPM poverty indirectly, by reducing non-premium MOOP

expenditures. 26 27

X. Results: Impact of Medicaid on Child Health-Inclusive Poverty

In this section, we present poverty rates for children and Medicaid impacts on child poverty,

deep poverty and near poverty, all using the Health Inclusive Poverty Measure HIPM. The HIPM

child poverty rate and corresponding impacts of Medicaid, means-tested benefits and tax credits

are similar to those reported in Remler, Korenman and Hyson (2017).

HIPM Thresholds. The HIPM threshold is the sum of the SPM threshold and the health

insurance need for the family (SPM unit), as described in the HIPM Methods section and

Appendix. Table 1 displays average HIPM thresholds, SPM thresholds and health insurance

needs for families of different sizes and age composition.



25
   While no widely accepted conceptual definition of needed care exists, much less an empirical definition, our
approach considers as "needed" whatever care people would get with the Basic Plan.
26
   These indirect impacts could be estimated by estimating counterfactual nonpremium MOOP expenditures, as in
Sommers and Oellerich (2013).
27
   The treatment of cost-sharing is a disadvantage for those who believe that the health insurance need for lower
income people should be a richer plan than the Silver plan, such as a Medicaid plan with little or no cost-sharing.
However, there are practical problems implementing such a need consistently. A Medicaid plan could easily and
consistently be designated as both need and resource for those who actually receive Medicaid, but not for those who
are otherwise similar but do not have Medicaid. If Medicaid is made their need and they spend money out-of-pocket
on care, then inconsistencies arise from either deducting or not deducting their non-premium MOOP. Deducting
such expenditures from resources basically counts their cost-sharing (and care) needs twice: once in the insurance
plan that does not require cost-sharing and again through deduction. Not deducting those expenditures misses how
people are truly made worse off in their ability to meet care and/or material needs, and misses how they are poorer
than healthy people in otherwise identical circumstances.

                                                                                                                42
The average HIPM threshold for all persons in families with children is $39,745, of which, the

average material need (SPM threshold) is $27,662 and the average health insurance need is

$12,083. Thus, on average the insurance need is 30 percent of the HIPM threshold. For a family

with one adult and two children, the average HIPM threshold is $27,727, of which $6,949 is the

health insurance need. For this family type, the health insurance need is 25 percent of the HIPM

threshold. Differences in threshold values across family types show the much higher cost of

health insurance for adults than for children.

HIPM resources. The HIPM methods section and Appendix explain that HIPM resources begin

with SPM resources before the MOOP subtraction and then add a value for any health insurance

benefits received, net of capped, required premium payments. The uninsured have no health

insurance resources. Like the SPM, the HIPM treats the need for cost sharing--nonpremium

MOOP--as a subtraction from resources, though it caps that subtraction.

HIPM Child Poverty Rates. Table 2 shows the proportion of children below the HIPM

poverty, deep poverty and near poverty thresholds. The HIPM threshold for deep poverty for a

family is the family's health insurance need plus one-half the SPM threshold. The threshold for

near-poverty is the health insurance need plus one-and-one-half times the SPM threshold.

The HIPM child poverty rate in 2014 was 18.4%. The corresponding SPM child poverty rate for

this sample was 16.0%; before the SPM MOOP deduction, it was 13.0%. (The SPM rates are not

shown in Table 2.) The higher HIPM rate reflects the ability of the HIPM to capture the direct

impact on child poverty of the unmet need for health insurance. The HIPM deep poverty rate was

5.8%, and the proportion of children below the HIPM near poverty threshold was 38.5% (Table

2, row 1).



                                                                                                 43
Medicaid Impacts. To account for the impact of Medicaid on poverty, we computed

counterfactual HIPM poverty rates by subtracting a value for Medicaid from the resources of

families with Medicaid recipients. 28 The impact of Medicaid on poverty is the difference

between the counterfactual and actual poverty rate.

When Medicaid is removed from resources, all else the same, the HIPM child poverty rate rises

from 18.4% (row 1) to 23.7% (row 2) for an impact of 5.3 percentage points (row 5). For

comparison, we also computed estimates for the impact of all non-health cash and in-kind

means-tested benefits (TANF, SNAP, WIC, SSI, school meal programs, and housing and energy

subsidies) and for federal refundable tax credits (EITC and CTC). The 5.3 percentage point

reduction of child poverty from Medicaid is greater than the combined impact of all means-tested

cash and in-kind benefits (4.4 points), though somewhat smaller than the impact of federal tax

credits targeted to families with children (6.5 points).

Medicaid has a smaller impact on the proportion of children below the HIPM deep or near

poverty thresholds: 3.2 and 3.1 percentage points, respectively (Table 2, row 5). For deep

poverty, the impact of Medicaid is smaller than the impact of other means-tested benefits but

larger than the impact of tax credits. In contrast, for the proportion below the near-poverty

threshold, Medicaid has a larger impact than means-tested benefits and approximately the same

impact as tax credits. This pattern results from the large transfers through tax credits to families

with earnings, who are more likely to have incomes above half the poverty line, and the targeting

of means-tested benefits to the poorest families (Moffitt 2015). Medicaid's impact appears to be




28
     For this calculation, we did not subtract the Medicaid benefits of dual Medicaid-Medicare eligibles.

                                                                                                            44
somewhat more evenly spread across the lower-end of income distribution (among families with

children).

As we noted in the discussion of the HIPM approach, these Medicaid impact estimates do not

capture the impact of Medicaid's generous cost-sharing. In principle, the HIPM could also be

used to estimate that impact by estimating counterfactual non-premium MOOP (see Sommers

and Oellerich, 2013).

The estimate of the impact of Medicaid on HIPM poverty in Table 2 included the impact of full-

year Medicaid, pro-rated part-year Medicaid and CHIP. Table 3 shows the disaggregation of this

impact. Nearly 90% (4.7 out of 5.3 percentage points) of the Medicaid impact on HIPM child

poverty is attributable to full-year Medicaid (Table 3, rows 8, 9 and 10).

Results presented so far assume that the health insurance need is the unsubsidized premium of

the second-low-cost Silver plan in the ACA rating area where the family resides. As explained in

the Methods section, a family's health insurance resources are always less than or equal to this

need. For example, if the family is covered by a Medicaid plan with no required premium

payments, the health insurance need is fully met and the value of health insurance resources is

also the second low-cost Silver plan premium.

How sensitive are our results to the Basic Plan premium used to value health insurance in needs

and resources? Table 4 shows the sensitivity of results to varying the value of the health

insurance. Specifically, we set the health insurance need to either 100%, 75% or 125% of the

unsubsidized premium of the second low-cost Silver plan and also adjusted all health insurance




                                                                                                   45
resources consistently. 29 Column 1 of Table 4 reproduces the HIPM child poverty rate (18.4%)

and Medicaid impact (5.3 percentage points) from Table 2, which used 100% of the premium of

the second low-cost Silver plan. Comparing results across columns 1, 2, and 3 reveals that HIPM

rates and Medicaid impacts are modestly affected by these variations in the insurance value. 30

The Medicaid impact on child poverty falls by about one percentage point when the health

insurance need is 75% of the silver plan, and rises by about 1 percentage point when the health

insurance need is 125% of the silver plan. The modest sensitivity of results stems from the use of

the same value of insurance (e.g., 125% Silver plan premium) for the health insurance need in

the threshold and for the (maximum) value of health insurance resources. Medicaid fully meets

the health insurance needs of Medicaid recipients, whatever the specific dollar value assigned to

that need.

So far, we have assumed that no health insurance resources are available either to the uninsured

or to Medicaid recipients in the counterfactual situation in which Medicaid is subtracted from

resources to estimate Medicaid impacts. Table 5 shows the sensitivity of results to two different

assumptions about the availability of health insurance resources to the uninsured or to Medicaid

beneficiaries in the "Medicaid counterfactual."

The first alternative credits the uninsured with any ACA premium subsidies they would be

eligible to receive, if they were to purchase insurance. This approach is motivated by the ACA

mandate to purchase insurance, just as laws mandate tax payments, and the Census practice of

imputing income taxes paid and tax credits received on the basis of income (Short, Donahue and


29
   The choice of a new health insurance need requires a decision about whether the benchmark plan used to
determine premium subsidies also changes. For these calculations, we have changed the benchmark plan to be the
new health insurance need and adjusted premium subsidies accordingly.
30
   The sensitivity analyses discussed here and shown in Table 4 differ from those in the previous version of this
report due to the correction of a coding error.

                                                                                                                    46
Lynch 2012). In this first alternative we continue to assume that Medicaid beneficiaries have no

health insurance resources in the counterfactual situation. The resulting poverty rates and

Medicaid impacts, shown in column 2 of Table 5, are very similar to those presented in Table 2,

and summarized in column 1 of Table 5. In particular, crediting the uninsured with ACA

subsidies for which they would be eligible lowers the HIPM child poverty rate by one-half

percentage point, from 18.4% to 17.9%, and leaves the Medicaid impact unchanged at 5.3

percentage points.

Our second sensitivity analysis assumes that the uninsured have access to free care and that

current Medicaid beneficiaries would also have access to free care if their Medicaid benefits

were removed (the counterfactual for "Medicaid losers"). The implicit insurance value of free

care is set to 60% of the value of the unsubsidized premium of the second-cheapest Silver plan.

The 60% figure is our calculation based on results reported in Finkelstein, Hendren and Luttmer

(2016, Table 1, columns II and III) from the Oregon Health Insurance experiment; it is the ratio

of the actuarial value of free care received by the randomly-assigned control group to the

actuarial value of Medicaid-funded care received by randomly-assigned Medicaid treatment

group (see discussion in section VIII for additional details). 31

The results are sensitive to the assumption that the uninsured and "Medicaid losers" would

receive substantial free care. The HIPM poverty rate is 16.6% rather than 18.4%, and the impact

of Medicaid falls from 5.3 percentage points to 2.2. This sensitivity is not surprising given the

large value of implicit insurance through free care that is assumed to replace Medicaid in the

counterfactual situation in which all Medicaid recipients lose their benefits. Of course, if all


31
  Specifically, it is the ratio of (mean medical spending minus mean out-of-pocket spending) of "control group
compliers" to "treatment group compliers" or (2721 ­ 569)/3600 = 0.60.

                                                                                                                 47
Medicaid were eliminated, sustaining that level of free care would require significant additional

funding.




                                                                                                48
    XI. Figure 1: Poverty Measure Concepts: Official, Supplemental and Health Inclusive
                             Official
                             Poverty Measure              Supplemental Poverty Measure                                          Health Inclusive Poverty Measure

  Measurement Units          Families or unrelated        Families, including any coresident unrelated children who are         Same as SPMi
                             individuals                  cared for by the family and any cohabiters and their relatives, or
                                                          unrelated, noncohabiting individuals
                             Three times cost of          The mean of expenditures on food, clothing, shelter, and utilities
  Non-Health Needs           minimum food diet in         (FCSU) over all two-child consumer units in the 30th to 36th          Same as SPM measure of non-health needs
                             1963ii                       percentile expenditure range multiplied by 1.2

   Adjustments to            Vary by family size,         Geographic adjustments for differences in housing costs by tenure
   Non-health Needs          composition, and age of      and a three-parameter equivalence scale for family size and           Same as SPM
                             householder                  composition
   Updating Non-             Consumer Price Index:        5-year moving average of expenditures on FCSU
   health Needs              all items                                                                                          Same as SPM
                                                          Explicit: None
  Health Insurance          Small amount implicit in      Implicit: All out-of-pocket expenditures on insurance (premium        Explicit: Unsubsidized Premium of Basic Health
  Needs                     the 3X multiplier             MOOP) [because deducted from resources as a nondiscretionary          Insurance Plan
                                                          expense]
                                                          Explicit: None                                                        Explicit: None
  Cost-sharing and           Small amount implicit in     Implicit: All out-of-pocket expenditures on care (non-premium         Implicit: Capped out-of-pocket expenditures on
  Uncovered Health           the 3X multiplier            MOOP) [because deducted from resources as a nondiscretionary          care (non-premium MOOP up to the cap
  Care Needs                                              expense]                                                              available with Basic Plan) [because deducted
                                                                                                                                from resources]
                                                          Sum of cash income, plus noncash benefits that families can use
  Non-Health                Gross before-tax cash         to meet their FCSU needs minus taxes (or plus tax credits), minus      SPM Resource Measure but without the MOOP
  Resources                 income                        work expenses and child support paid to another household              subtraction
                                                          minus out-of-pocket medical care and insurance and Over-the-
                                                          counter expenses (MOOP)
                                                                                                                                 For those who get private or public health
  Health Insurance           None                         None                                                                   insurance benefits: Unsubsidized premium of
  Resources                                                                                                                      Basic Plan minus actual premium MOOP
                                                                                                                                 (limited to premium MOOP necessary to obtain
                                                                                                                                 Basic Plan).
                                                                                                                                 For those eligible for premium subsidies:
                                                                                                                                 subsidy value.
Source: Korenman and Remler (2016, Table 1). The OPM and SPM descriptions are partly based on Short (2013, page 3).
i
  However, health insurance needs & resources are determined for Health Insurance Units, subunits of the SPM unit, then aggregated to SPM unit
ii
   A small amount of out of pocket expenditures for health insurance and care is captured by the OPM needs threshold                                                26
XII. Tables


Table 1: Average SPM & HIPM Thresholds1 and Health Insurance Need, by Number of Adults and Children Present, 2014
Families (SPM Units) With at Least One Child Under age 18
                                                     Health
                                     SPM2          Insurance          HIPM3         Sample
                                   Threshold         Need           Threshold         Size
                                      (1)             (2)         (3) = (1) + (2)     (4)
 All SPM units with children        $27,662         $12,083          $39,745        106,946

 1 adult, 1 child SPM               $17,540         $5,462           $23,002         3,973
 1 adult, 2 children SPM            $20,779         $6,949           $27,727         4,046
 1 adult, 3+ children SPM           $25,688         $8,660           $34,348         3,281

 2 adults, 1 child SPM              $22,533          $8,915          $31,448        17,715
 2 adults, 2 children SPM           $25,770         $10,415          $36,185        27,292
 2 adults, 3+ children SPM          $29,517         $11,927          $41,444        21,149

 3+ adults, 1+ child SPM            $33,696         $17,522          $51,217        29,490
Notes:
1. The average thresholds are the threshold of the average person's SPM-unit (i.e., the average is taken over all persons in SPM-unit
with children present). Means are weighted by ASEC (March Supplement) sample weights.
2. SPM: Supplemental Poverty Measure
3. HIPM: Health Inclusive Poverty Measure



                                                                                                                                        50
Table 2: HIPM Poverty Rates and Impacts of Medicaid and Selected Other Transfers on Rates of HIPM Poverty, Deep Poverty &
Near Poverty for Children1, 2014

                                                                                                                               HIPM
 Row                                                                                        HIPM             HIPM           Poor or Near
 Number       Poverty Rates (percent)                                                        Poor          Deep Poor2          Poor3
 1            HIPM rate                                                                     18.4%            5.8%             38.5%
 2            HIPM rate, if subtract Medicaid4 only from resources                          23.7%            8.9%             41.6%
 3            HIPM rate, if subtract means-tested benefits5 only from resources             22.9%            9.8%             40.8%
 4            HIPM rate, if subtract tax credits6 only from resources                       24.9%            8.6%             41.7%
              Program Impacts (percentage points)4
 5=2-1        Medicaid5                                                                      5.3                3.2             3.1
 6=3-1        Means-tested benefits6                                                         4.4                4.0             2.3
 7=4-1        Tax credits7                                                                   6.5                2.8             3.3
Notes:
1. Children are under age 18.
2. HIPM Deep Poverty Threshold = Health Insurance need + 50% of SPM threshold
3. HIPM Near Poverty Threshold = Health Insurance need + 150% of SPM threshold
4. Impacts are differences in percentage points. Due to rounding, the impacts presented in rows 5 to 7 sometimes differ by 0.1
        percentage point from the difference between the corresponding rates presented in rows 1 through 4.
5. Medicaid includes full-year, part year (pro-rated), and CHIP. See Table 3 for the contribution of each to the overall Medicaid effect.
6. Means-tested benefits include: TANF, SNAP, WIC, SSI, school meal programs, and housing and energy subsidies.
7. Tax credits include: the federal EITC and CTC.




                                                                                                                                      51
Table 3: HIPM Poverty Rates and Impacts of Medicaid and Selected Transfers for Children, 2014
 Row                                                                                             HIPM
 number       Poverty Rates (percent)                                                           Poverty
 1            HIPM rate                                                                         18.4%
 2            HIPM: subtract Medicaid (FY, PY) & CHIP                                           23.7%
 3              HIPM: subtract FY Medicaid only                                                 23.1%
 4              HIPM: subtract PY Medicaid only                                                 18.7%
 5              HIPM: subtract CHIP only                                                        18.9%
 6            HIPM: subtract means tested benefits only                                         22.9%
 7            HIPM: subtract tax credits only                                                   24.9%

              Program Impact (percentage points)
  8=2­1       Medicaid FY & PY, CHIP                                                              5.3
  9=3­1        FY Medicaid                                                                        4.7
 10 = 4 ­ 1    PY Medicaid                                                                        0.2
 11 = 5 ­ 1    CHIP                                                                               0.4
 12 = 6 ­ 1   Means-tested benefits                                                               4.4
 13 = 7 ­ 1   Tax credits                                                                         6.5

              Number of observations (children)                                                 50398


See notes to Table 2 for definitions.




                                                                                                          52
Table 4: HIPM Poverty Rates and Medicaid Impacts, Children, 2014: Sensitivity to Value of Basic Plan Premium1
                                                                                HIPM Poverty             HIPM Poverty
                                                        HIPM Poverty          Insurance Value =        Insurance Value =
                                                      Insurance Value =       75% of Silver Plan         125% of Silver
                                                     Silver Plan Premium          Premium                  Premium
    Poverty Rates (percent)                                   (1)                    (2)                      (3)
    HIPM rate                                               18.4%                   17.5%                    19.4%
    HIPM: subtract Medicaid (FY, PY & CHIP)                 23.7%                   21.5%                    25.9%

    Program Impacts (percentage points)
    Medicaid (FY, PY, CHIP)                                  5.3                      4.2                     6.5
    Number of observations (children)                       50938                    50398                   50398

1
    The figures in columns (2) and (3) differ from those in the previous version of this report due to the correction of a coding error.




                                                                                                                                           53
Table 5: HIPM Poverty Rates and Medicaid Impacts Under Alternative Assumptions About Health Insurance Resources Available to
the Uninsured, and to Medicaid Recipients in the Counterfactual State for Children, 2014
                                                                                                       HIPM Poverty:
                                                                            HIPM Poverty:               Uninsured and
                                                                          Uninsured Get ACA         Medicaid Counterfactual
                                                       HIPM Poverty       Premium Subsidies             Get Free Care
 Poverty Rates (percent)                                   (1)                    (2)                         (3)
 HIPM rate                                                18.4%                 17.9%                       16.6%
 HIPM: subtract Medicaid (FY, PY & CHIP)                  23.7%                 23.1%                       18.8%

 Program Impact (percentage points)
 Medicaid (FY, PY, CHIP)                                     5.3                  5.3                         2.2%

 Assumptions about health insurance resources
                                                                            ACA Premium
 Uninsured                                                  None              Subsidies                     Free Care
 Medicaid Counterfactual                                    None                None                        Free Care

 Number of observations (children)                         50938                 50398                       50398


1. Adds a value to resources for the ACA premium subsidies that the uninsured would receive if they were to buy insurance.
2. Adds a value of free care to the resources of the uninsured and to Medicaid recipients in the counterfactual to represent a
replacement of Medicaid with free care. The value of free care is set to 60% of the unsubsidized premium of the second-low-cost
Silver plan in the family's ACA rating area. See text for discussion.




                                                                                                                                  54
XIII. References
Abramowitz, Joelle, Brett O'Hara and Darcy Steeg Morris. 2017. Risking Lie and Limb:
Estimating a Measure of Medical Care Economic Risk, and Considering Its Implications. Health
Economics 26: 469-485.

Antonisse, Larisa. Rachel Garfield, Robin Rudowitz, and Samantha Artiga. 2017. The Effects of
Medicaid Expansion under the ACA: Updated Findings from a Literature Review. Issue Brief.
Kaiser Family Foundation. September 25. https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/the-effects-
of-medicaid-expansion-under-the-aca-updated-findings-from-a-literature-review-september-
2017/
Ben-Shalom, Yonatan, Robert Moffitt, and John Karl Scholz. 2012. An Assessment of the
Effectiveness of Antipoverty Programs in the United States. In Philip N. Jefferson, ed. The
Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Poverty. New York: Oxford University Press.

Burkhauser, R.V., J. Larrimore and K.I. Simon. 2012. "A "Second Opinion" on the Economic
Health of the American Middle Class" National Tax Journal, 65: 7-32.

Burkhauser, R.V., J. Larrimore and K. Simon. 2013. Measuring the impact of valuing health
insurance on levels and trends in inequality and how the Affordable Care Act of 2010 could
affect them. Contemporary Economic Policy 31(4): 779-794.

Burtless, Gary and Sarah Siegel. 2004. Medical Spending, Health Insurance, and Measurement
of American Poverty. In Race, Poverty, and Domestic Policy, edited by C. Michael Henry. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 117-154.
Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael, eds. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach.
National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences. Washington DC: National
Academy Press.

Cogan, John F. 1995 Dissent. Appendix A, in Citro, C. and R. T. Michael, eds. 1995. Measuring
Poverty: A New Approach. National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences.
National Academy Press.

Congressional Budget Office. 2011. Trends in the Distribution of Household Income Between
1979 and 2007 CBO Publication 4031. October 25. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/42729


Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2012. The Distribution of Household Income and Federal
Taxes, 2008 and 2009. http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/43373-06-11-
HouseholdIncomeandFedTaxes.pdf




                                                                                              55
Finkelstein, Amy, Neale Mahoney, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2017. What Does (Formal)
Health Insurance Do, and For Whom? NBER Working Paper 23718. August.
Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Mark Shepard. 2017. Subsidizing health insurance for
low-income adults: Evidence from Massachusetts. NBER Working Paper No. 23668. August.
Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2016. The Value of Medicaid:
Interpreting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. November. Revision of
NBER Working 21308.
Foster, Ann C. 2016. "Household healthcare spending in 2014," Beyond the Numbers: Prices &
Spending, 5(13) (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, August. https://www.bls.gov/opub/btn/volume-
5/household-healthcare-spending-in-2014.htm

Fox, Liana. 2017. The Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2016. Current Population Report P60-
261. US Census Bureau, September.


Garner, Thesia I. and Kathleen S. Short. 2010. Identifying the poor: Poverty Meaurement for the
U.S from 1966 to 2005. Review of Income and Wealth 56(2): 237-258.
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2015. Hospitals as Insurers of Last
Resort. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 21290.

Hendren, Nathaniel. 2017. Measuring Ex-Ante Welfare in Insurance Markets. August.
Department of Economics. Harvard University.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. A Roadmap to Reducing
Child Poverty. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/25246.
Accessed February 28, 2019.

Hirth, Richard A., Sebastian Calonico, Teresa B. Gibson, Helen Levy, Jeffrey Smith and Anup
Das. 2016. "Long Term Health Spending Persistence among the Privately Insured in the US"
Fiscal Studies 37(304): 749-783.

Hoynes, Hilary W., Marianne E. Page & Ann Huff Stevens. 2006. Poverty in America: Trends
and Explanations. Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1): 47-68.
Kaestner, Robert and Darren Lubotsky. 2016. Health Insurance and Income Ineqality Journal of
Economic Perspectives. 30 (2): 53-78.

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2013. Summary of the Affordable Care Act.
https://www.kff.org/health-reform/fact-sheet/summary-of-the-affordable-care-act/ Accessed
October 1, 2017.




                                                                                               56
King, Miriam, Steven Ruggles, J. Trent Alexander, Sarah Flood, Katie Genadek, Matthew B.
Schroeder, Brandon Trampe, and Rebecca Vick. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series,
Current Population Survey: Version 3.0. [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota.

Korenman, Sanders, Dahlia K. Remler and Rosemary T. Hyson. 2019. Who are the elderly poor
and how much are they helped by social and health policies? Paper presented to the 2019
Meetings of the Population Association of America. Austin, TX. April.
Korenman, Sanders and Dahlia K. Remler. 2013. Rethinking elderly poverty: time for a health
inclusive poverty measure? NBER Working Paper No. 18900. March.
Korenman, Sanders D. & Dahlia K. Remler 2016. Including health insurance in poverty
measurement: the impact of Massachusetts health reform on poverty. Journal of Health
Economics 50: 27­35.
MACPAC (Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission). 2016. MACStats: Medicaid
and CHIP Data Book. December. https://www.macpac.gov/macstats/
Medicaid.gov. n.d. Cost Sharing Our of Pocket Costs. https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/cost-
sharing/out-of-pocket-costs/index.html October 1, 2017.

Meier S. and B. Wolfe. 2012. Conceptual Framework for Measuring Medical Care Economic
Risk. In Medical Care Economic Risk: Measuring Financial Vulnerability from Spending on
Medical Care. Panel on Measuring Medical Care Risk in Conjunction with the New
Supplemental Income Poverty Measure, M.J.

Meier, Sarah K. 2016. Examining risk classification strategies for the development of a measure
of medical care economic risk in the United States. Journal of Economic and Social
Measurement 41: 289-305.

Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2012. Winning the War: Poverty from the Great Society
to the Great Recession. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall: 133-200.
Meyer, Bruce and James X. Sullivan. 2013. Winning the War: Poverty from the Great Society to
the Great Recession NBER Working Paper 18718, on-line appendix: www.nber.org/data-
appendix/w18718/.
Mitchell, Emily. 2016. Concentration of Health Expenditures in the US Civilian,
Noninstitutionalized population, 2014. AHRQ Statistical Brief 497.
https://meps.ahrq.gov/data_files/publications/st497/stat497.pdf

Moffitt, Robert A. (2016). "Introduction" Economics of means tested transfer programs in the
United States, Volume 1 edited by Robert A. Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



                                                                                               57
Moffitt Robert A. 2015. The deserving poor, the family, and the U.S. welfare system.
Demography 52(3):729­49.


Moon, Marilyn. 1993. Incorporating Health Issues in the Measurement of Poverty. Urban
Institute.

National Research Council. 2005. Experimental Poverty Measures: Summary of a Workshop.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/11166

Norris, Louise. 2019. Can recent immigrants to the United States get health coverage if they are
over 65? https://www.medicareresources.org/faqs/can-recent-immigrants-to-the-united-states-
get-health-coverage-if-theyre-over-65/. January 23.

Nyman, John A. 2003. The Theory of Demand for Health Insurance. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.

Nyman, John. 2004. "Is Moral Hazard Inefficient?" Health Affairs 23(5): 194-199.

O'Grady and G.S. Wunderlich, Eds. 2012. Committee on National Statistics, Division of
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, and Board on Health Care Services, Institute of
Medicine. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

Remler, Dahlia K., Sanders D. Korenman and Rosemary T. Hyson. 2017. Estimating the Effects
of Health Insurance and Other Social Programs On Poverty Under the Affordable Care Act.
Health Affairs 36(10): 1828-1837 October 2.

Scholz, John Karl, Robert Moffitt & Benjamin Cowan. 2009. Trends in income support. In Maria
Cancian and Sheldon Danziger, eds. Changing Poverty, Changing Policies New York: Russell
Sage Foundation, pp. 203-241.

Short, Kathleen S. 2011. The Supplemental Poverty Measure: Examining the Incidence and
Depth of Poverty in the U.S. Taking Account of Taxes and Transfers. US Census Bureau
SEHSD working paper # 2011-20 June 3.

Short, Kathleen S. 2013. The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2012. Current
Population Reports P60-247, U.S. Census Bureau. November.

Short, Kathleen, Dennis Donahue & George Lynch. 2012. EITC Estimates in the CPS ASEC
Simulations of After-Tax Income Hispanic Population. SEHSD Working Paper # 2012-19.
August.
Smeeding, Timothy M. 1977. The Antipoverty Effectiveness of In-Kind Transfers. Journal of
Human Resources 12(3): 360-378


                                                                                                58
Smeeding, Timothy M. 1982. Alternative Methods for Valuing Selected In-Kind Transfer
Benefits and Measuring Their Effects on Poverty. Technical Paper No. 50. Bureau of the Census.
Washington DC: Bureau of the Census.
Society of Actuaries. 2016. "Accuracy of Claims Based Risk Scoring Models."
https://www.soa.org/.../research-2016-accuracy-claims-based-risk-scoring-models.pdf

Sommers, Benjamin D. and Donald Oellerich. 2013. The Poverty-Reducing Effect of Medicaid.
Journal of Health Economics 32: 816-832.

Sommers, Benjamin D., Atul A. Gawande, and Katherine Baicker. 2017. Health Insurance
Coverage and Health--What the Recent Evidence Tells Us. New England Journal of Medicine
377: 586-593.

United Nations. 1948. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights. www.un.org/en/universal-
declaration-human-rights.

US Census. 1988a. Estimates of Poverty Including the Value of Noncash Benefits: 1987.
Technical Paper 58. Washington DC: USGPO.
US Census. 1988b. Measuring the Effects of Benefits and Taxes on Income and Poverty, 1986. P-
60-164- RD-1. Washington, DC: USGPO.
US Census. 1993. Current Population Reports, Series P60-186RD, Measuring the Effect of
Benefits and Taxes on Income and Poverty: 1992, Washington, DC: USGPO.
Winship, Scott (2016). Poverty After Welfare Reform. Manhattan Institute Report. August.




                                                                                            59
