                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 HURRICANE KATRINA FLOODS NEW JERSEY:
     THE ROLE OF INFORMATION IN THE MARKET RESPONSE TO FLOOD RISK.

                                      Nicholas Z. Muller
                                     Caroline A. Hopkins

                                      Working Paper 25984
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25984


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




The authors wish to thank, Laura Bakkensen for detailed and constructive comments, Katherine
Y Zipp, Allan Beltran-Hernandez, and the other conference participants at the World Congress of
Environmental and Resource Economists, The New Jersey Department of Treasury, and Bill
Lesser at FEMA. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Nicholas Z. Muller and Caroline A. Hopkins. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hurricane Katrina Floods New Jersey: The Role of Information in the Market Response to
Flood Risk.
Nicholas Z. Muller and Caroline A. Hopkins
NBER Working Paper No. 25984
June 2019
JEL No. H41,Q51,Q54,R31

                                          ABSTRACT

This study uses hedonic property models to explore how coastal real estate markets subject to
heterogeneous information treatments respond to flood risk. We identify reactions to flood risk,
distinctly from price effects due to flood damage, by examining non-local flooding events.
Utilizing a difference-in-difference methodology, we test whether the coastal real estate market in
New Jersey responds to several well-publicized hurricanes and tropical storms that did not strike
the Atlantic seaboard. We find that homes in high flood risk zones situated in towns that
participate in public flood awareness activities incur a 7 to 16 percent decrease in price after the
non-local shock.


Nicholas Z. Muller
Department of Engineering, and Public Policy
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
4215 Tepper Quad
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
nicholas.muller74@gmail.com

Caroline A. Hopkins
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
chopkins@andrew.cmu.edu
                                 I. Introduction

   This paper uses hedonic models to examine the influence of flood risks on
coastal real estate markets. While other authors have written in this context
(Hallstrom and Smith, 2005; Bin, Kruse, and Landry, 2008; Price and Chen,
2011; Bin and Landry, 2013; Bernstein, Gustafson, Lewis, 2018), the present
study offers three key innovations. First, we credibly identify the market response
to flood risk as distinct from manifest damage due to realized flooding. Second,
we demonstrate the importance of information about flood risk in triggering
market responses. Third, while a nascent literature focuses on market response to
long-run sea level rise (Bernstein, Gustafson, and Lewis, 2018) we show that
current flood risk, over and above risk discounts associated with long-run
outcomes, affects real estate prices.
   Our identification strategy relies on the following consideration: observed
housing market responses to a flooding event (or other natural disasters) occurring
in said market conflate the effect of risk perception among buyers and sellers
together with actual property damage. To separate these two effects, this paper
examines whether prices for properties at risk of coastal flooding events adjust
when environmental hazards manifest in geographically distant markets. This
design decouples risk discounts from property damage; price effects must reflect
risk perception because there is no property damage. One motivation for this
strategy is evidence that people's current visceral experiences can inform their
beliefs about the likelihood of future states. For example, Risen and Critcher
(2011) show that experiencing warm indoor temperatures enhanced people's
beliefs in global warming and that thirst influenced forecasts of drought. Our
design hypothesizes that exposure, through extensive media coverage, to a non-
local flooding shock acts as a visceral state influencing homeowners' beliefs
about their own future flood risk.




                                                                                    2
    Why is it useful to decouple market responses due to risk perception from
damages? Decisions about how governments should manage climate change, air
pollution, and a multitude of other environmental market failures depend critically
on valuations of risk. Many prior studies that quantify environmental risk rely on
one of two approaches: damage function methods and revealed preference
techniques. The damage function approach employs simulation models 1 to
facilitate inferences regarding the probabilities of harmful events. Then, monetary
values for associated outcomes (health effects, property damages, crop losses) are
applied to predicted event frequencies (USEPA, 1999; 2010; Nordhaus, 2006;
Mendelsohn, Emmanuel, Chonabayashi, 2011). Together, these steps, which
comprise the damage function approach, yield risk-weighted damage estimates.
    Revealed preference techniques, specifically the hedonic pricing method, offer
an alternative approach to risk valuation. For more than forty years, economists
have used hedonic models to elicit values for non-market services and public
goods 2. This tack extracts evidence embedded in market transactions regarding
the value for non-market (or near-market) environmental services. The values
produced by hedonics serve as an important point of comparison to risk
measurements generated by the damage function method (Smith and Huang,
1995; Palmquist and Smith, 2002).
    The approach to risk valuation developed and applied herein provides just
such a counterpoint to the more common damage function approach found in the
climate economics literature. Further, methodologically, demonstrating that
revealed preference techniques are able to detect and measure market responses to

1
  In the context of climate change such models might include general circulation models of the
earth's climate or storm forecast models for hurricanes. For local air pollution such models might
encompass air quality models and epidemiological or toxicological dose-response models.
2
  One common, and especially relevant, application of hedonics in the context of risk assessment
is the valuation of air quality. Prior papers use hedonics to ascertain the discount associated with
proximate pollution levels (Bajari et al., 2012; for a review of this literature see: Kuminoff, Smith,
Timmins, 2013).




                                                                                                     3
current risk in this context will open-up a series of future studies in other
geographic settings.
   This paper's second contribution centers on the role of risk-relevant
information in market responses to natural disasters. Our examination of the role
of information leverages geographic variation in communities' enrollment in
public flood awareness programs. In a triple difference framework, we assess
whether non-local flooding events impact market outcomes in treated towns
(those enrolled in flood awareness programs) relative to those areas not enrolled.
Aside from empirically testing for heterogeneous reactions to distant floods, we
argue that this design has potentially fundamental implications. Prior literature
contends that asset bubbles arise, in part, from information frictions
(Brunnermeier and Oehmke, 2018). The flood awareness program we study
infuses risk-relevant information into the market. Corrections operating through
purely informational channels may be welfare improving if they diminish either
the likelihood or the severity of future bubbles. This is especially important for
asset bubbles in large markets (such as residential real estate) that can have
adverse and far-reaching consequences.
   Our third contribution stems from this study's focus on current risk valuation.
Specifically, recent contributions to the empirical finance literature report that
coastal real estate markets embody discounts from long run risks associated with
expected, eventual sea level rise (Bernstein, Gustafson, and Lewis, 2018). In
contrast, the present analysis tests whether coastal markets capitalize current risks.
This is an important distinction. Episodic flooding from climate change is
currently occurring in major metropolitan areas in the United States and
elsewhere in the world (New York Times, 2019). Efficient policy interventions to
manage current risk depends on reliable estimates of the value of such risks, as
distinct from risks associated with eventual sea level rise. Complementarily,
coastal markets' capacity to capitalize risks, and in turn "guide" investment in




                                                                                     4
physical capital absent public policy, hinges on adequate information. The paper
contributes to both dimensions of this issue.
    The empirical setting in which we explore flooding risks is the New Jersey
coastal real estate market. This is a large, and economically significant context 3
spanning 130 miles of coastline. The value of land and property along the coast
has grown from less than $1 billion in 1960 to greater than $170 billion today. 4 In
this geographical setting, residential properties face varying levels of flood risk.
Public policy plays a crucial role in conveying risk information to market
participants. Risk designations are provided by the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), which is administered by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). Communities choose whether to participate in NFIP. 5 Once a
community joins the NFIP, Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) are drawn to
demonstrate flood risk levels.
    The NFIP offers additional information on flood risk through Community
Rating System (CRS). The CRS is a voluntary component of the NFIP that
encourages communities to increase floodplain management above the minimum
federal standards. The program consists of four categories of actions: public
information, mapping and regulation, flood damage reduction, and warning and
response. Because the majority of CRS communities pursue low-cost activities
such as providing public information (Michel-Kerjan, et al., 2016), we posit that
communities enrolled in CRS have better information about flood risk. In addition


3
  We define the New Jersey coastal real estate market as homes located in Cape May, Atlantic,
Ocean, and Monmouth counties. We do not include Middlesex County as a shore county, although
it does contain the northern most part of the New Jersey coastline. This is due to the region's
proximity to New York and that the characteristics of the area are different than those of the beach
towns contained in the other four counties.
4
  "How Rising Seas and Coastal Storms Drowned the U.S. Flood Insurance Program" Yale
Environment 360. Accessed 6/9/2017
5
   New Jersey has consistently been one of the top five states participating in the National Flood
Insurance Program. In 2016 there were 231,956 policies in force in New Jersey. This number was
only exceeded by Florida, Texas, Louisiana, and California.




                                                                                                  5
to homeowners having better information, prospective buyers have better
information as well since the public awareness activities may be visible to buyers
as they tour the town and homes for sale.
       For our identification strategy to be viable, New Jersey homeowners must
be "exposed" to the non-local shock. Unlike most hedonic analyses of coastal
flood risks that rely on physical exposure, our strategy depends on exposure to
risk information. We contend that it is quite likely homeowners in New Jersey
were aware of Hurricane Katrina. The storm (and its subsequent destruction) was
extensively covered on television and in newspapers throughout the United States.
Utilizing Google Trends provides support for this claim. In Figure 1 we show that
New Jersey residents searched for information related to the storm immediately
after Hurricane Katrina made landfall in August, 2005. Interestingly, the New
Jersey residents search again for information regarding Hurricane Katrina, when
Hurricane Irene made landfall in New Jersey in 2011 and Hurricane Sandy made
landfall in New Jersey in 2012. This further demonstrates the connection between
local risk and non-local shocks.

                               A. Relevant Literature.

   Prior research uses revealed preference techniques to value flood risk. Bin and
Landry (2013) find that home prices decrease after a flooding incident, but that
such discounts manifest only after a local flood. Hence, the price decrease cannot
be parsed into a risk effect and that due to property damages. Additionally,
Keenan, Hill, and Gumber (2018) find differential trends in property values in
Miami-Dade County, Florida. Specifically, they report that lower elevation homes
have appreciated less rapidly than those situated at higher elevations. Importantly,
they too cannot disentangle the effects of flood risk perception and property
damage in driving the differential trends. Hallstrom and Smith (2005) attempt to




                                                                                     6
separate out the information about flood risk from flooding damage by using an
instance where a hurricane is predicted to hit an area, but instead the hurricane
hits a neighboring county and causes wide spread damage there. The authors,
using a difference in difference methodology, find that homes in high risk flood
areas see a 19% decrease in property values relative to those in low risk areas in
the county that the hurricane missed. The proximity between the physically
affected county and county in which price effects are detected generates some
concerns regarding identification of a pure risk effect. First, many residents may
have prepared for the hurricane and evacuated. The authors do not discuss how
these behaviors could affect prices in ways distinct from flood risk 6. Additionally,
the timing of the study may confound the information effect of Hurricane Andrew
in 1992 from the 1994 law change that made flood insurance premiums
mandatory in high risk areas, therefore making it more expensive to own a high
risk home. 7 Finally, Hurricane Andrew caused significant damage to the
neighboring county, which could have influenced prices in the near-miss county.
    Bernstein, Gustafson, and Lewis (2018) report that properties at risk of sea
level rise sell at a 7% discount, relative to comparable properties. Further, they
argue that this effect is due to perception of future risk, rather than property
damage, by showing that rental rates do not evince such a discount. While
Bernstein, Gustafson, and Lewis (2018), demonstrate that property markets
capitalize flooding risk, their focus is on long run cash flows whereas we zero in
on acute, short run responses to current flooding events. Climate science indicates
that anthropogenic climate change is currently affecting sea level and coastal
flooding (IPCC, 2013). Our focus on capitalization of current risk speaks to this


6
  For example, boarded-up homes may be aesthetically unappealing to prospective buyers.
7
  It is also difficult to separate out flood risk information due to zone designations from the cost of
insurance premiums. Several studies have shown that flood zone identification does lead to lower
housing prices, but this may be due to the cost of the insurance premiums. See for example Bin et
al., 2009




                                                                                                      7
near-term dimension of climate change and flood risk. Thus, our work is
complementary to that of Bernstein, Gustafson, and Lewis (2018).

                                     B. Summary of Results.

    Our empirical analyses rely on a differences-in-differences framework. We
begin by assigning homes in high-risk areas, as designated by FEMA's FIRMs, to
the treatment group. The occurrence of a non-local hurricane or tropical storm
identifies the time of treatment. In this standard specification, we do not find
evidence of a drop in price following a storm that caused flooding in other
regions.
    Our next specification employs a triple difference, which incorporates whether
homes are in CRS communities, and therefore subject to the information
treatment. We find a significant drop in price in CRS towns after a storm. 8 For
Hurricane Katrina, inclusive of all sales, we find significant risk discounts of 7%
on sales beginning four months after the storm. This effect endures for sales up to
one year after the storm. The discount peaks roughly 10 months following
Katrina. Employing a repeat-sales model (Mendelsohn, et al., 1992) with parcel
fixed effects, the effect increases. We report a drop of 11% for sales occurring
within six months of the storm. This risk discount increases to 15.7% for sales
within one year of the storm. We interpret this differential effect in CRS
communities as an indication that information on flood risk is important to how
markets respond to risk signals. We also analyze several other hurricanes that did
not impact the New Jersey coast. In the case of four other hurricanes between
2001 and 2007 (or months with several storms occurring in rapid succession) we




8
  Note our indicator for participation in CRS is defined as participating in public awareness
activities and public map information activities. See Table A1 for more details.




                                                                                                8
find evidence of risk discounts on transactions in CRS communities following
each of these storms.
   We explore numerous additional specifications in order to test possible threats
to our identification strategy. First, are local flooding events (in New Jersey) that
happen after a distant storm strikes driving our results? We estimate a model that
controls for local flooding events and our results are unaffected. Second, the New
Jersey coastal market is comprised of numerous second-home owners. These
market participants may impart greater liquidity on the market and essentially sell
en masse following a storm. This phenomenon would be especially problematic if
second-homes owned by non-residents comprise a large share of properties in
CRS towns. This may conflate the role of information provided by CRS with risk
preferences of non-residents. Exploiting the rich nature of the data, we do find
evidence that non-residents are more likely to sell after non-local hurricanes,
however the effect is very small. Third, non-resident buyers may lack full
information about flood risks and, hence, it may the case that sales following non-
local storms exploit this information asymmetry. We find no evidence that non-
resident buyers are more likely to make purchases after the hurricanes of interest.
Finally, it could be the case that especially high-risk towns (relative to towns that
do not enroll) select into the CRS program which would fundamentally affect the
inferences drawn from our primary results. We detect no evidence that average
flood insurance claims are higher in CRS communities.
   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the
theoretical model, Section III presents the data and empirical methodology,
Section IV reports the results, and in Section V we conclude.




                                                                                        9
                                    II. Theoretical Model

       The paper's empirical focus lies on credible identification of risk valuation.
The goal of this theoretical exposition is to demonstrate, conceptually, potential
measurement issues associated with relying on observable characteristics to
extract flood risk valuations. 9 We start by building on the theory set out by
Freeman, Herriges, and Kling (2014). Let (,  ,  ) denote a representative
consumer's utility function, defined over (Z) a composite consumption good, a
bundle of physical parcel characteristics (Xi), and (Ai), a coastal amenity bundle,
for parcel (i). This index may capture proximity to coastal resources, view, and
                                       2
frontage services. We assume that   0;   2  0. Further, the

signs of the partial derivatives with respect to (Ai) and (Xi) depend on the specific
arguments within each vector of characteristics. Let (Pi) denote the price of parcel
(i) where P is a function of ( ,  ,  ), where ( ) represents coastal flooding
probability, and (M) reflects income of the representative consumer.
       Suppose every so often, coastal flooding occurs with probability  ; we allow
flooding risk to vary by parcel (i), because coastal flood risk is heterogeneous
across locations. Since location dictates realizations of (Ai) and ( ), the index (Ai)
reflects both amenities and disamenities associated with proximity to the coast.
Let H( ,  ) be a function of the parcel characteristics that measures housing
services. Finally, we define (Fi) an indicator variable that assumes a value of zero
if a flood occurs for parcel (i), unity otherwise. If a flood occurs, the consumer
will no longer have access to the housing services.
       Normalizing the price of the composite good to 1, we can define the expected
utility of purchasing a home as:



9
    Our empirical model uses flood shocks as the signal.




                                                                                        10
          (1)     [] =  [ - ( ,  ,  ), 0  H( ,  )] + (1 -  )[ -
                                         ,  ,  , 1  H( ,  )]
   where v is the indirect utility function of the representative consumer. To
demonstrate the conceptual difficulty in relying on the bundle of coastal amenity
services to extract flood risk valuation, we show the first-order condition with
respect to ( ) in (2):


           ()        0                                       1       
   (2)     
                = -    
                        + (1 -  )                   - (1 -  )  
                                                                =0
                                                                        




   Rearranging terms reveals that price depends on the coastal amenity bundle in
                                        
                            (1- )                              
                                        
the following way:  =       0      1       . This partial effect   may be either
                             +(1- )                               

positive or negative depending on how utility varies with proximity. Intuition and
                                  
empirical evidence suggests that  > 0. Hence, the combined proximity, view,
                                     

and frontage services overwhelm disutility from flood risk.
   As an alternative to inferring flood risk valuation from the bundled coastal
amenity index, we propose zeroing in on market participants' perception of
flooding probabilities. By focusing solely on if the perceived risk changes we can
separate out the flood risk from the amenity of coastal proximity. Our subsequent
empirical strategy hinges on non-local flooding shocks because such events (may)
induce changes in perceived risk while not also producing flood damages which
would affect the value of the coastal amenity. Assuming dependence of price on
flooding probability, we return to (1) and take first order conditions with respect
to :




                                                                                   11
                   [-( ),0]- [-( ),H( , )]
   (3)         =            0 +(1- ) 1
                                   




   Expression (3) is negative, as [ - ( ), 0] < [ - ( ), H( ,  )].
Thus as perceived risk increases, prices fall. A conceptual advantage of our
empirical strategy is that geographically distant events, by virtue of their
"remoteness", can only operate through risk perceptions. Thus, risk perception
changes while all other aspects of all parcels remain fixed. This stands in stark
contrast to a strategy relying on cross-sectional differences in risk. In such a
setting, perceived risk changes along with exposure to coastal amenities and
potentially other characteristics.
   We can depict this graphically as well. Figure 2 depicts the marginal implicit
price function corresponding to the amenity bundle (Ai). As above, price is a
function of the vector of characteristics associated with parcel (i), denoted (Xi),
and the bundle (Ai). Further, in the event that market participants relevant to
parcel (i) are "treated" by a non-local flooding event is captured by the difference
between (0 = no flood) and (1 = flood). Figure 2 suggests that above some
threshold level of the amenity bundle (A), the hedonic price function diverges
according to the realization of ( ). This is consistent with the idea that only
owners of parcels proximate to the coastal resource, and therefore at higher risk of
flooding, are potentially affected by the remote flooding event.
   Figure 2 shows that an increase in perceived risk (1 > 0 ) leads to a lower
price for higher risk homes. Hence, there is a risk discount. This change is
dependent on the homeowner's perceived risk changing after the shock. We
argue, and test below in the empirical section, that informed market participants
transacting high-risk parcels are more likely to update their perceived risk after a
non-local shock than relatively uninformed participants in low risk zones.




                                                                                      12
                          III. Data and Empirical Analysis

     This paper uses hedonic property models to test whether homeowners respond
to non-local flooding events as a means to plausibly identify the value attributed
to flood risk rather than physical property damage. The empirical analysis relies
on several sources of data. The New Jersey Treasury provides housing parcel
data. This database contains an array of information including the address, type of
property, price, size of the property, year built, and information about the owner
and the buyer. All residential properties in New Jersey are included in the data
which span the years from 2000 to 2015. As Hurricane Sandy hit New Jersey in
October of 2012 and provided a large local risk shock, the analysis considers
dates prior to Hurricane Sandy. Since precise location data is needed to assess
flood risk, we geolocate all properties in the database to identify the longitude and
latitude coordinates. 10

     The analysis relies on risk designations provided by the NFIP, which was
created through the National Flood Insurance Act. The NFIP provides flood
insurance policies to homeowners in flood-prone communities. Once a
community joins the NFIP, FIRMs are created to demonstrate the level of flood
risk. The analysis uses flood risk information from the FIRMS created by FEMA's
NFIP. 11 In Figure 3 below we present a map of risk zones for the counties in our
analyses. Figure 4 overlays Figure 3 with a map of homes that sold from 2000-
2012. Each parcel is assigned to a risk zone, which, in turn, affects the insurance
premium. In the New Jersey coastal market, many of the homes are designated in
Zones AE, AO, or V. Zones AE and AO indicate the home is in the 100-year



10
  For this work we used BING maps API along with additional internet tools like google maps.
11
  We utilized the preliminary firms as opposed to the original firms as those had not been updated
since the 80s. We argue the preliminary firms are a better assessment of current risk.




                                                                                               13
floodplain, while Zone V indicates that the home is in a coastal area and subject to
velocity hazard (wave action). 12

     The database delineating participation rates in CRS covers all municipalities
from 2000 to 2015. 13 FEMA defines the level of participation based on the total
number of points a town received for their prior CRS activities. The database
reports the participation level for each town annually and it provides detailed
information on the type of activities undertaken and the associated point values.
The present analysis focuses on CRS participation in public awareness activities.
     We focus on this dimension of the CRS for two reasons. First, we are
interested in exploring the role of information with respect to risk valuations.
Second, prior research in this area has shown that people do not always know or
understand their risk (Bakkensen and Barrage 2017). Ascertaining individual
market participants' endowment of information is not possible. As such, we use
town-level CRS participation in public awareness activities as a proxy for market
participants' information since one of the most common actions CRS towns take
are public awareness campaigns. 14
     Because housing markets respond to local environmental quality (Bajari et al.,
2012), and because such attributes are likely correlated with proximity to coastal
amenities, we use the monthly average level of fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
particles from EPA's Air Quality System (AQS) dataset to control for air
pollution. Further, we employ data on the number and value of new builds from
the Census Building Permit Survey to control for changing market conditions.
Finally, to identify the storms that comprise the non-local shocks, we selected

12
   There are some homes designated as Zone A in the four relevant counties. However, homes
designated only as A, and not AE or AO, are along rivers and not along the coast. Thus they are
not included in our analyses.
13
   The database was provided from FEMA upon request.
14
   We identify towns that participate in at least 1 of the 300 level activities, and either 410 or 440.
The description of these activity codes is shown in Table A1.




                                                                                                     14
storms that did not affect the New Jersey coast in years without a large flood
shock to New Jersey. 15 This resulted in the following list of named storms:
Hurricane Allison, Charley, Katrina, Erin, and Dean, along with multiple storms
that struck during September of 2002.
     The estimation dataset is summarized in Table 1. Approximately 16% of the
houses are in municipalities that meet our definition of CRS participation. 16
Further, 11% of homes are located both in high risk zones and in CRS
municipalities. Overall participation in CRS varies both at the class level and
across the type of activity level. The majority of the points are achieved through
activities coded in the 300s and 400s. These categories contain public information
activities. The average home was built in 1974 and has approximately 1,378
square feet. The average sales price was almost $327,000 and there is a strong
positive skew to the price data.
     Table 2 Panel A summarizes CRS enrollment status by flood risk level.
Roughly 27 percent of parcels occur in high risk zones. Within this category, 42
percent of parcels are in CRS-enrolled towns. Table 2 Panel B reports that
properties in high flood risk zones tend to sell for higher prices. This is expected
because flood risk is effectively bundled with coastal amenities (views and
proximity). Table 2 Panel B also demonstrates that CRS participation (and its
interaction with the high flood risk indicator) is also positively correlated with
prices. While this positive correlation is suggestive, the regression analyses that
follow test whether this relationship changes both after a storm and conditional on
controlling for other important factors that may also effect sale prices.




15
   Some remnants of these storms did eventually pass over New Jersey, however these storms did
not induce local flooding.
16
   As defined in Table A1. Unless otherwise noted our use of CRS or CRS participation
throughout the paper relies on this definition.




                                                                                            15
      The empirical analysis builds on the hedonic literature that describes the
prices of a durable good (in this case, housing) as a function of its attributes
(Ridker and Henning, 1967). Further, in order to identify the causal effect of
flooding risk and information on price, we invoke a differences-in-differences
specification (DD). Our treatment group consists of properties in the high risk
zone (zonei) as designated by FEMA's flood insurance risk maps. These homes
are all located within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), which are areas that
have a 1 percent annual chance of flooding. We denote homes outside of the
(SFHA) as the control group. The treatment period is a flexibly defined period of
time after the storm (postym). (Without a clearly defined post-storm period, we
explore this semi-parametrically, considering a range of post-storm periods of 2 to
12 months.) The time windows are lagged by 1 month as many sales are
negotiated 30 days (or longer) prior to the actual sale date.
      The empirics begin with the simplest model in (5), where (i) denotes parcel,
(t) reflects town, and (y) and (m) are year and month, respectively. This model
does not control for any factors associated with parcels or market conditions other
than the remote flood shock.


(4)     log  = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3     + 


The model in (6) expands on (5), by including year, month, county-year, and town
(municipality) fixed effects (FE). 17 Model (6) also includes time-variant controls:
an indicator of CRS public awareness participation (CRSty), the number of
monthly sales, the ratio monthly sales to average monthly sales in this

17
  We use the monthly fixed effects to control for seasonality and the year fixed effects to control
for changes to the real estate market for the state of New Jersey over time. We use the town fixed
effects to control for specific attributes of the municipality that our other variables do not capture.
Finally, the county-year fixed effects are included to control for anything that is changing over
time in a specific county.




                                                                                                     16
municipality, and the age and size of the home. The  and  terms
index variables that are characteristics of house and town by year and month,
respectively.


(5)    log  = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3 (   ) +
                      4  + 5 (   ) + 6  +
                      7  +  +  +  +  + 


The model in (7) is a repeat sales model featuring parcel fixed effects
(Mendelsohn et al., 1992).


(6)     log  = 0 + 1  + 2     + 3  +
                      4     + 5  + 6  +  +
                       +  +  + 


Given the panel structure of the model, Post indicates that a sale occurs during the
post-storm period and the parcel was previously sold prior to the storm. Hence,
the repeated sales must straddle the storm to be included in this dataset. The fixed
effects in (7) encompass year, month, county-year, and parcel (i). Further, note
that model (7) retains the controls for time-variant characteristics of the home,
such as living space and the age of the home and environmental and market
conditions including: PM2.5 pollution, the number of monthly sales, the ratio
monthly sales to average monthly sales in this municipality, and new builds. The
models in (5), (6), and (7) are applied to each of the storms listed above. The main
empirical results section focuses on Hurricane Katrina.
The following specifications invoke a triple-difference approach to test whether
information on flood risk differentially affects market responses to distant storms.




                                                                                    17
In addition to the terms in (6), the triple difference features an interaction between
CRS, the post-storm indicator, and the high risk flood zone control. This
interaction term enables a test of how owners of high risk parcels respond after a
storm and how information (proxied by CRS participation) might change their
response. We also include the interaction between CRS and Post. This
specification applied to all sales in shown in (8).

(7)      = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3 (   ) +
                       4  + 5 (   ) + 6 ( 
                        ) + 7 (     ) +
                      8  + 9  +  +  +  +
                       + 


The triple difference is also applied in the panel data context as shown in (9).


(8)    log  = 0 + 1  + 2     + 3  +
                     4     + 5     +
                     6       + 7  +
                     8  +  +  +  +  + 




The analysis also explores several robustness checks in an effort to dismiss
various threats to our identification strategy. The particular specifications
employed are shown and discussed in section IV.C. below.




                                                                                   18
                                         IV. Results

     The empirical results section begins by focusing on Hurricane Katrina and the
coefficients of interest. The detailed regression results for all storms are covered
in the appendix. A table summarizing the estimation results for these additional
storms is included in this section. We also conduct a battery of robustness checks.
The empirics begin with the standard DD model shown in (5), the fixed effects
model with controls (6), and the repeat sales models (7), before moving on to the
triple difference specifications shown in (8) and (9).

                    A. DD Specification: High Risk Zone as Treatment.

     Table 3 presents the results from fitting (5). The table includes specifications
for post storm periods of 2 to 12 months. Each column represents post storm
windows of a particular length. For example, column 1 employs a 2 month post-
storm period, column 2 corresponds to 4 months post period, and this pattern
continues through column 6 which corresponds to a 12 month post storm period.
The coefficients on the post storm variable and the interactions between the post
storm and high-risk zone controls are reported for each post-storm period in each
column. 18 For example the coefficient on the Post # Months variable in column 1
reveals the effect on sales prices when the post-storm period is defined as two
months after Katrina.
     As anticipated Table 3 reveals a premium on parcels sold in high risk zones of
about 18.5% in all specifications. It likely stems from the frontage, view, and
proximity services associated with parcels in high-risk zones. Housing prices
were systematically higher, by roughly 40%, in the post-storm period. This
premium is robust across each of the post-storm period designations. We find no

18
  This is the setup we use in all the tables that rely on these 6 post storm periods. See Table A2
for more information on the variables in each model.




                                                                                                     19
evidence of a risk discount for parcels sold in high risk zones after the storm. In
fact, the coefficient on high risk interacted with post-storm is robustly positive
and significant. These results suggest that properties in high-risk zones sold for a
premium after Katrina of between 9 and 15 percent.
   Table 4 reports the estimates from model (6), which adds controls and a
battery of fixed effects to (5). Adding controls and fixed effects accentuates the
premium for parcels in high risk zones from 18.5% to 23%. Participation in CRS
is associated with a small premium (less than 5%) though this effect is
imprecisely estimated. The coefficient on the CRS-by-high risk zone term is
negative and significant, implying a discount relative to high risk parcels not in
CRS towns of about 13%. Consistent with Table 3, we find no evidence of a risk
discount for parcels sold in high risk zones after Hurricane Katrina. The
coefficient on the interaction between high risk and post storm is significant and
ranges from 7 to 11 percent. Many of the other controls in model (6) behave as
intuition would suggest (such as square footage and structure age) bolstering the
credibility of the model. The results of the various controls are included in the
appendix in Tables A34 through A38.
   Table 5 reports results from the repeat-sales model. This specification reduces
the estimation sample from greater than 170,000 observations to about 60,000.
The high risk zone control drops out with parcel fixed effects. CRS participation
is associated with a premium of about 8 to 10%. The coefficient on the CRS-by-
high risk zone interaction is no longer robustly significant. The repeat sales model
also suggests parcels sold during the post-Katrina periods did so at a small
discount (less than 3%). However, the positive and significant coefficient on the
high risk-by-post storm term obtains across all specifications. The effect estimate
suggests a 10% premium on homes in high-risk zones after Katrina.
       Across specifications in Tables 3, 4, and 5, we report evidence of a
premium on sales in high risk zones after Katrina. What are possible explanations




                                                                                      20
for this result? First, this premium may be due to an average increase in housing
prices over time specific to high coastal amenity (and therefore high risk) homes.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that ocean front homes and those with ocean views
(those typically categorized as high risk) did not see the drop in prices that other
homes in these coastal towns experienced in 2006 and 2007. 19 (See Figure A1,
which shows average sales price trends for high risk and low risk groups.)
Another explanation is that there was a substitution effect driving this result;
homeowners considering whether to purchase coastal property were deterred from
the Gulf Coast market by Hurricane Katrina. A viable (though imperfect)
substitute market is in coastal New Jersey. Such an effect could increase prices
differentially in high-risk zones.

       B. Triple Difference Model: High Risk Zone, CRS Enrollment as Treatments.

Bringing equation (8) to the data enables an exploration of the role that risk
information plays in the coastal market. Table 6 presents the results from fitting
equation (8) inclusive of all sales. Many of the results reported in Table 5
manifest in the triple difference context as well. These include the imprecisely
estimated premium on CRS participation, the 23% premium associated with
parcels in high risk zones and the 13% discount on parcels in high risk zones and
CRS towns. In all of the specifications, the interaction between the high-risk zone
and post-storm indicators remains positive and significant. The premium on such
sales is remarkably robust, ranging between 10 and 12 percent.

          Of particular interest is the interaction term between CRS enrollment and
the high-risk zone and post-storm indicators. Table 6 reports that this triple
interaction term is negatively associated with price for all specifications.


19
     See "In New Jersey Summer Deals Amid a Downturn", The New York Times, 8/9/2009.




                                                                                       21
Beginning with the post-storm specifications at 6 months, the triple interaction is
statistically significant at conventional levels. The effect estimate is also
economically significant, implying a risk discount in CRS towns of between 7 and
11 percent. In contrast to the effect of being in the high risk zone, which
attenuates with longer post-storm periods, the information treatment has a larger
effect for longer post-storm periods.
         This result indicates that high risk homes in CRS participating towns sold
for a lower price after Katrina relative to parcels in non-CRS towns. Recall that
the vast majority of towns enrolled in CRS pursue activities that provide
community members with information about flood risk. One interpretation of this
finding is that this information shock makes market participants more sensitive to
a geographically distant, well-publicized coastal flooding event.
         Table 7 reports the results from the repeat sales model. Several results
from Table 6 obtain here as well. Of particular interest, the coefficient on the
interaction between the high-risk zone and post-storm controls is positive and
significant. Its magnitude is similar to that observed in prior specifications.
Additionally, the triple interaction between CRS enrollment, high-risk zone, and
post-storm is negative and significant for all specifications. The effect estimate
suggests that a high risk home in a high-participating CRS town sells for a
discount ranging from approximately 11 to 16 percent following Hurricane
Katrina. 20 We argue that the flood risk information provided to market
participants via CRS activities is driving this discount.



20
  In our preferred specifications, we limit our analysis to compare sales before the storm to the
post storm window. Recall that this post-storm period is flexibly defined from up to 2 months to
one year after the storm. We choose to limit the post storm period to no more than one year
because of the financial crisis. In an alternative specification, we include all sales after the storm.
These results are presented in Table A3. The results are consistent with our main specifications.
However, the coefficients are slightly smaller in absolute value terms and insignificant in two of
the specifications.




                                                                                                      22
                                C. Robustness Checks.

   This section proceeds by first examining results from all storms. It then probes
whether the parallel trends assumption crucial to causal inference in the DD
framework holds in the pricing data. Finally, this section explores a number of
alternative mechanisms that may confound the paper's ability to attribute the
changes in prices observed in the data to the tropical cyclones and the CRS
information programs. We also explore alternative definitions of CRS
participation and whether historical flood information affects our results.


Other Tropical Cyclones. The preceding results focus on Hurricane Katrina due to
the immense damage, considerable loss of life, and highly publicized nature of the
storm. Table A4 summarizes the results from regression analyses on the other
storms. This table reports the number of specifications that yield negative and
significant coefficients on the triple interaction term (CRS x high risk x post
storm). For each storm, there are six specifications that encompass all sales and
six repeat sales specifications. The number of specifications is dictated by the
semi-parametric approach to measuring post-storm periods. The full set of results
for all storms is provided in Tables A19 through A43 in the appendix. Table A4
indicates that each storm, except for Hurricane Allison, adversely affected
housing prices among high risk properties in towns that participated in CRS.
Hurricane Allison made landfall in Texas in June of 2001. The lack of significant
results associated with this storm is consistent with the fact that very few towns
participated strongly in CRS at this time. For the multiple storms that struck in
September of 2002, five out of twelve specifications yield negative, significant
coefficients on the triple interaction of interest. For Hurricane Charley, ten out of
twelve specifications produce negative, significant coefficients on the triple
interactions of interest. And, similar results evince for Hurricanes Erin and Dean;




                                                                                     23
seven out of twelve specifications produce negative, significant coefficients on
the triple interactions of interest.


Parallel Trends. The key assumption undergirding causal inference, and hence,
internal validity, in a DD specification is parallel trends in outcomes between the
treatment and control groups, prior to treatment. Figure A3 shows parallel price
trends between the high risk treatment group (the middle price line) and the
control group (the bottom price line). The vertical lines correspond to the storm
dates. The second vertical line from the right denotes Katrina. Between 2000 and
when the storm struck in late August, 2005, the price trends are roughly parallel.
After Hurricane Katrina struck, Figure A3 displays clear evidence of a growing
spread between prices for parcels in high risk zones and the control group. This
supports the robust finding of a premium on high risk parcels after the storm.
Conversely, comparing the top line (high risk parcels in CRS towns) with the
middle line suggests prices for CRS, high risk parcels converged toward prices for
high risk parcels. Both patterns support our empirical results: premiums for high
risk properties after Hurricane Katrina, relative to control, and risk discounts for
CRS, high risk parcels, relative to other high risk parcels.
        The right-most vertical line corresponds to the month during which
Hurricanes Dean and Erin struck. There is clearly a violation of the pre-trends
assumption in this case as the control group parcel prices are rising more rapidly
than the high risk group. The third line from the right denotes Hurricane Charley.
Here, the parallel trend assumption appears to hold which bolsters the causal
interpretation of the storm's effect on housing prices. For the cluster of storms
that struck during 2002, again, the parallel trends assumption holds. Finally, the
parallel trend assumption does not hold for Hurricane Allison (left-hand most
vertical line), especially comparing the high risk parcel prices and those for the
control group.




                                                                                     24
Alternative Mechanisms. This section explores mechanisms that may explain the
apparent risk discount associated non-local storms and CRS participation.
Specifically targeted are mechanisms correlated with CRS participation that could
plausibly induce the negative coefficient on the triple interaction term. These
alternative explanations include: the role of second-home owners and non-
residents in the coastal housing market, unobservable risk in CRS relative to non-
CRS towns, local flooding events occurring after tropical cyclones, and
alternative definitions of CRS participation. 21
         We first consider the role of second homeowners. On the supply-side,
second homeowners may have more flexibility to sell than market participants
selling their primary residence. Table A5 shows the breakdown of transactions
according to residency status and CRS participation. The table reveals that
second homeowners often possess property in towns with high CRS participation
and in high risk zones. That the econometric models report parcels in CRS towns
and high-risk zones sell at a discount following storms may reflect non-residents'
greater liquidity. While this may still expose market participants' attitudes toward
(or perceptions of) risk, it would obfuscate our ability to cleanly identify a causal
effect of the CRS.




21
  While not presented in the paper, we do test two alternative definitions of CRS participation.
Neither yield significant results. The first considers the CRS-treated group as any municipality
that ever participated in CRS. The potential problem with this definition is the inclusion of
municipalities that are not actively participating in CRS. During our sample period, the total
number of credits for ever-participating towns may decrease. The results from the alternative,
more permissive, definition of CRS participation are presented in the appendix. Similarly we do
not find a significant relationship between non-local flood shocks, CRS participation, and prices
when we define CRS participation as towns that register Series 300 activities. The same problem
described for CRS participation applies here. To correct for these measurement problems, we
define our CRS treatment group as those municipalities that increased their participation in CRS
300 level activities in the prior year. With this definition, we do find a consistent, significant
relationship between non-local flooding events, CRS participation, and prices. These results are
discussed below and presented in the appendix.




                                                                                                 25
        We use linear probability models to test this mechanism. The first
specification employs the entire population of properties (not just homes that
sold) and is shown in (10).


(9)     = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3     +
                 4  + 5  + 6  
                   + 7  +  +  +  +  + 


where  is an indicator of whether parcel (i) is sold in month-year (ym). The
fixed effects, CRS, and Zone are defined as in the previous specifications. The
index,  , contains controls for the conditions in the town-month-year
during which parcel (i) sold including: the average parcel price, average number
of sales, if there are more sales than average in month (ym), number of new units
being built, total new value being built, and the level of PM2.5 air pollution. Post
indicates whether year-month (ym) is in the 12-month window after Hurricane
Katrina. Nonresident is an indicator of whether the homeowner lists an address
outside of the town containing parcel (i) as their primary residence. This is the
covariate of interest.
Table A6 reports the results from this regression. Parcels are more likely to be
sold in a month during the post-Katrina period and if the parcel is in a high
participating CRS town. However, properties owned by non-residents are less
likely to be sold after the storm. Also noteworthy is the negative and marginally
significant coefficient on the interaction term between CRS and the high risk
flood zone. This suggests that some portion of the risk discount reported in Tables
6, 7, and A4 is due to illiquidity in such periods.
        The second specification limits the data to parcels that sold. The
dependent variable is an indicator for non-resident sellers. The covariate of




                                                                                    26
interest is the post storm indicator. As above, we approach this semi-
parametrically, testing definitions of Post from two to twelve months following
Hurricane Katrina. The models control for age and living space of the home along
with market conditions like average price, average number of sales, new builds
information, and include year, month, county-year, and town fixed effects. Table
A7 reports that sales occurring after Katrina are slightly more likely to involve
non-residents. The effect is small (about 1.3 percent) and is marginally
significant. However, Table A7 also demonstrates that sales are roughly 15
percent less likely to involve a non-resident if the parcel is in a CRS town and is
located in a high flood risk zone. These results suggest that a supply-side role of
non-residents is particularly unlikely to be driving the effect of CRS participation
on high risk parcel prices.
        Although Table A7 shows that non-residents are not selling significantly
more after Katrina, it is possible non-residents are playing a role on the demand
side of the market. 22 First we test whether non-residents are more likely to buy
properties after Hurricane Katrina by adopting the specifications used in the
supply-side regressions (above) with the distinction that the dependent variable is
an indicator for non-resident buyers. Table A8 shows that the coefficients of
interest are not significant for any of the six post-storm periods.
        First, the coefficients for the post-Katrina periods are all negative and not
statistically significant. Hence, we detect no evidence that non-resident buyers are
disproportionately more likely to purchase parcels after Katrina and therefore
induce the risk discount reported in Tables 6 and 7. Table A8 does suggest that


22
   The story for why non-resident's buying would drive a decrease in prices is not as
straightforward as the non-resident's financial mobility selling mechanism. We propose an income
effect of sorts. If non-resident second home owners are wealthier on average, it is possible that
non-residents are more likely to have all cash offers than primary residents, which might be
accepted by sellers at a lower price. With this mechanism an increase in non-residents (correlated
with CRS) drives down prices, not information about risk.




                                                                                               27
parcels in high risk zones increases the likelihood that non-residents purchase the
parcel. Conversely, parcels in CRS towns and high risk zones are between 5 and
7% less likely to be purchased by non-residents.
       Table A9 displays the results from a regression through which we test
whether non-resident buyers are especially likely to purchase parcels from
primary residents. The coefficient indicating non-resident buyer is negative and
significant (p < 0.01). Hence, when a transaction features non-resident buyers,
such a transaction is nearly 20% less likely to involve primary resident sellers.
More important to our test of mechanism is the interaction term between non-
resident and post-storm. This interaction term is not significant in all
specifications.
       We then consider whether homeowners in CRS communities perceive
higher risk and that drives both the participation in CRS and the price drops after
Hurricane Katrina. To test this, we compare sales across buyer type. If it is
perceived risks driving the results we would expect transactions with buyers from
outside of the CRS towns to have a significantly smaller price drop than
transaction with buyers who are also from the CRS town. To run this test we limit
our data to only sales in CRS high public awareness activity towns. We use the
regression models in (11) and (12) for all sales and for repeated sales,
respectively.
(10)    log  = 0 + 1   + 2  +
                       3      + 4  +
                       5    + 6   
                         + 7        +
                       8  + 9  +  +  +  +
                        + 




                                                                                    28
(11)      = 0 + 1   + 2 (  
                       ) + 3  + 4 (   ) +
                       5 (    ) +
                       6 (      ) +
                       7  + 8  +  +  +  +
                        + 



       We present these results in Tables A10 and A11. We find no significant
difference between these two types of transactions. Specifically the coefficient on
the interaction term between the non-resident buyer-by-high risk zone-by-post
storm is insignificant across both specifications (repeated cross-sections and
repeat sales) and all delineations of periods after Hurricane Katrina.
       Another threat to our identification strategy is that parcels in CRS towns
are at higher risk, in ways that are unobservable to the econometrician, than
parcels in the same FEMA risk zones, but not situated in CRS towns. This
concern stems from the fact that municipalities select into CRS. One might be
concerned that towns facing particularly high risk would select into CRS. Stated
alternatively: do parcels within CRS towns in the high risk flood zones face more
risk than parcels in non-CRS towns in those same zones? And, crucially, are they
more likely to respond to a storm? To explore this alternative mechanism, we
examine whether the average claim values are higher in CRS towns than in non-
CRS towns. While we expect to find a positive relationship between CRS and
claims (as CRS is correlated with FEMA's high risk zones and it provides
information about flood insurance), a positive relationship between CRS towns
with high levels of public awareness activities and average claims would provide
evidence that the mechanism may be stemming from higher risk and not better
information. Average claim is defined as the total dollar amount of claims divided




                                                                                    29
by the number of claims made in each town in each year. We use the following
model:


(12)   = 0 + 1  +  +  +  + 


         Table A12 reports a negative relationship between CRS and average
claims. Upon inclusion of municipality FE, the relationship becomes insignificant.
While we cannot conclusively rule out this mechanism, table A12 suggests that
unobservable differences in risk within FEMA's risk zones across CRS
participation is not driving our results.
         We then consider whether local flood shocks might be driving our results.
Table A13 in the appendix reports the results from the triple difference repeat
sales model with a control for whether the sale occurred during a month in which
a flood disaster had been declared in New Jersey. 23 The coefficient of interest on
the local flood control, Disaster Declared, is negative, small in magnitude (less
than 1 percent) and only marginally significant in one of the six specifications. In
contrast, the triple interaction coefficient is significant in all specifications,
negative, and its magnitude is between 6 and 9.5 percent. Thus, local flooding
disasters do not appear to drive our results.
         Tables A14, A15, and A16 in the appendix report the results from models
that employs alternate definitions of CRS participation. (These are all triple
difference, repeat sales models.) Table A14 reclassifies CRS participation to
include all class 8 towns. The central results are unchanged. The coefficient on
the triple interaction is negative and significant in four of the six specifications,
ranging between 11 and 14 percent. Table A15 reclassifies CRS participation to



23
  We also considered municipality-month-year claims data as a control for other flood
experiences and these data do not change our results.




                                                                                        30
include towns who increase their level of participation with any of the 300
information-based activities. One of the six coefficients is significant and
negative. However, the effect estimate is larger than in the main paper at 19.5
percent. In our final definition presented in Table A16 we consider all activities
that might affect information. 24 In this definition we include activities related to
emergency response and warnings and limit our CRS treatment group to those
who participate in the top ten percent of these activities. Using this definition does
not change our results.
                 D. Monetary Impact of Flood Risk and Welfare Implications
       These results imply a large loss for the homeowners in CRS- participating
municipalities after a flood shock. We calculate the approximate revenue lost to
the homeowners that sold properties during the post storm periods and we
calculate the potential revenue loss to all homes that are in a CRS-treated town
and at high flood risk, but were not sold immediately following the storm. We use
the fitted coefficients from the repeat sales models. We emphasize that this is an
approximate calculation. Table 7 reports that the decrease in price during the 12
month window after the storm is 15.7%. There are 1,902 homes that are in
municipalities that meet our definition of CRS public awareness activities, in a
high risk zone, and that sold during this window. The average price of homes
sold during the pre-Hurricane Katrina window that were in high risk zones and in
CRS municipalities is about $460,000. Thus, in total sellers lost almost $140
million dollars (15.7% x 460,000 x 1,902). In addition, there are approximately
30,000 homes that are high risk and in CRS towns during the post Katrina
window. While, only a small subset of these homes sold during the window, if our
results are externally valid, the value of all of these homes would be effected. The
total potential revenue loss is then over $2 billion. This calculation is limited to


24
     The relevant activities are presented in Table A17.




                                                                                        31
the homes in informed regions whose values would have been effected during the
post storm window.
     It is possible that this adjustment to property values is welfare improving. As
the financial crisis of 2008 made clear, real estate market corrections, and the
resulting income effects, can affect the entire economy. The wide reaching effect
of real estate market corrections is not unique to the financial crisis of 2008. The
literature has shown that asset bubbles often lead to crashes, and that these crashes
can spill over into other areas of the economy (Brunnermeier and Oehmke 2012).
Further, information frictions can cause bubbles to arise, in turn contributing to
future crashes (Brunnermeier and Oehmke 2012). The CRS infuses risk-relevant
information into the market. The non-local shock provides updated news. Hence,
the price drop we detect after the storm shock may just be a price correction in the
market. This could be welfare improving if such a price correction prevents a
future correction of greater magnitude with adverse effects on other real and
financial markets. There is empirical evidence that increasing the number of well-
informed homeowners can be welfare improving. Bakkensen and Barrage (2017)
find that increasing the number of realists (homeowners who know the true value
of flood risk) minimizes the reduction in home price due to sea level rise.
     We also consider whether CRS improves insurance levels. The initial policy
goal of the National Flood Insurance Program was to force homeowners to
internalize risk through insurance. However, even though it was mandated for
homes with federally backed mortgages, there has not been enforcement and take
                                                   25
up has been slow (Michel-Kerjan, 2010).                 One possible explanation is that
people were uninformed about risk to properly insure (Chivers and Flores, 2012).
While estimating the optimum level of insurance is beyond the scope of this
paper, prior literature has demonstrated that homes in high risk areas are still

25
  While take up has increased over the years, as of 2008 at least half of the homes in high risk
zones are uninsured.




                                                                                                   32
underinsured against their future risks (Michel-Kerjan, 2010). Thus, an increase
in policy holders in municipalities with high risk areas should be welfare
improving. Municipalities that participate in CRS have seen an increase in
insurance policy holders. In Table A18 we present results from a regression of
CRS public awareness participation on policy counts. We also include
specifications with year, month fixed effects and year, month, municipality fixed
effects. In all three of our specifications, participating in CRS, is positively and
significantly related with the number of policy holders.
   A final welfare consideration of CRS is whether participation in these
activities mitigates flood damages. Our regressions presented in Table A12 show
participation in CRS is associated with a decrease in the average claim. While this
is provocative evidence that CRS may be effective in mitigating damages, further
research is required to thoroughly explore this question.

                                  V. Conclusion

   The present study offers three key innovations over prior papers that use
hedonic models to examine how coastal real estate markets capitalize flood risks.
First, we develop a novel identification strategy to isolate the market response to
flood risk distinctly from damage due to realized flooding. Second, we
demonstrate the importance of information specifically about flood risk in
triggering market responses. Third, we show that current flood risk, over and
above risk discounts associated with long-run outcomes, affects real estate prices.
   We find that parcels located in high risk coastal flooding zones in New Jersey
tend to sell at a premium, relative to other parcels, and prices tend to be higher
after Hurricane Katrina. In a triple difference specification, the interaction term
between flood risk, post-Katrina, and CRS participation suggests that information




                                                                                       33
provided to market participants in such towns differentially depresses prices after
a non-local shocks such as Hurricane Katrina.
   These findings stand to inform policymakers in at least two ways. First,
environmental regulators charged with conducting climate change related risk
assessments now have compelling evidence that major coastal flooding events
impact markets distant from the locus of the event. In the present case, direct
property damage from Katrina is estimated at $125 billion (Knabb et al., 2005).
Non-local risk discounts only in the coastal New Jersey CRS towns are estimated
herein at $2 billion. Our findings argue strongly for further research in other
coastal real estate markets to ascertain whether such effects evince there as well.
   Second, analysts at the NFIP may benefit from our findings. Specifically, we
demonstrate a causal effect of CRS information campaigns on the sensitivity of
participants to flood risk. Something about the CRS information treatment
heightens risk awareness. Though not causal we also present evidence that CRS
increases insurance uptake and decreases average claim values. We leave the
larger question of whether CRS interventions avert asset bubbles by infusing risk
relevant information to future work.
   We conclude with the following consideration. An underlying premise of
hedonic theory is the notion that prices embody markets in equilibrium (Freeman,
1979). As such, at any given time, market prices in coastal locales reflect some
balance between the stream of benefits generated by access or proximity to the
coast and flood risk. Our analysis centers on unanticipated events that provide
market participants with information related to flood risks. Hence, we study
market adjustment processes. This tack is especially relevant now as the
distribution of flood risk changes because of climate change. The extent to which
markets can rapidly and efficiently capitalize changing risks will bolster the




                                                                                   34
ability of revealed preference techniques to capture risk valuations. The
information provision embodied in the CRS appears to facilitate this process.
This, in turn, will strengthen society's capacity to design efficient environmental
policies targeting climate change risks.




                                                                                  35
                             REFERENCES

1) Anderson, Dan R. 1974. "The National Flood Insurance Program.
    Problems and Potential." The Journal of Risk and Insurance, 41(4): 579­
    599.
2) Atreya, Ajita, and Jeffrey Czajkowski. 2016. "Graduated Flood Risks and
    Property Prices in Galveston County." Real Estate Economics
3) Attanasi, E. D.,and M. R. Karlinger. 1979. "Risk Preferences and Flood
    Insurance." American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 61(3):490­495.
4) Bailey, Steve. 2009 "In New Jersey Summer Deals Amid a Downturn",
    The New York Times, August 9th.
5) Bakkensen, Laura A, and Lint Barrage. 2017. Flood Risk Belief
    Heterogeneity and Coastal Home Price Dynamics: Going Under Water?
    NBER Working Paper 23854.
6) Bajari, Patrick, Jane Cooley Fruehwirth, Kyoo Il Kim, Christopher
    Timmins. 2012. "A Rational Expectations Approach to Hedonic Price
    Regressions with Time-Varying Unobserved Product Attributes: The Price
    of Pollution," American Economic Review. 102(5): 1898-1926.
7) Bernstein, Asaf, Matthew Gustafson, and Ryan Lewis. 2018. Disaster on
    the Horizon: The Price Effect of Sea Level Rise (May 4, 2018). Journal of
    Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
8) Bin, Okmyung, and Craig E. Landry. 2012. "Changes in Implicit Flood
    Risk Premiums: Empirical Evidence from the Housing Market." Journal
    of Environmental Economics and Management, 65(3).
9) Bin, Okmyung, Jamie Brown Kruse, and Craig E. Landry. 2008. "Flood
    Hazards, Insurance Rates, and Amenities: Evidence from the Coastal
    Housing Market." The Journal of Risk and Insurance, 75(1):63­82.
10) Brody, Samuel D., Sammy Zharan, Wesley E. Highfield, Sarah P.
    Bernhardt, and Arnold Vedlitz. 2009. "Policy Learning for Flood
    Mitigation: A Longitudinal Assessment of the Community Rating System
    in Florida." Risk Analysis, 29(6):912­929.
11) Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Martin Oehmke. 2013. Chapter 18 -
    Bubbles, Financial Crises, and Systemic Risk, Handbook of the
    Economics of Finance, Volume 2, Part B, Pages 1221-1288.
12) Cameron, T. A. 2006. "Directional Heterogeneity in Distance Profiles in
    Hedonic Property Value Models." Journal of Environmental Economics
    and Management, 51:26­45.
13) Census Bureau. 2000­2012. "Building Permit Statistics." United States
    Department of Commerce.




                                                                          36
   https://www.census.gov/construction/bps/historical_data/ (accessed June 6th,
    2017).
14) Chivers, James and Nicholas E. Flores. 2002. "Market Failure in
    Information: The National Flood Insurance Program." Land Economics,
    78(4):515­521.
15) Cordes, Joseph J., and Anthony M. J. Yezer. 1998. "In Harm's Way: Does
    Federal Spending on Beach Enhancement and Protection Induce Excessive
    Development in Coastal Areas?" Land Economics, 74(1):128­145.
16) Davlasheridze, Meri, Karen Fisher-Vanden, and H. Allen Klaiber. 2016.
    "The Effects of Adaptation Measures on Hurricane Induced Property
    Losses: Which FEMA Investments have the Highest Returns?" Journal of
    Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 81:93­114.
17) Environmental Protection Agency, "PM2.5 Daily Summary Data" United
    States Department of Interior,
    https://aqs.epa.gov/aqsweb/airdata/download_files.html (accessed
    February 26th, 2018).
18) Fan, Qin, and Meri Davlasheridze. 2016. "Flood risk, flood mitigation,
    and location choice: evaluating the National Flood Insurance Program's
    Community Rating System." Risk Analysis, 36(6):1125­1147.
19) Freeman, A Myrick. 1979. "Hedonic Prices, Property Values and
    Measuring Environmental Benefits: A Survey of the Issues." The
    Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 81(2): 154-73. doi:10.2307/3439957.
20) Freeman III, A. Myrick, Joseph A. Herriges, and Catherine L. Kling.
    2014. The Measurement of Environmental and Resources Values.
    Resources for the Future, Washington, DC, Third Edition.
21) Gaul, Gilbert M. 2018 "How Rising Seas and Coastal Storms Drowned the
    U.S. Flood Insurance Program" Yale Environment 360, May 23rd.
22) Hallstrom, Daniel G., and Kerry V. Smith. 2005. "Market responses to
    hurricanes." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
    50(3):541­561.
23) Keenan, Jesse M., T. Hill, and A. Gumber. 2018. "Climate Gentrification:
    From Theory to Empiricism in Miami-Dade County, Florida."
    Environmental Research Letters, 13(5).
24) IPCC. 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
    Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
    Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K.
    Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex
    and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
    United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1535 pp.
25) Knabb, Richard D; Rhome, Jamie R; Brown, Daniel P. 2005. Hurricane
    Katrina: August 23 ­ 30, 2005 (Tropical Cyclone Report). United States




                                                                                  37
    National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Weather
    Service. Washington, D.C., USA.
26) Kousky, Carolyn. 2017. "Financing Flood Losses: A Discussion of the
    National Flood Insurance Program." RFF Discussion Paper.
27) Kousky, Carolyn, and Erwann Michel-Kerjan. 2017. "Examining Flood
    Insurance Claims in the United States: Six Key Findings." Journal of Risk
    and Insurance, 84(3):819­850.
28) Kuminoff, Nicolai, V.K. Smith, Christopher Timmins. 2013. "The New
    Economics of Equilibrium Sorting and Policy Evaluation Using Housing
    Markets," Journal of Economic Literature. Vol.51, No.4:1007-1062.
29) Landry, Craig E., and Mohammad R. Jahan-Parvar. 2011. "Flood
    Insurance Coverage in the Coastal Zone." The Journal of Risk and
    Insurance, 78(2):362­388.
30) Landry, Craig E., and Jingyuan Li. 2011. "Participation in the Community
    Rating System of NFIP: Empirical analysis of North Carolina Counties."
    Natural Hazards Review, 13(3):205­220.
31) Mendelsohn, Robert, Daniel Hellerstein, Michael Huguenin, Robert
    Unsworth, and Richard Brazee. 1992. "Measuring Hazardous Waste
    Damages with Panel Models." Journal of Environmental Economics and
    Management, 22(3):259-271.
32) Mendelsohn, Robert O., Kerry Emanuel, and Shun Chonabayashi. 2011.
    "The Impact of Climate Change on Hurricane Damages in the United
    States (February 1, 2011)". World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
    No. 5561. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1955105
33) Mendelsohn, Robert O.,, Kerry Emanuel, Shun Chonabayashi, and Laura
    Bakkensen. 2012. "The Impact of Climate Change on Global Tropical
    Cyclone Damage" Nature Climate Change 2: 205-209.
34) New York Times. 2019. "Miami Battles Rising Seas." Ban Ki Moon,
    Frances Saurez. February, 2019.
35) Nordhaus, William D. 2006. "The Economics of Hurricanes in the United
    States," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12813.
36) Michel-Kerjan, Erwann O. 2010. "Catastrophe Economics: The National
    Flood Insurance Program." The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
    24(4):165­186.
37) Michel-Kerjan, Erwann O., Ajita Atreya, and Jeffry Czajkowski. 2016.
    "Learning Over Time From FEMAs Community Rating System (crs) And
    Its Link to Flood Resilience Measurement." Working Paper.
38) Risen, Jane and Clayton R., Critcher. 2011. "Visceral Fit: While in a
    Visceral State, Associated States of the World Seem More Likely."
    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100(5), 777­793.




                                                                           38
39) Ridker, Ronald G., and John A. Henning. 1967. "The Determinants of
    Residential Property Values with Special Reference to Air Pollution." The
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 49(2): 246-57. doi:10.2307/1928231.
40) Palmquist, Raymond B. and V. Kerry Smith. 2002. "The use of hedonic
    property value techniques for policy and litigation." International
    Yearbook of Environmental and Resource Economics, 6:115-164,
    Cheltenham, U.K. Elgar.
41) Picard, Pierre. 2008. "Natural Disaster Insurance and the Equity-
    Efficiency Trade-Off." The Journal of Risk and Insurance, 75(1):17­38.
42) Pryce, Gwilym, and Yu Chen. 2011. "Flood Risk and the Consequences
    for Housing of a Changing Climate: An International Perspective." Risk
    Management, 13(4):228­246.
43) Smith, Kerry V. and Ju-Chin Huang. 1995. "Can Markets Value Air
    Quality? A Meta-Analysis of Hedonic Property Value Models." Journal of
    Political Economy, 103(1): 209-27.
44) Sadiq, Abdul-Akeem, and Douglas Noonan. 2015. "Flood Disaster
    Management Policy: An Analysis of the United States Community
    Ratings System." Journal of Natural Resources Policy Research, 7(1):5­
    22.




                                                                          39
                                     VI. Tables

                             Table 1 ­ Descriptive Statistics


                  Variable                  Mean            SD           Min     Max
Total CRS Points                               333.09         595.35       0        2288
CRS Class                                          9.43           1.05     6           10
CRS Pub Maps Par                                   0.16           0.37     0            1
Total CRS 300s Points                          106.30         181.14       0        571
Total CRS 400s Points                          108.99         220.11       0        1121
Total CRS 500s Points                           71.96         149.03       0        554
Total CRS 600s Points                           32.68            62.66     0        272
Zone High                                          0.27           0.44     0            1
CRS X Zone                                         0.11           0.31     0            1
Year Built                                    1974.22            25.15   1606       2012
Living Space (sq footage)                     1378.41        1053.92       0      200400
Verified Sales Price ($)                    326980.47      353859.31     400    44000000
Number of Monthly Sales                         50.29            44.64     1        245
Total New Builds (Number of Units)              12.73            18.93     0        305
Total Value New Builds ($)                 1535743.50     2085704.75       0    23094524
PM 2.5 Pollution (g/m3)                         11.48             4.45   2.95      38.07
Total Residents                              15707.17       11143.02     150      42203
Primary Residents                            10469.14        9097.26      67      32186
Secondary Residents                           5238.03        3941.44      34      14546
Percent Non-Resident                               0.37           0.23   0.07       0.89




                                                                                            40
Table 2 ­ Cross Tabulation and Correlations

 Panel A: Summary Cross Tab of Houses
                                           Non-
                           CRS             CRS           Total
  Zone High Risk               30,384       42,361         72,745
  Zone Low Risk                12,977      186,860        199,837

 Total                         43,361      229,221        272,582



 Panel B: Correlation Between Price and CRS, High Risk

                     Zone High Risk        CRS        CRS x Zone
 Log Price                     0.1328       0.2211         0.2326

 Note: Non-CRS refers to any municipality that does not meet our
 definition of CRS participation.




                                                                    41
   Table 3 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina ­ All Sales, No Controls




                                  (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
Variables:                    Log Price Log Price Log Price Log Price Log Price Log Price
Zone High Risk                0.185       0.185         0.185       0.185       0.185         0.185
                              (0.00429) (0.00429) (0.00429) (0.00429) (0.00429) (0.00429)
 Post # Months                0.441       0.436         0.423       0.432       0.443         0.442
                              (0.0106)    (0.00789) (0.00658) (0.00559) (0.00505) (0.00471)
Zone X Post # Months          0.144       0.148         0.121       0.113       0.0914        0.0963
                              (0.0269)    (0.0197)      (0.0166)    (0.0141)    (0.0126)      (0.0118)
Year FE                       N           N             N           N           N             N
Month FE                      N           N             N           N           N             N
County-Year FE                N           N             N           N           N             N
Municipality FE               N           N             N           N           N             N
House FE                      N           N             N           N           N             N
Observations                  178,844     182,491       186,126     190,609     194,668       198,060
R-squared                     0.023       0.030         0.035       0.043       0.049         0.054
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1
defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4
months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4
defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10
months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post #
Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post
period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                  42
      Table 4 - Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina ­ All Sales, Controls

                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Variables:                               Log Price         Log Price        Log Price        Log Price        Log Price        Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.         0.0511            0.0495           0.0439           0.0368           0.0338           0.0280
                                     (0.0243)          (0.0241)         (0.0237)         (0.0231)         (0.0227)         (0.0224)
Zone High Risk                       0.234             0.232            0.231            0.231            0.230            0.229
                                     (0.00804)         (0.00788)        (0.00779)        (0.00757)        (0.00740)        (0.00724)
CRS x Zone                           -0.129            -0.131           -0.131           -0.130           -0.131           -0.128
                                     (0.0127)          (0.0126)         (0.0124)         (0.0122)         (0.0120)         (0.0118)
Post Months                          -0.0188           -0.0144          -0.0105          -0.0100          -0.00751         -0.00726
                                     (0.00864)         (0.00714)        (0.00709)        (0.00708)        (0.00711)        (0.00710)
Zone X Post # Months                 0.117             0.102            0.0876           0.0869           0.0791           0.0787
                                     (0.0194)          (0.0144)         (0.0123)         (0.0106)         (0.00965)        (0.00901)
Year FE                              Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
Month FE                             Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
County-Year FE                       Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
Municipality FE                      Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
House FE                             N                 N                N                N                N                N
Observations                         156,561           159,887          163,157          167,290          171,118          174,301
R-squared                             0.630              0.632            0.632           0.634            0.636           0.638
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6
months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10
months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with
Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                43
           Table 5 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina - Repeated Sales,
                                         Controls


                                                 (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)
Variables:                                    Log Price      Log Price       Log Price      Log Price     Log Price        Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                 0.106          0.102           0.0919         0.0880        0.0841        0.0813
                                             (0.0290)       (0.0286)        (0.0281)       (0.0267)      (0.0263)      (0.0259)
CRS x Zone                                   -0.0619        -0.0595         -0.0496        -0.0470       -0.0472       -0.0466
                                             (0.0315)       (0.0312)        (0.0306)       (0.0294)      (0.0290)      (0.0287)
 Post Months                                 -0.0305        -0.0289         -0.0280        -0.0249       -0.0232       -0.0208
                                             (0.0105)       (0.00899)       (0.00874)      (0.00859)     (0.00840)     (0.00828)
Zone X Post # Months                         0.0909         0.0906          0.0967         0.0945        0.0994        0.0978
                                             (0.0222)       (0.0184)        (0.0150)       (0.0133)      (0.0118)      (0.0110)
Year FE                                      Y              Y               Y              Y             Y             Y
Month FE                                     Y              Y               Y              Y             Y             Y
County-Year FE                               Y              Y               Y              Y             Y             Y
Municipality FE                              N              N               N              N             N             N
House FE                                     Y              Y               Y              Y             Y             Y
Observations                                 60,138         61,111          62,137         63,449        64,650        65,626
R-squared                                    0.980          0.979           0.978          0.977         0.977         0.976
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to
6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up
to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables
interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                             44
          Table 6 - Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina ­ Information, All Sales,
                                            Controls

                                          (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
Variables:                               Log Price          Log Price         Log Price       Log Price          Log Price          Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.          0.0508             0.0472            0.0399          0.0316             0.0278             0.0219
                                      (0.0243)           (0.0240)          (0.0236)        (0.0231)           (0.0226)           (0.0223)
Zone High Risk                        0.234              0.232             0.230           0.229              0.228              0.226
                                      (0.00798)          (0.00782)         (0.00771)       (0.00747)          (0.00731)          (0.00716)
CRS x Zone                            -0.129             -0.128            -0.124          -0.120             -0.119             -0.116
                                      (0.0128)           (0.0127)          (0.0126)        (0.0125)           (0.0124)           (0.0123)
 Post Months                          -0.0190            -0.0165           -0.0132         -0.0123            -0.00969           -0.00904
                                      (0.00862)          (0.00709)         (0.00704)       (0.00703)          (0.00705)          (0.00703)
Zone X Post Months                    0.123              0.117             0.108           0.113              0.105              0.103
                                      (0.0245)           (0.0177)          (0.0151)        (0.0132)           (0.0122)           (0.0113)
CRS X Post # Months                   0.00514            0.0396            0.0464          0.0382             0.0382             0.0329
                                      (0.0458)           (0.0337)          (0.0273)        (0.0226)           (0.0204)           (0.0192)
 CRS X Zone X Post Mos                -0.0221            -0.0776           -0.0970         -0.105             -0.106             -0.0986
                                      (0.0582)           (0.0425)          (0.0355)        (0.0299)           (0.0266)           (0.0248)
Year FE                               Y                  Y                 Y               Y                  Y                  Y
Month FE                              Y                  Y                 Y               Y                  Y                  Y
County-Year FE                        Y                  Y                 Y               Y                  Y                  Y
Municipality FE                       Y                  Y                 Y               Y                  Y                  Y
House FE                              N                  N                 N               N                  N                  N
Observations                          156,561            159,887           163,157         167,290            171,118            174,301
R-squared                             0.630              0.632             0.632           0.634              0.636              0.638
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months
after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after
the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the
storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are
consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                 45
           Table 7 - Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina ­ Repeated Sales,
                                      Controls, Info

                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
Variables:                                    Log Price      Log Price        Log Price      Log Price     Log Price       Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                 0.106          0.101            0.0894         0.0826        0.0779         0.0734
                                             (0.0290)       (0.0288)         (0.0283)       (0.0271)      (0.0267)       (0.0264)
CRS x Zone                                   -0.0609        -0.0570          -0.0442        -0.0373       -0.0354        -0.0324
                                             (0.0315)       (0.0313)         (0.0307)       (0.0297)      (0.0293)       (0.0291)
 Post # Months                               -0.0288        -0.0310          -0.0306        -0.0280       -0.0263        -0.0243
                                             (0.0106)       (0.00914)        (0.00889)      (0.00873)     (0.00853)      (0.00840)
Zone X Post # Months                         0.124          0.114            0.122          0.123         0.127          0.126
                                             (0.0299)       (0.0232)         (0.0184)       (0.0159)      (0.0139)       (0.0128)
 CRS X Post # Mos                            -0.0376        0.0424           0.0517         0.0648        0.0697         0.0807
                                             (0.0416)       (0.0610)         (0.0472)       (0.0396)      (0.0347)       (0.0322)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                     -0.0575        -0.105           -0.116         -0.140        -0.146         -0.157
                                             (0.0560)       (0.0679)         (0.0533)       (0.0452)      (0.0397)       (0.0370)
Year FE                                      Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y
Month FE                                     Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y
County-Year FE                               Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y
Municipality FE                              N              N                N              N             N              N
House FE                                     Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y
Observations                                 60,138         61,111           62,137         63,449        64,650         65,626
R-squared                                    0.980          0.979            0.978          0.977         0.977          0.976
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up
to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as
up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables
interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                            46
       -10
               10
                    30
                         50
                              70
                                   90
                                        110
     2004-01
     2004-06
     2004-11
     2005-04
     2005-09
     2006-02
     2006-07
     2006-12
     2007-05
     2007-10
     2008-03
     2008-08
     2009-01
     2009-06
                                                                                                                      VII. Figures




     2009-11
     2010-04
     2010-09
     2011-02
     2011-07
     2011-12
     2012-05
     2012-10
     2013-03
     2013-08
     2014-01
     2014-06
                                              Figure 1 ­ Google Trends in New Jersey: Hurricane Katrina Search Term




47
     2014-11
    Figure 2 ­ Relationship between Coastal Amenity and Price



P

                                              P(Xi,Ai,0)




                                              P(Xi,Ai,1)




                            A                                   A




                                                                48
Figure 3 - Map of Flood Risk in New Jersey Counties




                                                      49
Figure 4 - Map of Flood Risk in New Jersey Counties and Housing Sales




                                                                        50
                                                                    For Online Publication

  APPENDIX

I.   Appendix Tables

              Table A1­ Description of Public Awareness CRS Activities

               Activity Number                        Description
                    320          Map Information
                    330          Public Outreach Projects
                    340          Hazard Disclosure
                    350          Flood Protection Information
                    360          Flood Protection Assistance
                    410          Floodplain Mapping
                    440          Flood Data Maintenance




                                                                                       51
                           Table A2 ­ Table Setup for Post and Post Interaction Variables

                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                              Column          Column          Column          Column          Column       Column
Variables:                   Definition      Definition      Definition      Definition      Definition    Definition
                           Post 2 Months   Post 4 Months   Post 6 Months   Post 8 Months   Post 10         Post 12
Post # Months                                                                              Months          Months
                           Zone X Post 2   Zone X Post 4   Zone X Post 6   Zone X Post 8   Zone X Post     Zone X Post 12
Zone X Post # Months       Months          Months          Months          Months          10 Months       Months
                           CRS X Post 2    CRS X Post 4    CRS X Post 6    CRS X Post 8    CRS X Post 10   CRS X Post 12
CRS X Post # Mos           Months          Months          Months          Months          Months          Months
                           CRS X Zone X    CRS X Zone X    CRS X Zone X    CRS X Zone X    CRS X Zone X    CRS X Zone X
CRS X Zone X Post # Mos    Post 2 Mos      Post 4 Mos      Post 6 Mos      Post 8 Mos      Post 10 Mos     Post 12 Mos
                           Secondary Res   Secondary Res   Secondary Res   Secondary Res   Secondary Res   Secondary Res
Secondary Res Buy X Post   Buy X Post 2    Buy X Post 4    Buy X Post 6    Buy X Post 8    Buy X Post 10   Buy X Post 12
# Mo                       Mo              Mo              Mo              Mo              Mo              Mo
                           OB X Post 2     OB X Post 4     OB X Post 6     OB X Post 8     OB X Post 10    OB X Post 12
OB X Post # Mos            Months          Months          Months          Months          Months          Months
                           OB X Zone X     OB X Zone X     OB X Zone X     OB X Zone X     OB X Zone X     OB X Zone X
OB X Zone X Post # Mo      Post 2 Mo       Post 4 Mo       Post 6 Mo       Post 8 Mo       Post 10 Mo      Post 12 Mo




                                                                                                             52
        Table A3 - Sales Price Regression, Pre and Post Period, Repeated Sales,
                                    Controls, Info

                                                (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
Variables:                                   Log Price      Log Price        Log Price      Log Price      Log Price     Log Price
CRS Public Info and Maps Par.               -0.00929       -0.00963         -0.0106        -0.0115        -0.0119       -0.0121
                                            (0.00989)      (0.00990)        (0.00990)      (0.00991)      (0.00992)     (0.00992)
CRS x Zone                                  0.0635         0.0635           0.0643         0.0661         0.0665        0.0670
                                            (0.0144)       (0.0144)         (0.0144)       (0.0144)       (0.0144)      (0.0144)
Age                                         -0.00399       -0.00399         -0.00399       -0.00400       -0.00400      -0.00399
                                            (0.000294)     (0.000294)       (0.000295)     (0.000295)     (0.000295)    (0.000295)
Living Space                                4.52e-05       4.52e-05         4.53e-05       4.53e-05       4.53e-05      4.53e-05
                                            (2.14e-05)     (2.14e-05)       (2.14e-05)     (2.14e-05)     (2.14e-05)    (2.14e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                       -0.0100        -0.00972         -0.00989       -0.00987       -0.00893      -0.00838
                                            (0.00471)      (0.00471)        (0.00471)      (0.00470)      (0.00470)     (0.00470)
Mo Sales                                    0.000629       0.000633         0.000623       0.000614       0.000616      0.000622
                                            (6.70e-05)     (6.70e-05)       (6.69e-05)     (6.68e-05)     (6.68e-05)    (6.68e-05)
Lag Air Pollution                           0.000905       0.000863         0.000857       0.000909       0.000950      0.000936
                                            (0.000293)     (0.000292)       (0.000292)     (0.000292)     (0.000292)    (0.000292)
Air Pollution                               -0.000168      -0.000161        -0.000122      -0.000145      -5.26e-05     -6.36e-05
                                            (0.000289)     (0.000287)       (0.000287)     (0.000287)     (0.000287)    (0.000287)
Total New Builds                            0.000144       0.000145         0.000140       0.000140       0.000142      0.000141
                                            (6.00e-05)     (6.00e-05)       (6.00e-05)     (6.00e-05)     (6.00e-05)    (6.00e-05)
Total Value New Builds                      0.00370        0.00355          0.00346        0.00345        0.00340       0.00339
                                            (0.00107)      (0.00107)        (0.00107)      (0.00107)      (0.00107)     (0.00107)
 Post # Months                              -0.000420      0.0116           0.0134         0.0252         0.0286        0.0271
                                            (0.00789)      (0.00605)        (0.00507)      (0.00462)      (0.00462)     (0.00489)
Zone X Post # Months                        0.0622         0.0539           0.0711         0.0744         0.0742        0.0721
                                            (0.0254)       (0.0180)         (0.0147)       (0.0130)       (0.0117)      (0.0109)
 CRS X Post # Mos                           -0.0432        0.0235           0.0439         0.0527         0.0536        0.0619
                                            (0.0305)       (0.0372)         (0.0293)       (0.0262)       (0.0238)      (0.0222)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                    -0.0109        -0.0417          -0.0723        -0.0933        -0.0940       -0.105
                                            (0.0426)       (0.0435)         (0.0348)       (0.0311)       (0.0282)      (0.0263)
Constant                                    11.68          11.68            11.68          11.68          11.68         11.68
                                            (0.0306)       (0.0306)         (0.0306)       (0.0306)       (0.0306)      (0.0306)
Year FE                                     Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
Month FE                                    Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
County-Year FE                              Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
Municipality FE                             N              N                N              N              N             N
House FE                                    Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
Observations                                86,543         86,543           86,543         86,543         86,543        86,543
R-squared                                   0.969          0.969            0.969          0.969          0.969         0.969
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up
to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period
as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post
period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and
variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more
information.




                                                                                                                           53
            Table A4­ Summary of Results from Analyses of All Storms
                                                                                  Repeated
   Storm                        Description                      All Sales         Sales
Allison         Tropical Storm Allison landed in Texas in                    0               0
               June of 2001 and led to 30,000 homeless
               after storm flooding.
Multiple       Several hurricanes and tropical storms that                   5               0
2002           hit several regions of the US and the
               Caribbean in September 2002.
Charley        Hurricane Charley hit the US in August of                     6               4
               2004 and caused over 15 billion dollars in
               damages. Primarily in Florida.
Katrina        Hurricane Katrina hit the US in August of                     5               4
               2005. It was the costliest cyclone to ever hit
               the US and cost more than 100 billion in
               damages.

Multiple       Hurricane Dean and Tropical storm Erin both                   4               3
2007           occurred in August of 2007 and both caused
               wide spread damages. Hurricane Dean's
               destruction was felt primarily in the gulf
               coast and Mexico, where as Erin caused
               flooding in Texas and Oklahoma.

Notes: This table presents the number of negative and significant coefficients on the
interaction term, CRS x Zone x Post # Months, across all six specifications for each storm and
each dataset. In column "All Sales" we denote the number for the regressions that utilize all
sales and in the column "Repeated Sales" we denote the number for the specifications that
considered only repeated sales.




                                                                                     54
   Table A5 - Cross Tabulation Across Resident Groups

                                            CRS           Non-CRS              Total
Primary Resident:
                      Zone High Risk          7,966             16,977            24,943
                      Zone Low Risk           4,064            113,085           117,149
                               Total         12,030            130,062           142,092
Non Resident:
                      Zone High Risk         22,418             25,384            47,802
                      Zone Low Risk           8,913             73,775            82,688
                               Total         31,331             99,159           130,490
All Residents
                      Zone High Risk          30,384             42,361            72,745
                      Zone Low Risk           12,977            186,860           199,837
                               Total          43,361            229,221           272,582
Note: Non-CRS refers to any municipality that does not meet our definition of CRS
participation.




                                                                                            55
Table A6 ­ Probability a Home is Sold by Non-Resident After Hurricane
                               Katrina


                                                                (1)
                Variables:                                     Sold
                Post 12 Months                                       0.0126
                                                                (0.000218)
                Non-resident Sell                                     -0.986
                                                                (0.000216)
                Non-resident Sell x Post 12 Months                  -0.0126
                                                                (0.000216)
                CRS Public Info and Maps Par.                     0.000515
                                                                (0.000107)
                Zone High Risk                                    0.000259
                                                                 (2.28e-05)
                CRS x Zone                                       -0.000551
                                                                 (6.32e-05)
                Average Sales                                        0.0847
                                                                  (0.00129)
                Number Sales Over Average                           0.00184
                                                                 (2.78e-05)
                Average Price                                    -0.000279
                                                                 (3.86e-05)
                Average Lag Pollution                             -2.29e-06
                                                                 (2.12e-06)
                Average Pollution                                  2.67e-06
                                                                 (2.12e-06)
                Total New Units                                   -3.34e-07
                                                                 (4.50e-07)
                Total New Value                                   -6.67e-06
                                                                 (6.84e-06)
                Constant                                               0.250
                                                                   (0.0112)
                Year FE                                                    Y
                Month FE                                                   Y
                County-Year FE                                             Y
                Municipality FE                                            Y
                House FE                                                   N
                Observations                                    43,989,189
                R-squared                                              0.542
                Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is
                listed in column header




                                                                               56
                            Table A7 ­ Probability of Non-Resident Sale After Hurricane Katrina

                                             (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)                   (5)                    (6)
Variables:                           Non-Resident Sale Non-Resident Sale Non-Resident Sale Non-Resident Sale Non-Resident Sale Non-Resident Sale
Zone High Risk                                     0.0951                 0.0937                0.0949                0.0959                0.0950                 0.0952
                                               (0.00552)              (0.00544)             (0.00537)              (0.00527)             (0.00520)              (0.00514)
CRS Public Info and Maps Par.                      0.0968                   0.101               0.0853                0.0755                0.0602                 0.0633
                                                 (0.0362)               (0.0354)              (0.0340)              (0.0320)              (0.0304)               (0.0292)
CRS x Zone                                          -0.138                 -0.136                -0.133                -0.134                -0.133                 -0.133
                                                 (0.0101)             (0.00992)             (0.00980)              (0.00963)             (0.00950)              (0.00938)
Age                                             1.01e-05               1.33e-05              8.96e-06               9.34e-06              1.66e-05               1.32e-05
                                              (6.38e-05)             (6.27e-05)            (6.18e-05)             (6.07e-05)            (5.98e-05)             (5.91e-05)
Living Space                                   -4.44e-05              -4.48e-05             -4.50e-05              -4.53e-05             -4.53e-05              -4.54e-05
                                              (1.07e-05)             (1.05e-05)            (1.03e-05)             (1.01e-05)            (9.78e-06)             (9.61e-06)
Average Price                                     -0.0587                -0.0609               -0.0586               -0.0596               -0.0608                -0.0679
                                                 (0.0151)               (0.0148)              (0.0146)              (0.0142)              (0.0140)               (0.0137)
Average Month Sales                             -0.00347               -0.00203              -0.00190             -0.000972              -7.16e-05              0.000801
                                               (0.00215)              (0.00207)             (0.00196)              (0.00185)             (0.00176)              (0.00170)
Total Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                     -0.00293               -0.00146            -0.000970               0.000219                0.00260                0.00356
                                               (0.00486)              (0.00481)             (0.00477)              (0.00469)             (0.00460)              (0.00453)
Lag Air Pollution                              -7.95e-05              -8.35e-05            -0.000151              -0.000198             -0.000150              -0.000231
                                             (0.000490)             (0.000489)            (0.000484)             (0.000478)            (0.000474)             (0.000470)
Air Pollution                                 -0.000120              -0.000129             -0.000132               -8.20e-05             -8.08e-05             -0.000125
                                             (0.000488)             (0.000481)            (0.000479)             (0.000477)            (0.000472)             (0.000467)
Total New Builds                               -9.16e-05              -9.86e-05             -9.59e-05              -8.15e-05             -7.88e-05              -7.32e-05
                                              (9.67e-05)             (9.62e-05)            (9.55e-05)             (9.47e-05)            (9.37e-05)             (9.28e-05)
Total Value New Builds                         0.000674               0.000781                0.00124                0.00106             0.000988               0.000517
                                               (0.00155)              (0.00153)             (0.00151)              (0.00148)             (0.00143)              (0.00141)
Percentage Homes Zone High                          -0.315                 -0.133              -0.0921               -0.0247                  0.145                  0.241
                                                   (0.249)                (0.239)               (0.223)               (0.207)               (0.198)                (0.192)
Percentage Homes Non-resident                       -0.109                 -0.236                -0.246                -0.335                -0.522                 -0.589
                                                   (0.251)                (0.241)               (0.231)               (0.221)               (0.211)                (0.204)
Total Population                                5.95e-06               1.25e-06              9.09e-07              -2.42e-06             -5.50e-06              -8.14e-06
                                              (7.77e-06)             (7.46e-06)            (7.09e-06)             (6.70e-06)            (6.34e-06)             (6.11e-06)
Post # Month                                       0.0121                 0.0128                0.0129                0.0130                0.0131                 0.0131
                                               (0.00881)              (0.00759)             (0.00759)              (0.00759)             (0.00759)              (0.00759)
Constant                                             1.263                  1.301                 1.262                 1.295                 1.340                  1.434
                                                   (0.182)                (0.178)               (0.174)               (0.170)               (0.166)                (0.162)
Year FE                                                  Y                      Y                     Y                     Y                     Y                      Y
Month FE                                                 Y                      Y                     Y                     Y                     Y                      Y
County-Year FE                                           Y                      Y                     Y                     Y                     Y                      Y
Municipality FE                                          Y                      Y                     Y                     Y                     Y                      Y
House FE                                                 N                      N                     N                     N                     N                      N
Observations                                     110,624                113,950               117,220                121,353               125,181                128,364
R-squared                                            0.217                  0.217                 0.216                 0.216                 0.215                  0.215
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2
defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to
8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm.
Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                               57
            Table A8 ­ Probability of Non-Resident Purchase After Hurricane Katrina

                                         (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
                                    Non-Resident        Non-Resident       Non-Resident      Non-Resident       Non-Resident      Non-Resident
Variables:                              Buy                 Buy                Buy               Buy                Buy               Buy
Zone High Risk                               0.0993              0.0985           0.0980             0.0985            0.0984             0.0979
                                         (0.00516)           (0.00508)         (0.00502)         (0.00494)          (0.00488)         (0.00481)
CRS Public Info and Maps Par.                0.0852              0.0851           0.0671             0.0353            0.0382             0.0362
                                           (0.0353)            (0.0342)         (0.0331)           (0.0316)          (0.0297)           (0.0284)
CRS x Zone                                  -0.0724             -0.0703          -0.0667            -0.0621           -0.0605            -0.0597
                                           (0.0101)          (0.00994)         (0.00982)         (0.00967)          (0.00954)         (0.00943)
Age                                      0.000147            0.000152          0.000151          0.000165           0.000175          0.000183
                                        (5.81e-05)          (5.71e-05)        (5.62e-05)        (5.53e-05)         (5.44e-05)        (5.37e-05)
Living Space                             -3.51e-05           -3.53e-05         -3.55e-05         -3.59e-05          -3.56e-05         -3.53e-05
                                        (7.17e-06)          (7.04e-06)        (6.92e-06)        (6.81e-06)         (6.57e-06)        (6.38e-06)
Average Price                               -0.0451             -0.0458          -0.0466            -0.0448           -0.0461            -0.0427
                                           (0.0127)            (0.0125)         (0.0122)           (0.0120)          (0.0117)           (0.0114)
Average Month Sales                        0.00113             0.00229           0.00208           0.00300            0.00337           0.00317
                                         (0.00185)           (0.00178)         (0.00170)         (0.00160)          (0.00152)         (0.00147)
Total Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales               -0.00199          -0.000327          0.000150            0.00113            0.00219           0.00319
                                         (0.00425)           (0.00421)         (0.00417)         (0.00411)          (0.00403)         (0.00398)
Lag Air Pollution                         -0.00142            -0.00147          -0.00147          -0.00145           -0.00139          -0.00134
                                       (0.000435)          (0.000434)        (0.000429)        (0.000423)         (0.000420)        (0.000416)
Air Pollution                           -0.000495           -0.000535         -0.000514         -0.000548          -0.000514         -0.000535
                                       (0.000431)          (0.000425)        (0.000424)        (0.000422)         (0.000417)        (0.000412)
Total New Builds                          1.90e-05           -3.87e-06         -4.95e-06         -5.28e-06          -3.04e-05         -2.56e-05
                                        (8.09e-05)          (8.06e-05)        (7.99e-05)        (7.91e-05)         (7.84e-05)        (7.77e-05)
Total Value New Builds                  -0.000607           -0.000505         -0.000332          0.000241             0.00118         0.000128
                                         (0.00142)           (0.00140)         (0.00137)         (0.00134)          (0.00129)         (0.00127)
Percentage Homes Zone High                  -0.0789                0.104            0.215              0.392             0.532              0.573
                                             (0.217)             (0.208)          (0.195)            (0.182)           (0.174)            (0.171)
Percentage Homes Non-
resident                                         0.285           0.0689            -0.0407            -0.268             -0.384            -0.366
                                               (0.242)           (0.233)            (0.224)          (0.214)            (0.203)           (0.199)
Total Population                            -9.85e-06         -1.40e-05          -1.35e-05        -1.72e-05          -1.82e-05         -1.72e-05
                                           (6.65e-06)        (6.39e-06)         (6.10e-06)       (5.75e-06)         (5.44e-06)        (5.27e-06)
Post # Month                                 -0.00191          -0.00222           -0.00222         -0.00235           -0.00224          -0.00220
                                            (0.00789)         (0.00682)          (0.00682)        (0.00682)          (0.00681)         (0.00681)
Constant                                         0.647             0.695              0.724            0.737              0.757             0.720
                                               (0.157)           (0.154)            (0.150)          (0.147)            (0.143)           (0.140)
Year FE                                              Y                 Y                  Y                Y                  Y                 Y
Month FE                                             Y                 Y                  Y                Y                  Y                 Y
County-Year FE                                       Y                 Y                  Y                Y                  Y                 Y
Municipality FE                                      Y                 Y                  Y                Y                  Y                 Y
House FE                                             N                 N                  N                N                  N                 N
Observations                                  110,624           113,950            117,220          121,353            125,181           128,364
R-squared                                        0.348             0.347              0.346            0.346              0.346             0.345
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months
after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the
storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm.
Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent
with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                   58
      Table A9 - Probability Primary Seller's Home is Bought by Non-Resident

                                             (1)           (2)                (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)
                                         Primary        Primary           Primary         Primary         Primary        Primary
Variables:                                  Sell           Sell              Sell            Sell            Sell           Sell
Zone High Risk                               -0.0767       -0.0754            -0.0767        -0.0777         -0.0768         -0.0772
                                          (0.00532)      (0.00524)         (0.00518)       (0.00508)       (0.00502)      (0.00496)
CRS Public Info and Maps Par.                -0.0810       -0.0854            -0.0728        -0.0689         -0.0531         -0.0568
                                            (0.0363)      (0.0355)           (0.0343)       (0.0320)        (0.0304)        (0.0291)
CRS x Zone                                      0.125         0.123              0.121          0.123           0.121           0.122
                                          (0.00998)      (0.00984)         (0.00973)       (0.00955)       (0.00943)      (0.00930)
Age                                        1.74e-05       1.53e-05          1.90e-05        2.11e-05        1.53e-05       1.96e-05
                                         (6.27e-05)     (6.16e-05)        (6.07e-05)      (5.96e-05)      (5.87e-05)     (5.81e-05)
Living Space                               3.78e-05       3.82e-05          3.85e-05        3.86e-05        3.87e-05       3.89e-05
                                         (9.41e-06)     (9.26e-06)        (9.11e-06)      (8.89e-06)      (8.65e-06)     (8.51e-06)
Average Price                                 0.0503        0.0526             0.0500         0.0512          0.0521          0.0597
                                            (0.0144)      (0.0141)           (0.0139)       (0.0136)        (0.0133)        (0.0130)
Average Month Sales                         0.00370        0.00252           0.00229         0.00150       0.000577      -0.000470
                                          (0.00212)      (0.00204)         (0.00195)       (0.00185)       (0.00175)      (0.00170)
Total Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                 0.00256        0.00140         0.000998        -7.62e-06        -0.00219       -0.00294
                                          (0.00481)      (0.00476)         (0.00472)       (0.00464)       (0.00455)      (0.00449)
Lag Air Pollution                        -0.000185      -0.000192         -0.000121        -7.01e-05      -0.000107       -1.63e-05
                                        (0.000483)     (0.000482)        (0.000477)      (0.000471)      (0.000467)     (0.000463)
Air Pollution                              2.75e-05       2.91e-05          3.66e-05       -1.92e-05       -1.37e-05       2.60e-05
                                        (0.000483)     (0.000476)        (0.000474)      (0.000472)      (0.000467)     (0.000462)
Total New Builds                           9.54e-05       9.85e-05          9.50e-05        8.03e-05        7.25e-05       6.70e-05
                                         (9.51e-05)     (9.45e-05)        (9.39e-05)      (9.31e-05)      (9.21e-05)     (9.13e-05)
Total Value New Builds                   -0.000787      -0.000873           -0.00130        -0.00102      -0.000782      -0.000505
                                          (0.00152)      (0.00150)         (0.00148)       (0.00145)       (0.00140)      (0.00138)
Percentage Homes Zone High                      0.302         0.158              0.132        0.0952         -0.0554           -0.154
                                              (0.246)       (0.237)            (0.221)        (0.206)         (0.197)         (0.191)
Percentage Homes Non-resident                   0.160         0.239              0.239          0.290           0.467           0.557
                                              (0.245)       (0.236)            (0.227)        (0.218)         (0.208)         (0.203)
Total Population                          -7.85e-06      -4.13e-06         -3.41e-06       -6.55e-07        2.58e-06       5.94e-06
                                         (7.65e-06)     (7.37e-06)        (7.02e-06)      (6.66e-06)      (6.32e-06)     (6.11e-06)
Secondary Resident Buy                         -0.186        -0.186             -0.185         -0.185          -0.185          -0.185
                                          (0.00394)      (0.00392)         (0.00390)       (0.00388)       (0.00385)      (0.00384)
Post # Month                                 -0.0116       -0.0113            -0.0133        -0.0139         -0.0153         -0.0170
                                            (0.0104)     (0.00867)         (0.00838)       (0.00818)       (0.00807)      (0.00800)
Secondary Res Buy X Post # Mo              -0.00224       -0.00534          2.46e-05         0.00121         0.00470        0.00956
                                            (0.0149)      (0.0114)         (0.00987)       (0.00868)       (0.00794)      (0.00746)
Constant                                       -0.143        -0.171             -0.128         -0.160          -0.202          -0.304
                                              (0.174)       (0.170)            (0.167)        (0.163)         (0.159)         (0.156)
Year FE                                             Y             Y                  Y              Y               Y               Y
Month FE                                            Y             Y                  Y              Y               Y               Y
County-Year FE                                      Y             Y                  Y              Y               Y               Y
Municipality FE                                     Y             Y                  Y              Y               Y               Y
House FE                                            N             N                  N              N               N               N
Observations                                110,624        113,950           117,220         121,353         125,181        128,364
R-squared                                       0.238         0.238              0.237          0.237           0.236           0.236
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up
to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period
as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post
period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months
and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more
information.




                                                                                                                              59
                                                Table A10 - All Sales Buyer Type Results


                                                     (1)                  (2)                (3)                  (4)                  (5)                 (6)
Variables:                                        Log Price           Log Price           Log Price            Log Price            Log Price           Log Price
Outside Buyer (OB)                            0.0558              0.0536              0.0531               0.0544               0.0541              0.0548
                                              (0.0145)            (0.0144)            (0.0144)             (0.0144)             (0.0144)            (0.0144)
Zone High Risk                                0.152               0.148               0.147                0.150                0.150               0.151
                                              (0.0154)            (0.0153)            (0.0152)             (0.0152)             (0.0151)            (0.0151)
OB x Zone                                     -0.0352             -0.0333             -0.0325              -0.0341              -0.0341             -0.0351
                                              (0.0169)            (0.0168)            (0.0168)             (0.0168)             (0.0168)            (0.0168)
Age                                           -0.00234            -0.00234            -0.00228             -0.00231             -0.00231            -0.00228
                                              (0.000156)          (0.000153)          (0.000152)           (0.000149)           (0.000147)          (0.000146)
Living Space                                  0.000452            0.000449            0.000450             0.000451             0.000451            0.000451
                                              (7.75e-06)          (7.60e-06)          (7.50e-06)           (7.37e-06)           (7.26e-06)          (7.16e-06)
Total Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                   -0.0434             -0.0498             -0.0581              -0.0606              -0.0663             -0.0687
                                              (0.0162)            (0.0160)            (0.0159)             (0.0157)             (0.0153)            (0.0151)
Total Mo Sales                                0.00184             0.00200             0.00230              0.00243              0.00264             0.00277
                                              (0.000396)          (0.000387)          (0.000391)           (0.000380)           (0.000369)          (0.000363)
Lag Air Pollution                             -0.00246            -0.00255            -0.00234             -0.00229             -0.00227            -0.00239
                                              (0.00109)           (0.00109)           (0.00108)            (0.00107)            (0.00106)           (0.00106)
Air Pollution                                 -0.00150            -0.00171            -0.00167             -0.00173             -0.00157            -0.00184
                                              (0.00113)           (0.00112)           (0.00112)            (0.00111)            (0.00110)           (0.00110)
Total New Builds                              -0.000480           -0.000421           -0.000275            -0.000133            -2.45e-05           -2.14e-05
                                              (0.000321)          (0.000319)          (0.000314)           (0.000311)           (0.000308)          (0.000307)
Total Value New Builds                        0.0272              0.0268              0.0251               0.0246               0.0247              0.0230
                                              (0.00519)           (0.00516)           (0.00493)            (0.00492)            (0.00486)           (0.00482)
 Post # Months                                -0.0251             -0.0730             -0.0540              -0.0527              -0.0443             -0.0284
                                              (0.0527)            (0.0387)            (0.0342)             (0.0324)             (0.0303)            (0.0301)
Zone X Post # Months                          0.0724              0.0489              0.0690               0.0407               0.0450              0.0328
                                              (0.0681)            (0.0501)            (0.0428)             (0.0382)             (0.0339)            (0.0317)
 OB X Post # Mos                              -0.0653             0.0511              0.0622               0.0587               0.0550              0.0233
                                              (0.0793)            (0.0600)            (0.0479)             (0.0406)             (0.0359)            (0.0342)
 OB X Zone X Post # Mos                       0.0808              0.00806             -0.0653              -0.0264              -0.0405             -0.0101
                                              (0.0959)            (0.0728)            (0.0604)             (0.0514)             (0.0456)            (0.0426)
Constant                                      10.82               10.83               10.85                10.85                10.85               10.87
                                              (0.0785)            (0.0779)            (0.0755)             (0.0751)             (0.0744)            (0.0737)
Year FE                                       Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                    Y                   Y
Month FE                                      Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                    Y                   Y
County-Year FE                                Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                    Y                   Y
Municipality FE                               Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                    Y                   Y
House FE                                      N                   N                   N                    N                    N                   N
Observations                                  20,982              21,411              21,866               22,392               22,838              23,221
R-squared                                     0.667               0.669               0.665                0.666                0.666               0.666
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm.
Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post
period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months
after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more
information.




                                                                                                                                           60
                                          Table A11 - Repeated Sales Buyer Type Results


                                                (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)
Variables:                                   Log Price           Log Price           Log Price            Log Price            Log Price            Log Price
Outside Buyer (OB)                       -0.0218            -0.0260              -0.0290              -0.0292              -0.0371              -0.0405
                                         (0.0309)           (0.0297)             (0.0286)             (0.0278)             (0.0269)             (0.0262)
OB x Zone                                0.0221             0.0267               0.0310               0.0342               0.0450               0.0498
                                         (0.0352)           (0.0338)             (0.0326)             (0.0317)             (0.0307)             (0.0300)
Age                                      -0.00141           -0.00934             -0.00885             -0.0139              -0.0135              -0.00988
                                         (0.0218)           (0.0224)             (0.0222)             (0.0218)             (0.0208)             (0.0202)
Living Space                             0.000314           0.000463             0.000522             0.000783             0.000719             0.000767
                                         (0.000496)         (0.000497)           (0.000491)           (0.000478)           (0.000457)           (0.000432)
Total Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales              -0.00334           -0.00337             -0.00348             -0.00357             -0.00359             -0.00360
                                         (0.000555)         (0.000542)           (0.000534)           (0.000521)           (0.000507)           (0.000491)
Total Mo Sales                           0.000104           0.000115             0.000121             0.000131             0.000134             0.000139
                                         (2.45e-05)         (2.44e-05)           (2.31e-05)           (2.33e-05)           (2.26e-05)           (2.24e-05)
Lag Air Pollution                        0.00154            0.00158              0.00181              0.00203              0.00207              0.00228
                                         (0.00155)          (0.00151)            (0.00148)            (0.00147)            (0.00144)            (0.00143)
Air Pollution                            -0.000809          -0.000791            -0.000479            -0.000772            -0.000825            -0.00116
                                         (0.00156)          (0.00152)            (0.00150)            (0.00147)            (0.00145)            (0.00142)
Total New Builds                         -0.000430          -0.000392            -0.000373            -0.000220            -0.000161            -0.000188
                                         (0.000412)         (0.000408)           (0.000398)           (0.000390)           (0.000381)           (0.000375)
Total Value New Builds                   0.00799            0.00697              0.00699              0.00812              0.00765              0.00798
                                         (0.00653)          (0.00639)            (0.00617)            (0.00618)            (0.00609)            (0.00605)
Post Months                              -0.0777            -0.0645              -0.0804              -0.0542              -0.0582              -0.0505
                                         (0.0885)           (0.0751)             (0.0661)             (0.0620)             (0.0575)             (0.0540)
Zone X Post # Months                     0.0387             0.0328               0.0538               0.0150               0.0283               0.0181
                                         (0.117)            (0.103)              (0.0855)             (0.0734)             (0.0664)             (0.0609)
OB X Post # Months                       -0.0329            0.0167               0.0306               0.0115               0.0174               0.0192
                                         (0.0969)           (0.118)              (0.0911)             (0.0835)             (0.0728)             (0.0668)
OB X Zone X Post # Mos                   0.0286             -0.0466              -0.0601              -0.0336              -0.0506              -0.0487
                                         (0.128)            (0.128)              (0.105)              (0.0949)             (0.0827)             (0.0764)
Constant                                 11.82              11.79                11.79                11.76                11.76                11.75
                                         (0.102)            (0.108)              (0.0983)             (0.0977)             (0.0949)             (0.0934)
Year FE                                  Y                  Y                    Y                    Y                    Y                    Y
Month FE                                 Y                  Y                    Y                    Y                    Y                    Y
County-Year FE                           Y                  Y                    Y                    Y                    Y                    Y
Municipality FE                          N                  N                    N                    N                    N                    N
House FE                                 Y                  Y                    Y                    Y                    Y                    Y
Observations                             7,814              7,929                8,044                8,177                8,283                8,372
R-squared                                0.987              0.986                0.985                0.985                0.984                0.984
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm.
Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the
post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12
months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for
more information.




                                                                                                                                          61
 Table A12 ­ Regression Results: CRS on Average Claims


                                        (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)
Variables:                         Avg Claims      Avg Claims     Avg Claims      Avg Claims
CRS Public Info and Maps Par             -2,712         -3,802          -3,498          -1,235
                                        (980.0)         (897.9)        (868.6)         (1,624)
Constant                                11,003           6,782           5,892         20,232
                                        (600.5)         (1,769)        (2,297)         (6,553)
Year FE                                       N              Y               Y                 Y
Month FE                                      N              N               Y                 Y
Municipality FE                               N              N               N                 Y
Observations                              2,200          2,200           2,200              2,200
R-squared                                 0.003          0.210           0.268              0.364

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header.




                                                                                                    62
                          Table A13- Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina ­ Rep Sales, Flood
                                                      Controls, Info


                                                 (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)                  (6)
Variables:                                    Log Price             Log Price             Log Price             Log Price             Log Price            Log Price

CRS Public Info and Maps Par              0.106                 0.101                 0.0894               0.0826                0.0778                0.0734
                                          (0.0290)              (0.0288)              (0.0283)             (0.0271)              (0.0267)              (0.0264)
CRS x Zone                                -0.0611               -0.0572               -0.0443              -0.0374               -0.0355               -0.0325
                                          (0.0315)              (0.0313)              (0.0308)             (0.0297)              (0.0293)              (0.0291)
Age                                       -0.00140              -0.00137              -0.00137             -0.00141              -0.00146              -0.00147
                                          (0.000383)            (0.000372)            (0.000366)           (0.000358)            (0.000350)            (0.000341)
Living Space                              1.50e-05              1.63e-05              1.73e-05             1.80e-05              1.94e-05              2.05e-05
                                          (1.14e-05)            (1.22e-05)            (1.27e-05)           (1.29e-05)            (1.37e-05)            (1.43e-05)
Total Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales               -0.00160              -0.00442              -0.00561             -0.00449              -0.00322              -0.00217
                                          (0.00828)             (0.00813)             (0.00783)            (0.00759)             (0.00730)             (0.00710)
Total Mo Sales                            -0.000154             -7.19e-05             -2.16e-05            3.42e-06              6.22e-05              0.000134
                                          (0.000129)            (0.000125)            (0.000120)           (0.000116)            (0.000112)            (0.000108)
Lag Air Pollution                         0.000345              0.000387              0.000480             0.000449              0.000541              0.000549
                                          (0.000405)            (0.000396)            (0.000385)           (0.000378)            (0.000365)            (0.000361)
Air Pollution                             -0.000497             -0.000512             -0.000513            -0.000543             -0.000421             -0.000484
                                          (0.000401)            (0.000389)            (0.000383)           (0.000378)            (0.000372)            (0.000365)
Total New Builds                          -7.70e-05             -8.53e-05             -0.000112            -0.000118             -9.88e-05             -0.000112
                                          (9.39e-05)            (9.22e-05)            (9.03e-05)           (8.84e-05)            (8.42e-05)            (8.32e-05)
Total Value New Builds                    0.00424               0.00452               0.00554              0.00596               0.00591               0.00600
                                          (0.00201)             (0.00195)             (0.00190)            (0.00182)             (0.00169)             (0.00165)
Disaster Declared                         -0.00668              -0.00578              -0.00612             -0.00446              -0.0111               -0.00425
                                          (0.00676)             (0.00669)             (0.00655)            (0.00637)             (0.00576)             (0.00560)
Post # Months                             -0.0301               -0.0319               -0.0315              -0.0287               -0.0281               -0.0250
                                          (0.0108)              (0.00923)             (0.00898)            (0.00881)             (0.00860)             (0.00847)
Zone X Post # Months                      0.124                 0.114                 0.122                0.123                 0.127                 0.126
                                          (0.0298)              (0.0232)              (0.0184)             (0.0159)              (0.0139)              (0.0128)
CRS X Post # Mos                          -0.0379               0.0423                0.0517               0.0647                0.0695                0.0807
                                          (0.0416)              (0.0610)              (0.0472)             (0.0396)              (0.0347)              (0.0322)
CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                   -0.0575               -0.105                -0.117               -0.140                -0.145                -0.157
                                          (0.0559)              (0.0679)              (0.0533)             (0.0452)              (0.0397)              (0.0370)
Constant                                  11.61                 11.57                 11.56                11.57                 11.57                 11.56
                                          (0.0319)              (0.0351)              (0.0320)             (0.0305)              (0.0293)              (0.0289)
Year FE                                   Y                     Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
Month FE                                  Y                     Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
County-Year FE                            Y                     Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
Municipality FE                           N                     N                     N                    N                     N                     N
House FE                                  Y                     Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
Observations                              60,138                61,111                62,137               63,449                64,650                65,626
R-squared                                 0.980                 0.979                 0.978                 0.977                 0.977                0.976
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2
defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8
months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post #
Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                               63
      Table A14 - Regression Results with CRS Class 8 or Above, Repeated Sales,
                                    Controls, Info


                                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
Variables:                                  Log Price      Log Price      Log Price      Log Price      Log Price     Log Price
CRS Class 8 or Above                       0.194          0.189          0.192          0.189          0.190         0.189
                                           (0.0365)       (0.0366)       (0.0360)       (0.0346)       (0.0343)      (0.0340)
CRS x Zone                                 -0.0261        -0.0215        -0.0249        -0.0253        -0.0287       -0.0292
                                           (0.0398)       (0.0397)       (0.0389)       (0.0375)       (0.0371)      (0.0368)
Age                                        -0.00127       -0.00124       -0.00125       -0.00130       -0.00136      -0.00137
                                           (0.000371)     (0.000362)     (0.000358)     (0.000351)     (0.000344)    (0.000337)
Living Space                               1.55e-05       1.68e-05       1.79e-05       1.86e-05       2.00e-05      2.11e-05
                                           (1.18e-05)     (1.26e-05)     (1.32e-05)     (1.34e-05)     (1.41e-05)    (1.47e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                      -0.00171       -0.00421       -0.00491       -0.00397       -0.00237      -0.00149
                                           (0.00821)      (0.00810)      (0.00782)      (0.00760)      (0.00732)     (0.00712)
Mo Sales                                   -8.87e-05      -1.45e-05      2.99e-05       5.18e-05       0.000115      0.000177
                                           (0.000128)     (0.000124)     (0.000119)     (0.000116)     (0.000112)    (0.000108)
Lag Air Pollution                          0.000267       0.000309       0.000408       0.000393       0.000455      0.000499
                                           (0.000402)     (0.000393)     (0.000382)     (0.000375)     (0.000363)    (0.000359)
Air Pollution                              -0.000511      -0.000530      -0.000532      -0.000562      -0.000428     -0.000505
                                           (0.000399)     (0.000387)     (0.000381)     (0.000376)     (0.000370)    (0.000363)
Total New Builds                           -6.85e-05      -7.33e-05      -0.000102      -0.000111      -9.06e-05     -0.000105
                                           (9.37e-05)     (9.20e-05)     (9.02e-05)     (8.82e-05)     (8.42e-05)    (8.31e-05)
Total Value New Builds                     0.00351        0.00382        0.00481        0.00533        0.00522       0.00542
                                           (0.00200)      (0.00193)      (0.00189)      (0.00181)      (0.00169)     (0.00164)
Post # Months                              -0.0262        -0.0271        -0.0274        -0.0246        -0.0230       -0.0210
                                           (0.0106)       (0.00910)      (0.00883)      (0.00866)      (0.00847)     (0.00835)
Zone X Post # Months                       0.121          0.115          0.121          0.121          0.124         0.122
                                           (0.0301)       (0.0235)       (0.0188)       (0.0167)       (0.0145)      (0.0134)
CRS X Post # Mos                           -0.0730        0.00633        0.0430         0.0427         0.0531        0.0623
                                           (0.0348)       (0.0480)       (0.0418)       (0.0320)       (0.0300)      (0.0290)
CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                    -0.0164        -0.0823        -0.115         -0.118         -0.126        -0.134
                                           (0.0509)       (0.0566)       (0.0482)       (0.0383)       (0.0354)      (0.0340)
Constant                                   11.60          11.56          11.55          11.56          11.56         11.55
                                           (0.0318)       (0.0349)       (0.0318)       (0.0304)       (0.0292)      (0.0289)
Year FE                                    Y              Y              Y              Y              Y             Y
Month FE                                   Y              Y              Y              Y              Y             Y
County-Year FE                             Y              Y              Y              Y              Y             Y
Municipality FE                            N              N              N              N              N             N
House FE                                   Y              Y              Y              Y              Y             Y
Observations                               60,138         61,111         62,137         63,449         64,650        65,626

R-squared                                   0.980          0.979            0.978          0.977          0.977         0.976
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up
to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period
as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post
period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and
variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more
information.




                                                                                                                          64
          Table A15 - Regression Results Using Inc Total 300s, Repeated Sales,
                                    Controls, Info


                                                (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
Variables:                                   Log Price      Log Price        Log Price      Log Price      Log Price     Log Price
CRS Inc Tot 300s                            0.0217         0.0202           0.0210         0.0229         0.0242        0.0219
                                            (0.0137)       (0.0133)         (0.0131)       (0.0126)       (0.0122)      (0.0121)
CRS x Zone                                  0.0159         0.0153           0.0141         0.0136         0.0112        0.0125
                                            (0.0170)       (0.0165)         (0.0163)       (0.0158)       (0.0154)      (0.0153)
Age                                         -0.00125       -0.00123         -0.00123       -0.00126       -0.00132      -0.00132
                                            (0.000370)     (0.000362)       (0.000357)     (0.000349)     (0.000342)    (0.000334)
Living Space                                1.51e-05       1.63e-05         1.74e-05       1.81e-05       1.95e-05      2.07e-05
                                            (1.15e-05)     (1.23e-05)       (1.28e-05)     (1.30e-05)     (1.38e-05)    (1.45e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                       -0.00317       -0.00555         -0.00614       -0.00469       -0.00285      -0.00158
                                            (0.00826)      (0.00814)        (0.00786)      (0.00761)      (0.00733)     (0.00713)
Mo Sales                                    -0.000134      -5.70e-05        -1.43e-05      2.59e-06       6.12e-05      0.000116
                                            (0.000128)     (0.000125)       (0.000120)     (0.000116)     (0.000112)    (0.000109)
Lag Air Pollution                           0.000283       0.000335         0.000434       0.000420       0.000494      0.000542
                                            (0.000404)     (0.000395)       (0.000384)     (0.000376)     (0.000365)    (0.000361)
Air Pollution                               -0.000439      -0.000476        -0.000484      -0.000511      -0.000380     -0.000468
                                            (0.000401)     (0.000389)       (0.000383)     (0.000378)     (0.000372)    (0.000365)
Total New Builds                            -7.66e-05      -8.37e-05        -0.000110      -0.000116      -9.57e-05     -0.000112
                                            (9.41e-05)     (9.24e-05)       (9.04e-05)     (8.85e-05)     (8.43e-05)    (8.32e-05)
Total Value New Builds                      0.00463        0.00497          0.00598        0.00640        0.00629       0.00649
                                            (0.00200)      (0.00194)        (0.00189)      (0.00182)      (0.00169)     (0.00164)
 Post # Months                              -0.0317        -0.0304          -0.0291        -0.0262        -0.0246       -0.0222
                                            (0.0105)       (0.00900)        (0.00875)      (0.00860)      (0.00841)     (0.00829)
Zone X Post # Months                        0.0932         0.0955           0.102          0.101          0.106         0.105
                                            (0.0227)       (0.0186)         (0.0152)       (0.0134)       (0.0119)      (0.0111)
 CRS X Post # Mos                           0.0859         0.0892           -0.121         -0.0894        -0.0768       -0.0857
                                            (0.0424)       (0.0419)         (0.123)        (0.0988)       (0.0950)      (0.0856)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                    -0.113         -0.197           0.0108         -0.0555        -0.0870       -0.0935
                                            (0.0884)       (0.0761)         (0.129)        (0.104)        (0.0998)      (0.0903)
Constant                                    11.60          11.57            11.56          11.57          11.56         11.56
                                            (0.0318)       (0.0350)         (0.0318)       (0.0304)       (0.0291)      (0.0287)
Year FE                                     Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
Month FE                                    Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
County-Year FE                              Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
Municipality FE                             N              N                N              N              N             N
House FE                                    Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
Observations                                60,138         61,111           62,137         63,449         64,650        65,626
R-squared                                   0.980          0.979            0.978          0.977          0.977         0.976
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up
to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period
as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post
period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and
variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more
information.




                                                                                                                           65
       Table A16 - CRS All Pub High Definition, Repeated Sales, Controls, Info


                                                (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
Variables:                                   Log Price      Log Price        Log Price      Log Price      Log Price     Log Price
CRS Public Actions High                     -0.123         -0.126           -0.123         -0.124         -0.124        -0.134
                                            (0.0425)       (0.0419)         (0.0418)       (0.0411)       (0.0407)      (0.0402)
CRS x Zone                                  0.0575         0.0597           0.0566         0.0586         0.0563        0.0638
                                            (0.0439)       (0.0432)         (0.0431)       (0.0423)       (0.0419)      (0.0414)
Age                                         -0.00115       -0.00113         -0.00113       -0.00117       -0.00124      -0.00125
                                            (0.000367)     (0.000358)       (0.000353)     (0.000347)     (0.000340)    (0.000333)
Living Space                                1.55e-05       1.67e-05         1.78e-05       1.86e-05       1.99e-05      2.11e-05
                                            (1.18e-05)     (1.26e-05)       (1.32e-05)     (1.34e-05)     (1.42e-05)    (1.48e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                       -0.00288       -0.00564         -0.00666       -0.00541       -0.00379      -0.00289
                                            (0.00829)      (0.00817)        (0.00788)      (0.00763)      (0.00735)     (0.00715)
Mo Sales                                    -9.56e-05      -1.69e-05        3.08e-05       5.20e-05       0.000115      0.000181
                                            (0.000129)     (0.000126)       (0.000120)     (0.000117)     (0.000112)    (0.000109)
Lag Air Pollution                           0.000268       0.000308         0.000405       0.000383       0.000444      0.000492
                                            (0.000403)     (0.000394)       (0.000383)     (0.000376)     (0.000364)    (0.000360)
Air Pollution                               -0.000503      -0.000529        -0.000534      -0.000562      -0.000431     -0.000509
                                            (0.000400)     (0.000389)       (0.000383)     (0.000377)     (0.000371)    (0.000364)
Total New Builds                            -8.67e-05      -9.26e-05        -0.000117      -0.000122      -9.94e-05     -0.000114
                                            (9.40e-05)     (9.23e-05)       (9.03e-05)     (8.84e-05)     (8.43e-05)    (8.32e-05)
Total Value New Builds                      0.00499        0.00527          0.00619        0.00662        0.00642       0.00663
                                            (0.00201)      (0.00195)        (0.00190)      (0.00182)      (0.00169)     (0.00165)
 Post # Months                              -0.0285        -0.0295          -0.0287        -0.0253        -0.0236       -0.0213
                                            (0.0106)       (0.00912)        (0.00889)      (0.00870)      (0.00852)     (0.00840)
Zone X Post # Months                        0.123          0.112            0.121          0.118          0.121         0.118
                                            (0.0284)       (0.0222)         (0.0174)       (0.0151)       (0.0132)      (0.0122)
 CRS X Post # Mos                           -0.0551        0.0332           0.0516         0.0630         0.0729        0.0798
                                            (0.0374)       (0.0524)         (0.0526)       (0.0439)       (0.0414)      (0.0399)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                    -0.0375        -0.0972          -0.129         -0.150         -0.154        -0.160
                                            (0.0526)       (0.0606)         (0.0583)       (0.0490)       (0.0458)      (0.0440)
Constant                                    11.60          11.57            11.56          11.57          11.57         11.56
                                            (0.0320)       (0.0350)         (0.0320)       (0.0306)       (0.0292)      (0.0289)
Year FE                                     Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
Month FE                                    Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
County-Year FE                              Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
Municipality FE                             N              N                N              N              N             N
House FE                                    Y              Y                Y              Y              Y             Y
Observations                                60,138         61,111           62,137         63,449         64,650        65,626
R-squared                                   0.980          0.979            0.978          0.977          0.977         0.976
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up
to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period
as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post
period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and
variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more
information.




                                                                                                                           66
Table A17 - Activities in Alternative Definition of CRS

   Activity Number                        Description

        320          Map Information
        330          Public Outreach Projects
        340          Hazard Disclosure
        350          Flood Protection Information
        360          Flood Protection Assistance
        410          Floodplain Mapping
        440          Flood Data Maintenance
        510          Floodplain Management Planning
        610          Flood Warning and Response
        620          Flood Warning and Response - Levees

        630          Flood Warning and Response - Dams




                                                           67
  Table A18 ­ Regression Results: CRS on Policy Counts


                                       (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
                                      Policy         Policy         Policy          Policy
Variables:                            Count          Count          Count           Count

CRS Public Info and Maps Par             208.8           212.2          212.4           26.57
                                        (4.238)        (4.218)        (4.208)         (2.537)
Constant                                 60.95           61.34          48.96          -29.35
                                        (0.937)        (4.286)        (5.743)         (2.289)
Year FE                                        N              Y              Y               Y
Month FE                                       N              N              Y               Y
Municipality FE                                N              N              N               Y
Observations                            22,067         22,067          22,067         22,067
R-squared                                0.196           0.199          0.203           0.936

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header.




                                                                                                 68
     Table A19 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Allison ­ All Sales, No
                                  Controls


                                          (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
Variables:                             Log Price     Log Price        Log Price       Log Price        Log Price       Log Price
Zone High Risk                              0.149          0.149            0.149           0.149             0.149          0.149
                                        (0.00774)      (0.00774)        (0.00774)       (0.00774)        (0.00774)      (0.00774)
 Post # Months                             0.0824         0.0816           0.0808          0.0881             0.103          0.135
                                         (0.0111)      (0.00839)        (0.00748)       (0.00693)        (0.00639)      (0.00596)
Zone X Post # Months                     -0.00809        -0.0222           0.0218          0.0305           0.0621          0.0381
                                         (0.0248)       (0.0187)         (0.0162)        (0.0146)         (0.0132)        (0.0125)
Constant                                    11.87          11.87            11.87           11.87             11.87          11.87
                                        (0.00377)      (0.00377)        (0.00377)       (0.00377)        (0.00377)      (0.00377)
Year FE                                         N              N                N               N                 N              N
Month FE                                        N              N                N               N                 N              N
County-Year FE                                  N              N                N               N                 N              N
Municipality FE                                 N              N                N               N                 N              N
House FE                                        N              N                N               N                 N              N
Observations                               50,441         55,175           59,258          63,370           69,334          75,065
R-squared                                   0.010          0.010            0.012           0.014             0.019          0.021
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up
to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period
as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post
period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months
and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more
information.




                                                                                                                      69
                     Table A20 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Allison ­ All Sales, Controls


                                            (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)                   (6)
Variables:                              Log Price            Log Price             Log Price            Log Price             Log Price             Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                      1.012                1.025                 0.152                0.133                0.0710                0.0616
                                               (0.0454)             (0.0434)              (0.0527)             (0.0369)              (0.0320)              (0.0293)
Zone High Risk                                    0.216                0.216                 0.219                0.220                 0.222                 0.220
                                             (0.00884)            (0.00866)             (0.00852)            (0.00842)             (0.00830)             (0.00818)
CRS x Zone                                      -0.0314              -0.0359               -0.0475              -0.0729               -0.0992               -0.0987
                                               (0.0289)             (0.0280)              (0.0261)             (0.0242)              (0.0224)              (0.0211)
Age                                           -0.00213             -0.00210              -0.00206             -0.00211              -0.00221              -0.00223
                                           (0.000160)           (0.000150)            (0.000143)           (0.000138)            (0.000132)            (0.000121)
Living Space                                 0.000428             0.000429              0.000429             0.000430              0.000428              0.000425
                                            (3.15e-05)           (2.90e-05)            (2.67e-05)           (2.49e-05)            (2.23e-05)            (2.01e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                         -0.00670             -0.00563              -0.00245             -0.00517               0.00734               0.00526
                                               (0.0122)             (0.0118)              (0.0114)             (0.0111)              (0.0102)            (0.00954)
Mo Sales                                     0.000348             0.000352              0.000311             0.000323              0.000197              0.000122
                                           (0.000192)           (0.000188)            (0.000180)           (0.000174)            (0.000166)            (0.000158)
Lag Air Pollution                           -0.000774            -0.000687             -0.000532            -0.000561               4.89e-05             -9.44e-05
                                             (0.00108)          (0.000906)            (0.000899)           (0.000877)            (0.000821)            (0.000803)
Air Pollution                                0.000291            -0.000741             -0.000587            -0.000482               5.82e-05               0.00121
                                             (0.00124)          (0.000947)            (0.000922)           (0.000917)            (0.000855)            (0.000412)
Total New Builds                            -0.000132             -1.17e-06             -5.63e-05            -5.03e-06             0.000106              0.000152
                                           (0.000173)           (0.000160)            (0.000158)           (0.000152)            (0.000149)            (0.000147)
Total Value New Builds                         0.00717              0.00506               0.00451              0.00267               0.00219               0.00297
                                             (0.00364)            (0.00340)             (0.00330)            (0.00319)             (0.00300)             (0.00289)
Post # Months                                 -0.00840             -0.00485              -0.00553             -0.00492              -0.00356             0.000317
                                               (0.0118)             (0.0111)              (0.0108)             (0.0106)              (0.0103)            (0.00983)
Zone X Post # Months                             0.0272               0.0126                0.0230               0.0255                0.0443                0.0482
                                               (0.0181)             (0.0147)              (0.0126)             (0.0116)              (0.0104)            (0.00987)
Constant                                          10.88                10.91                 10.90                10.91                 10.90                 10.88
                                               (0.0687)             (0.0639)              (0.0600)             (0.0565)              (0.0522)              (0.0493)
Year FE                                               Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
Month FE                                              Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
County-Year FE                                        Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
Municipality FE                                       Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
House FE                                              N                    N                     N                    N                     N                     N
Observations                                     40,418               44,375                47,900               51,331                56,665                61,708
R-squared                                         0.597                0.596                 0.600                0.602                 0.607                 0.613
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm.
Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the
post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12
months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for
more information.




                                                                                                                                            70
        Table A21 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Allison ­ Repeated Sales,
                                      Controls


                                                  (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
Variables:                                     Log Price      Log Price      Log Price       Log Price      Log Price     Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                                                        0.291          0.158          0.171           0.186
                                                                                  (0.440)        (0.194)        (0.164)         (0.130)
CRS x Zone                                                                         -0.389         -0.141         -0.187          -0.191
                                                                                  (0.469)        (0.202)        (0.169)         (0.135)
Age                                             -0.00369        -0.00160        -0.00236       -0.00302       -0.00317       -0.00329
                                               (0.00504)       (0.00426)       (0.00362)      (0.00334)      (0.00225)      (0.00175)
Living Space                                    6.53e-05        5.58e-05        7.37e-05       8.75e-05       9.31e-05       8.51e-05
                                             (0.000129)       (8.76e-05)      (7.81e-05)     (7.24e-05)     (5.53e-05)     (4.46e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                          0.000234         -0.00216        -0.00114       -0.00489       -0.00371         -0.0103
                                                (0.0771)         (0.0620)        (0.0545)       (0.0473)       (0.0383)       (0.0358)
Mo Sales                                        4.21e-06      -0.000104       -0.000270      -0.000197      -0.000151      -0.000149
                                               (0.00125)       (0.00104)     (0.000855)     (0.000724)     (0.000592)     (0.000521)
Lag Air Pollution                                0.00195       0.000628          0.00163      0.000996         0.00255        0.00242
                                               (0.00664)       (0.00571)       (0.00485)      (0.00409)      (0.00351)      (0.00297)
Air Pollution                                   7.55e-05       -9.93e-05      -0.000536      -0.000830        2.73e-06      0.000755
                                               (0.00804)       (0.00508)       (0.00411)      (0.00348)      (0.00296)      (0.00132)
Total New Builds                              -0.000233        0.000122         9.24e-05      -8.00e-05       5.12e-05      -1.22e-05
                                               (0.00100)       (0.00107)     (0.000902)     (0.000721)     (0.000635)     (0.000517)
Total Value New Builds                           0.00145         0.00108         0.00379        0.00581        0.00435        0.00515
                                                (0.0200)         (0.0166)        (0.0145)       (0.0123)       (0.0100)     (0.00859)
 Post # Months                                   0.00505        -0.00249           0.0244         0.0270         0.0342          0.0387
                                                (0.0871)         (0.0622)        (0.0525)       (0.0454)       (0.0388)       (0.0329)
Zone X Post # Months                             0.00293           0.0277          0.0193         0.0303         0.0312          0.0474
                                                (0.0908)         (0.0618)        (0.0421)       (0.0347)       (0.0282)       (0.0243)
Constant                                            11.68           11.67           11.64          11.63          11.62           11.62
                                                  (0.309)         (0.232)         (0.200)        (0.165)        (0.152)         (0.126)
Year FE                                                 Y               Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
Month FE                                                Y               Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
County-Year FE                                          Y               Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
Municipality FE                                         N               N               N              N              N               N
House FE                                                Y               Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
Observations                                      13,111           13,350          13,639         13,964         14,483          15,015
R-squared                                           0.998           0.997           0.997          0.996          0.995           0.994
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to
2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as
up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post
period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and
variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                               71
                 Table A22 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Allison ­ All Sales, Controls,
                                               Information


                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)                 (6)
Variables:                               Log Price            Log Price           Log Price            Log Price            Log Price           Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                       1.017               1.032                0.162               0.123               0.0524              0.0458
                                                (0.0459)            (0.0443)             (0.0557)            (0.0405)             (0.0360)            (0.0338)
Zone High Risk                                     0.217               0.217                0.219               0.218                0.221               0.219
                                              (0.00888)           (0.00871)            (0.00861)           (0.00855)            (0.00849)           (0.00842)
CRS x Zone                                       -0.0375             -0.0422              -0.0548             -0.0593              -0.0796             -0.0842
                                                (0.0303)            (0.0299)             (0.0293)            (0.0287)             (0.0281)            (0.0278)
Age                                            -0.00213            -0.00210             -0.00206            -0.00211             -0.00221            -0.00223
                                            (0.000160)          (0.000150)           (0.000143)          (0.000138)           (0.000132)          (0.000121)
Living Space                                  0.000428             0.000429             0.000429            0.000430             0.000428            0.000425
                                             (3.16e-05)          (2.90e-05)           (2.67e-05)          (2.49e-05)           (2.23e-05)          (2.01e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                          -0.00652            -0.00614             -0.00285            -0.00494              0.00781             0.00548
                                                (0.0122)            (0.0118)             (0.0114)            (0.0111)             (0.0102)          (0.00953)
Mo Sales                                      0.000345             0.000349             0.000311            0.000325             0.000202            0.000127
                                            (0.000192)          (0.000188)           (0.000180)          (0.000174)           (0.000166)          (0.000158)
Lag Air Pollution                            -0.000771           -0.000688            -0.000532           -0.000560              4.98e-05           -9.76e-05
                                              (0.00108)         (0.000906)           (0.000899)          (0.000877)           (0.000821)          (0.000803)
Air Pollution                                 0.000306           -0.000744            -0.000583           -0.000500              4.37e-05             0.00122
                                              (0.00124)         (0.000947)           (0.000922)          (0.000917)           (0.000855)          (0.000412)
Total New Builds                             -0.000131            -2.08e-06            -5.69e-05           -3.40e-06             0.000106            0.000153
                                            (0.000173)          (0.000160)           (0.000158)          (0.000152)           (0.000149)          (0.000147)
Total Value New Builds                          0.00718             0.00515              0.00457             0.00262              0.00210             0.00288
                                              (0.00364)           (0.00340)            (0.00330)           (0.00319)            (0.00300)           (0.00289)
 Post # Months                                 -0.00734            -0.00379             -0.00473            -0.00596             -0.00491          -0.000544
                                                (0.0118)            (0.0111)             (0.0107)            (0.0106)             (0.0103)          (0.00982)
Zone X Post # Months                              0.0207              0.0116               0.0217              0.0299               0.0481              0.0501
                                                (0.0199)            (0.0156)             (0.0138)            (0.0129)             (0.0117)            (0.0111)
 CRS X Post # Mos                                -0.0323             -0.0328              -0.0240              0.0251               0.0349              0.0256
                                                (0.0517)            (0.0440)             (0.0365)            (0.0320)             (0.0283)            (0.0268)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                          0.0544              0.0313               0.0246             -0.0360              -0.0410             -0.0269
                                                (0.0641)            (0.0542)             (0.0443)            (0.0385)             (0.0341)            (0.0322)
Constant                                           10.88               10.91                10.90               10.92                10.90               10.88
                                                (0.0689)            (0.0641)             (0.0601)            (0.0566)             (0.0523)            (0.0494)
Year FE                                                Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                    Y                   Y
Month FE                                               Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                    Y                   Y
County-Year FE                                         Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                    Y                   Y
Municipality FE                                        Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                    Y                   Y
House FE                                               N                   N                    N                   N                    N                   N
Observations                                      40,418              44,375               47,900              51,331               56,665              61,708
R-squared                                          0.597               0.596                0.600               0.602                0.607               0.613
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months after the
storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4
defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post
period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post
period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                          72
         Table A23 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Allison ­ Repeated Sales,
                                     Controls, Info


                                           (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)
Variables:                              Log Price        Log Price        Log Price        Log Price       Log Price       Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                                                       0.314            0.174          0.168           0.124
                                                                                 (0.449)          (0.208)        (0.174)         (0.162)
CRS x Zone                                                                        -0.425           -0.161         -0.185          -0.129
                                                                                 (0.482)          (0.221)        (0.182)         (0.171)
Age                                        -0.00417         -0.00161          -0.00234         -0.00301       -0.00316        -0.00329
                                          (0.00517)        (0.00426)         (0.00362)        (0.00334)      (0.00225)       (0.00175)
Living Space                               8.15e-05         5.71e-05          7.42e-05         8.77e-05       9.31e-05        8.45e-05
                                        (0.000133)       (8.76e-05)         (7.80e-05)       (7.24e-05)     (5.55e-05)      (4.44e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                      -0.00461         -0.00317          -0.00132         -0.00521       -0.00367        -0.00977
                                            (0.0768)         (0.0621)          (0.0547)         (0.0475)       (0.0384)        (0.0358)
Mo Sales                                  -4.06e-05       -0.000108         -0.000283        -0.000200      -0.000150       -0.000135
                                          (0.00124)        (0.00104)       (0.000857)       (0.000724)     (0.000592)      (0.000521)
Lag Air Pollution                         0.000989         0.000660            0.00154        0.000967         0.00254         0.00243
                                          (0.00672)        (0.00578)         (0.00488)        (0.00409)      (0.00352)       (0.00298)
Air Pollution                             0.000718        -0.000168         -0.000495        -0.000823        7.42e-06       0.000816
                                          (0.00801)        (0.00512)         (0.00413)        (0.00350)      (0.00296)       (0.00132)
Total New Builds                         -0.000226         0.000118           9.25e-05        -8.04e-05       5.12e-05       -1.34e-05
                                        (0.000993)         (0.00107)       (0.000904)       (0.000722)     (0.000635)      (0.000517)
Total Value New Builds                      0.00251          0.00124           0.00394          0.00589        0.00433         0.00490
                                            (0.0196)         (0.0166)          (0.0145)         (0.0123)       (0.0101)      (0.00860)
 Post # Months                              0.00562         -0.00145             0.0246           0.0274         0.0341          0.0373
                                            (0.0869)         (0.0623)          (0.0526)         (0.0455)       (0.0390)        (0.0333)
Zone X Post # Months                         -0.0351           0.0271            0.0141           0.0281         0.0311          0.0503
                                            (0.0985)         (0.0690)          (0.0468)         (0.0395)       (0.0312)        (0.0261)
 CRS X Post # Mos                              -0.236         -0.0362           -0.0224          -0.0162       0.00362           0.0636
                                              (0.204)          (0.150)           (0.105)        (0.0869)       (0.0644)          (0.101)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                        0.391          0.0304            0.0410           0.0222      -0.00243          -0.0651
                                              (0.271)          (0.186)           (0.127)          (0.103)      (0.0775)          (0.110)
Constant                                        11.67            11.67             11.64            11.63          11.62           11.63
                                              (0.303)          (0.232)           (0.201)          (0.166)        (0.153)         (0.126)
Year FE                                             Y                Y                 Y                Y              Y               Y
Month FE                                            Y                Y                 Y                Y              Y               Y
County-Year FE                                      Y                Y                 Y                Y              Y               Y
Municipality FE                                     N                N                 N                N              N               N
House FE                                            Y                Y                 Y                Y              Y               Y
Observations                                  13,111           13,350            13,639           13,964         14,483          15,015
R-squared                                       0.998            0.997             0.997            0.996          0.995           0.994
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to
6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up
to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables
interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                               73
Table A24 ­ Sale Price Response to 2002 Hurricanes ­ All Sales, No Controls


                                   (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
Variables:                      Log Price      Log Price       Log Price       Log Price       Log Price        Log Price
Zone High Risk                       0.161          0.161           0.161           0.161            0.161            0.161
                                 (0.00587)      (0.00587)       (0.00587)       (0.00587)       (0.00587)        (0.00587)
 Post # Months                       0.178          0.207           0.215           0.251            0.284            0.304
                                  (0.0116)      (0.00889)       (0.00731)       (0.00626)       (0.00555)        (0.00511)
Zone X Post # Months                0.0670         0.0790          0.0997          0.0785          0.0325           0.0359
                                  (0.0282)       (0.0199)        (0.0160)        (0.0135)        (0.0123)         (0.0113)
Constant                             11.95          11.95           11.95           11.95            11.95            11.95
                                 (0.00279)      (0.00279)       (0.00279)       (0.00279)       (0.00279)        (0.00279)
Year FE                                  N              N               N               N                N                N
Month FE                                 N              N               N               N                N                N
County-Year FE                           N              N               N               N                N                N
Municipality FE                          N              N               N               N                N                N
House FE                                 N              N               N               N                N                N
Observations                        87,279         91,286          96,058         101,903         107,655          113,522
R-squared                             0.014            0.020          0.026          0.034            0.040            0.048
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period
as up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the
post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5
defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the
storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period.
See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                      74
                      Table A25 ­ Sale Price Response to 2002 Hurricanes­ All Sales, Controls


                                            (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)                   (6)
Variables:                              Log Price            Log Price             Log Price            Log Price             Log Price             Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                     0.0737               0.0720                0.0618               0.0486                0.0453                0.0375
                                               (0.0256)             (0.0247)              (0.0239)             (0.0230)              (0.0223)              (0.0218)
Zone High Risk                                    0.234                0.235                 0.235                0.237                 0.236                 0.236
                                             (0.00686)            (0.00677)             (0.00668)            (0.00658)             (0.00651)             (0.00643)
CRS x Zone                                      -0.0705              -0.0909                -0.103               -0.113                -0.108                -0.118
                                               (0.0188)             (0.0181)              (0.0175)             (0.0166)              (0.0160)              (0.0154)
Age                                           -0.00212             -0.00218              -0.00220             -0.00226              -0.00227              -0.00232
                                           (0.000107)           (0.000103)             (9.91e-05)           (9.39e-05)            (8.94e-05)            (8.54e-05)
Living Space                                 0.000422             0.000419              0.000416             0.000413              0.000409              0.000407
                                            (1.69e-05)           (1.59e-05)            (1.50e-05)           (1.40e-05)            (1.31e-05)            (1.23e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                        0.000264              -0.00432              -0.00307             -0.00419              -0.00408              -0.00424
                                             (0.00883)            (0.00863)             (0.00844)            (0.00812)             (0.00775)             (0.00748)
Mo Sales                                     -2.80e-05            -7.50e-06              1.50e-05            -2.49e-05             -4.94e-05            -0.000169
                                           (0.000150)           (0.000143)            (0.000141)           (0.000135)            (0.000132)            (0.000129)
Lag Air Pollution                            0.000156              9.82e-05              8.49e-05             8.28e-05              5.58e-05            -0.000240
                                           (0.000360)           (0.000360)            (0.000359)           (0.000358)            (0.000355)            (0.000346)
Air Pollution                                 3.13e-05            -3.54e-06              2.42e-05             2.81e-05             -6.20e-05            -0.000142
                                           (0.000376)           (0.000376)            (0.000375)           (0.000373)            (0.000368)            (0.000362)
Total New Builds                             0.000133              8.29e-05              6.75e-05            -1.52e-05            -0.000101             -0.000153
                                           (0.000135)           (0.000129)            (0.000127)           (0.000124)            (0.000112)            (0.000109)
Total Value New Builds                         0.00278              0.00237               0.00122              0.00426               0.00473               0.00549
                                             (0.00265)            (0.00250)             (0.00245)            (0.00234)             (0.00220)             (0.00210)
Post # Months                                    0.0606               0.0690                0.0679               0.0668                0.0680                0.0653
                                               (0.0101)           (0.00995)             (0.00986)            (0.00979)             (0.00976)             (0.00974)
Zone X Post # Months                             0.0746               0.0317                0.0295               0.0267                0.0228                0.0274
                                               (0.0204)             (0.0152)              (0.0122)             (0.0104)            (0.00948)             (0.00880)
Constant                                          10.85                10.86                 10.87                10.84                 10.84                 10.83
                                               (0.0440)             (0.0417)              (0.0398)             (0.0385)              (0.0365)              (0.0352)
Year FE                                               Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
Month FE                                              Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
County-Year FE                                        Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
Municipality FE                                       Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                     Y
House FE                                              N                    N                     N                    N                     N                     N
Observations                                     72,191               75,768                79,945               85,281                90,615                96,128
R-squared                                         0.618                0.619                 0.619                0.622                 0.623                 0.626
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm.
Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the
post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12
months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for
more information.




                                                                                                                                            75
       Table A26 ­ Sale Price Response to 2002 Hurricanes­ Repeated Sales,
                                    Controls


                                             (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
Variables:                              Log Price       Log Price      Log Price      Log Price      Log Price      Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                   0.142            0.154         0.162         0.123           0.115          0.112
                                            (0.0858)        (0.0737)       (0.0704)      (0.0666)       (0.0590)       (0.0511)
CRS x Zone                                    -0.103           -0.145        -0.149        -0.138          -0.120         -0.116
                                            (0.0932)        (0.0815)       (0.0778)      (0.0717)       (0.0629)       (0.0549)
Age                                        -0.00278        -0.00258       -0.00236      -0.00225       -0.00240       -0.00254
                                          (0.00166)       (0.00149)      (0.00121)     (0.00100)    (0.000902)     (0.000731)
Living Space                               8.28e-05        8.01e-05       8.11e-05      7.20e-05       6.78e-05       6.95e-05
                                         (3.96e-05)      (3.41e-05)     (2.89e-05)    (2.41e-05)     (2.17e-05)     (1.99e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                      -0.00679          -0.0107      -0.00249      -0.00807         -0.0229        -0.0238
                                            (0.0273)        (0.0258)       (0.0230)      (0.0195)       (0.0177)       (0.0158)
Mo Sales                                 -0.000239        -7.89e-05     -0.000135      -7.83e-05       5.12e-05      -2.24e-05
                                        (0.000425)      (0.000383)     (0.000341)    (0.000293)     (0.000273)     (0.000251)
Lag Air Pollution                         0.000610        0.000438       0.000361      0.000446       0.000283       0.000202
                                          (0.00113)       (0.00107)    (0.000970)    (0.000872)     (0.000798)     (0.000702)
Air Pollution                            -0.000846       -0.000979      -0.000965       -0.00127       -0.00130       -0.00101
                                          (0.00102)     (0.000949)     (0.000884)    (0.000803)     (0.000734)     (0.000668)
Total New Builds                         -0.000166       -0.000263      -0.000270     -0.000374      -0.000337      -0.000326
                                        (0.000371)      (0.000324)     (0.000277)    (0.000260)     (0.000226)     (0.000197)
Total Value New Builds                    0.000276        0.000966         0.00119       0.00550        0.00573        0.00549
                                          (0.00643)       (0.00589)      (0.00532)     (0.00485)      (0.00425)      (0.00389)
 Post # Months                                0.0582           0.0654        0.0727        0.0795          0.0850         0.0911
                                            (0.0277)        (0.0258)       (0.0241)      (0.0221)       (0.0211)       (0.0199)
Zone X Post # Months                           0.119            0.102         0.102        0.0867          0.0916         0.0825
                                            (0.0553)        (0.0382)       (0.0304)      (0.0233)       (0.0188)       (0.0162)
Constant                                       11.65            11.66         11.64         11.60           11.61          11.62
                                            (0.0977)        (0.0921)       (0.0819)      (0.0739)       (0.0641)       (0.0590)
Year FE                                            Y                Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
Month FE                                           Y                Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
County-Year FE                                     Y                Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
Municipality FE                                    N                N             N             N               N              N
House FE                                           Y                Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
Observations                                  25,651           26,204        26,925        27,854          28,782         29,767
R-squared                                      0.994            0.993         0.992         0.990           0.989          0.988
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as
up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post
period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5
defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the
storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See
Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                           76
                    Table A27 ­ Sale Price Response to 2002 Hurricanes ­ All Sales, Controls,
                                                 Information


                                                (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)                 (6)
Variables:                                  Log Price            Log Price           Log Price           Log Price           Log Price            Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                         0.0702              0.0564              0.0403               0.0201              0.0181            0.00314
                                                   (0.0260)            (0.0254)            (0.0248)             (0.0242)            (0.0237)            (0.0234)
Zone High Risk                                        0.234               0.233               0.232                0.232               0.231               0.230
                                                 (0.00688)           (0.00684)           (0.00678)            (0.00672)           (0.00668)           (0.00664)
CRS x Zone                                          -0.0675             -0.0732             -0.0751              -0.0734             -0.0700             -0.0690
                                                   (0.0193)            (0.0191)            (0.0188)             (0.0185)            (0.0184)            (0.0182)
Age                                               -0.00212            -0.00218            -0.00220             -0.00226            -0.00227            -0.00232
                                               (0.000107)          (0.000103)           (9.90e-05)           (9.39e-05)          (8.94e-05)          (8.54e-05)
Living Space                                     0.000422             0.000419            0.000416             0.000413            0.000409            0.000407
                                                (1.69e-05)          (1.59e-05)          (1.51e-05)           (1.40e-05)          (1.31e-05)          (1.23e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                            0.000362             -0.00392            -0.00307             -0.00473            -0.00449            -0.00448
                                                 (0.00883)           (0.00863)           (0.00844)            (0.00810)           (0.00774)           (0.00747)
Mo Sales                                         -2.83e-05           -1.43e-05            7.70e-06            -2.81e-05           -5.37e-05          -0.000173
                                               (0.000150)          (0.000143)          (0.000141)           (0.000135)          (0.000132)          (0.000129)
Lag Air Pollution                                0.000156             9.69e-05            8.20e-05             8.12e-05            5.51e-05          -0.000236
                                               (0.000360)          (0.000360)          (0.000359)           (0.000357)          (0.000355)          (0.000346)
Air Pollution                                     3.13e-05           -7.16e-06            1.88e-05             2.22e-05           -6.46e-05          -0.000147
                                               (0.000376)          (0.000376)          (0.000375)           (0.000373)          (0.000368)          (0.000362)
Total New Builds                                 0.000132             8.04e-05            6.48e-05            -2.15e-05          -0.000111           -0.000164
                                               (0.000135)          (0.000129)          (0.000127)           (0.000124)          (0.000112)          (0.000109)
Total Value New Builds                             0.00280             0.00241             0.00120              0.00434             0.00481             0.00577
                                                 (0.00265)           (0.00250)           (0.00245)            (0.00234)           (0.00220)           (0.00211)
 Post Months                                         0.0581              0.0633              0.0626               0.0617              0.0641              0.0613
                                                   (0.0103)            (0.0101)          (0.00995)            (0.00986)           (0.00982)           (0.00979)
Zone X Post Months                                   0.0770              0.0546              0.0564               0.0563              0.0467              0.0540
                                                   (0.0274)            (0.0192)            (0.0154)             (0.0131)            (0.0118)            (0.0110)
 CRS X Post # Mos                                    0.0406              0.0901              0.0899               0.0929              0.0779              0.0839
                                                   (0.0363)            (0.0287)            (0.0250)             (0.0213)            (0.0196)            (0.0184)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                            -0.0406              -0.127              -0.139               -0.149              -0.126              -0.139
                                                   (0.0518)            (0.0388)            (0.0327)             (0.0278)            (0.0257)            (0.0241)
Constant                                              10.85               10.86               10.87                10.84               10.84               10.83
                                                   (0.0440)            (0.0417)            (0.0398)             (0.0385)            (0.0365)            (0.0353)
Year FE                                                   Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                   Y
Month FE                                                  Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                   Y
County-Year FE                                            Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                   Y
Municipality FE                                           Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                   Y
House FE                                                  N                   N                   N                    N                   N                   N
Observations                                         72,191              75,768              79,945               85,281              90,615              96,128
R-squared                                             0.618               0.619               0.619                0.622               0.623               0.626
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm.
Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the
post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to
12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2
for more information.




                                                                                                                                          77
      Table A28 ­ Sale Price Response to 2002 Hurricanes ­ Repeated Sales,
                                 Controls, Info


                                             (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
Variables:                              Log Price      Log Price      Log Price     Log Price       Log Price      Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                   0.135           0.149          0.144         0.111           0.109          0.102
                                           (0.0890)        (0.0777)       (0.0727)      (0.0683)        (0.0610)       (0.0556)
CRS x Zone                                  -0.0981           -0.136         -0.131        -0.121          -0.109       -0.0958
                                           (0.0964)        (0.0854)       (0.0805)      (0.0744)        (0.0661)       (0.0605)
Age                                        -0.00276       -0.00260       -0.00237      -0.00226        -0.00241       -0.00256
                                          (0.00165)      (0.00149)      (0.00121)     (0.00100)     (0.000903)     (0.000733)
Living Space                               8.22e-05       8.11e-05       8.12e-05      7.25e-05        6.83e-05       7.05e-05
                                         (3.92e-05)     (3.38e-05)     (2.86e-05)    (2.40e-05)      (2.17e-05)     (1.99e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                      -0.00581         -0.0110      -0.00162      -0.00827          -0.0234        -0.0242
                                           (0.0274)        (0.0258)       (0.0231)      (0.0196)        (0.0179)       (0.0159)
Mo Sales                                 -0.000247       -7.67e-05     -0.000146      -7.74e-05        5.35e-05      -2.49e-05
                                        (0.000425)     (0.000383)     (0.000342)    (0.000293)      (0.000273)     (0.000251)
Lag Air Pollution                         0.000619       0.000438       0.000369      0.000451        0.000287       0.000208
                                          (0.00113)      (0.00107)    (0.000969)    (0.000871)      (0.000797)     (0.000701)
Air Pollution                            -0.000823      -0.000980      -0.000957       -0.00127        -0.00130       -0.00101
                                          (0.00102)    (0.000948)     (0.000884)    (0.000803)      (0.000734)     (0.000667)
Total New Builds                         -0.000164      -0.000271      -0.000273     -0.000380       -0.000340      -0.000332
                                        (0.000371)     (0.000324)     (0.000278)    (0.000260)      (0.000227)     (0.000197)
Total Value New Builds                    0.000243         0.00111        0.00116       0.00560         0.00578        0.00564
                                          (0.00645)      (0.00589)      (0.00533)     (0.00486)       (0.00426)      (0.00390)
 Post # Months                                0.0556          0.0650         0.0707        0.0788          0.0850         0.0913
                                           (0.0283)        (0.0261)       (0.0243)      (0.0224)        (0.0213)       (0.0201)
Zone X Post # Months                           0.107           0.115          0.106        0.0951          0.0979         0.0936
                                           (0.0667)        (0.0498)       (0.0364)      (0.0275)        (0.0221)       (0.0193)
 CRS X Post # Mos                             0.0459          0.0121         0.0415        0.0212       0.00875           0.0121
                                           (0.0778)        (0.0650)       (0.0586)      (0.0482)        (0.0401)       (0.0402)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                    -0.0102         -0.0433        -0.0462       -0.0398         -0.0248        -0.0414
                                             (0.130)       (0.0950)       (0.0799)      (0.0628)        (0.0523)       (0.0497)
Constant                                       11.65           11.66          11.64         11.60           11.61          11.62
                                           (0.0978)        (0.0917)       (0.0819)      (0.0740)        (0.0642)       (0.0590)
Year FE                                            Y               Y              Y             Y               Y              Y
Month FE                                           Y               Y              Y             Y               Y              Y
County-Year FE                                     Y               Y              Y             Y               Y              Y
Municipality FE                                    N               N              N             N               N              N
House FE                                           Y               Y              Y             Y               Y              Y
Observations                                  25,651          26,204         26,925        27,854          28,782         29,767
R-squared                                      0.994           0.993          0.992         0.990           0.989          0.988
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period
as up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the
post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5
defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the
storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period.
See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                           78
    Table A29 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Charley ­ All Sales, No
                                 Controls


                               (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)
Variables:                     Log Price       Log Price     Log Price      Log Price     Log Price       Log Price
Zone High Risk                        0.176           0.176         0.176          0.176         0.176           0.176
                                 (0.00464)       (0.00464)     (0.00464)      (0.00464)     (0.00464)       (0.00464)
 Post # Months                        0.355           0.372         0.378          0.395         0.433           0.453
                                   (0.0101)      (0.00765)     (0.00646)      (0.00560)     (0.00493)       (0.00449)
Zone X Post # Months                 0.0921           0.106        0.0993          0.103        0.0735          0.0676
                                   (0.0240)        (0.0179)      (0.0150)       (0.0124)      (0.0111)        (0.0104)
Constant                              12.11           12.11         12.11          12.11         12.11           12.11
                                 (0.00214)       (0.00214)     (0.00214)      (0.00214)     (0.00214)       (0.00214)
Year FE                                   N               N             N              N             N               N
Month FE                                  N               N             N              N             N               N
County-Year FE                            N               N             N              N             N               N
Municipality FE                           N               N             N              N             N               N
House FE                                  N               N             N              N             N               N
Observations                       148,044         152,515       156,797        162,602       168,782         174,454
R-squared                             0.021           0.030         0.037          0.049         0.062           0.073
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post
period as up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm.
Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8
months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the
post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are
consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                         79
            Table A30 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Charley ­ All Sales, Controls


                                              (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)
Variables:                               Log Price         Log Price          Log Price        Log Price           Log Price         Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                     0.0269           0.0272              0.0273           0.0503             0.0514             0.0468
                                               (0.0189)         (0.0186)            (0.0184)         (0.0258)           (0.0253)           (0.0248)
Zone High Risk                                    0.241            0.239               0.238            0.225              0.223              0.222
                                             (0.00535)        (0.00532)           (0.00528)       (0.00915)           (0.00865)          (0.00826)
CRS x Zone                                       -0.131           -0.133              -0.137           -0.135             -0.137             -0.134
                                               (0.0133)         (0.0130)            (0.0128)         (0.0135)           (0.0132)           (0.0129)
Age                                           -0.00216         -0.00214            -0.00213         -0.00202           -0.00203           -0.00199
                                            (6.83e-05)       (6.74e-05)          (6.59e-05)      (9.93e-05)          (9.20e-05)         (8.45e-05)
Living Space                                 0.000391         0.000388            0.000387         0.000314           0.000314           0.000314
                                            (9.11e-06)       (8.84e-06)          (8.58e-06)      (5.61e-05)          (5.39e-05)         (5.21e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                          0.00332          0.00472             0.00606            0.0143             0.0189             0.0189
                                             (0.00628)        (0.00619)           (0.00613)       (0.00621)           (0.00601)          (0.00596)
Mo Sales                                    -0.000331        -0.000285           -0.000238        -0.000201          -0.000277          -0.000314
                                           (0.000106)       (0.000104)          (0.000103)      (0.000108)          (0.000103)         (0.000102)
Lag Air Pollution                           -0.000345        -0.000281           -0.000289        -0.000303          -0.000290          -0.000431
                                           (0.000329)       (0.000328)          (0.000328)      (0.000347)          (0.000351)         (0.000344)
Air Pollution                                -7.59e-05       -0.000104           -0.000118         -7.83e-05         -0.000185          -0.000351
                                           (0.000344)       (0.000344)          (0.000344)      (0.000342)          (0.000338)         (0.000329)
Total New Builds                             -9.91e-06        -3.86e-05           -3.98e-05         2.47e-05          -5.72e-06          -8.78e-06
                                            (9.25e-05)       (9.19e-05)          (8.95e-05)      (8.29e-05)          (8.04e-05)         (7.90e-05)
Total Value New Builds                         0.00460          0.00534             0.00568          0.00468            0.00425            0.00444
                                             (0.00171)        (0.00170)           (0.00166)       (0.00159)           (0.00156)          (0.00153)
 Post # Months                                  -0.0106          -0.0146             -0.0145          -0.0146            -0.0128            -0.0118
                                             (0.00793)        (0.00668)           (0.00664)       (0.00675)           (0.00674)          (0.00674)
Zone X Post # Months                             0.0695           0.0764              0.0771           0.0876             0.0817             0.0776
                                               (0.0166)         (0.0125)            (0.0107)      (0.00918)           (0.00827)          (0.00774)
Constant                                          10.81            10.81               10.79            10.90              10.91              10.90
                                               (0.0292)         (0.0288)            (0.0282)         (0.0860)           (0.0823)           (0.0810)
Year FE                                               Y                Y                   Y                Y                  Y                  Y
Month FE                                              Y                Y                   Y                Y                  Y                  Y
County-Year FE                                        Y                Y                   Y                Y                  Y                  Y
Municipality FE                                       Y                Y                   Y                Y                  Y                  Y
House FE                                              N                N                   N                N                  N                  N
Observations                                   128,032          132,186             136,060          141,380            147,174            152,543
R-squared                                         0.643            0.645               0.646            0.619              0.624              0.628
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months
after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the
storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm.
Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent
with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                    80
       Table A31 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Charley ­ Repeated Sales,
                                     Controls


                                            (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
Variables:                             Log Price       Log Price        Log Price        Log Price       Log Price       Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                  0.109           0.112             0.115            0.106           0.111           0.115
                                           (0.0389)        (0.0372)          (0.0351)         (0.0301)        (0.0290)        (0.0288)
CRS x Zone                                  -0.0785         -0.0797           -0.0831          -0.0695         -0.0736         -0.0814
                                           (0.0403)        (0.0388)          (0.0366)         (0.0327)        (0.0316)        (0.0314)
Age                                       -0.00167        -0.00185          -0.00196         -0.00155        -0.00170        -0.00178
                                       (0.000538)      (0.000531)        (0.000531)       (0.000411)      (0.000396)      (0.000386)
Living Space                              3.97e-05        4.19e-05          4.61e-05         1.37e-05        1.46e-05        1.54e-05
                                        (2.15e-05)      (1.98e-05)        (2.03e-05)       (1.10e-05)      (1.13e-05)      (1.16e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                     -0.00383        -0.00767          -0.00841         -0.00195        -0.00159        -0.00130
                                           (0.0109)        (0.0104)        (0.00993)        (0.00950)       (0.00892)       (0.00849)
Mo Sales                                -0.000316       -0.000223         -0.000155        -0.000166       -0.000139       -0.000187
                                       (0.000171)      (0.000162)        (0.000153)       (0.000147)      (0.000137)      (0.000131)
Lag Air Pollution                       -0.000156        0.000103          0.000152         0.000153        0.000390        0.000243
                                       (0.000509)      (0.000486)        (0.000471)       (0.000452)      (0.000425)      (0.000412)
Air Pollution                           -0.000740       -0.000707         -0.000774        -0.000584       -0.000214       -0.000387
                                       (0.000500)      (0.000477)        (0.000462)       (0.000443)      (0.000426)      (0.000406)
Total New Builds                         -9.69e-05      -0.000114         -0.000155        -0.000123        -9.78e-05       -8.35e-05
                                       (0.000140)      (0.000132)        (0.000123)       (0.000106)       (9.99e-05)      (9.65e-05)
Total Value New Builds                     0.00391         0.00374           0.00408          0.00444         0.00354         0.00302
                                         (0.00290)       (0.00273)         (0.00255)        (0.00230)       (0.00214)       (0.00206)
 Post # Months                              -0.0236         -0.0188           -0.0174          -0.0163         -0.0155         -0.0147
                                           (0.0120)        (0.0104)        (0.01000)        (0.00969)       (0.00936)       (0.00915)
Zone X Post # Months                         0.0595          0.0609            0.0645           0.0728          0.0797          0.0861
                                           (0.0292)        (0.0196)          (0.0162)         (0.0131)        (0.0112)        (0.0102)
Constant                                      11.60           11.61             11.60            11.61           11.62           11.63
                                           (0.0447)        (0.0446)          (0.0419)         (0.0362)        (0.0338)        (0.0325)
Year FE                                           Y               Y                 Y                Y               Y               Y
Month FE                                          Y               Y                 Y                Y               Y               Y
County-Year FE                                    Y               Y                 Y                Y               Y               Y
Municipality FE                                   N               N                 N                N               N               N
House FE                                          Y               Y                 Y                Y               Y               Y
Observations                                 48,201          49,311            50,430           52,063          53,686          55,242
R-squared                                     0.984           0.983             0.982            0.981           0.980           0.979
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to
2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as
up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post
period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and
variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                              81
                 Table A32 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Charley ­ All Sales, Controls,
                                               Information


                                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)
Variables:                                Log Price            Log Price           Log Price           Log Price            Log Price            Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                        0.0205             0.0153              0.0116              0.0275               0.0257               0.0224
                                                  (0.0190)           (0.0188)            (0.0187)            (0.0256)             (0.0250)             (0.0246)
Zone High Risk                                       0.241              0.239               0.237               0.222                0.220                0.219
                                                (0.00537)          (0.00535)           (0.00533)           (0.00920)            (0.00866)            (0.00824)
CRS x Zone                                          -0.126             -0.124              -0.122              -0.111               -0.109               -0.106
                                                  (0.0134)           (0.0134)            (0.0133)            (0.0145)             (0.0142)             (0.0140)
Age                                              -0.00216           -0.00214            -0.00213            -0.00202             -0.00202             -0.00199
                                               (6.83e-05)         (6.74e-05)          (6.59e-05)          (9.93e-05)           (9.20e-05)           (8.45e-05)
Living Space                                    0.000391            0.000388            0.000387            0.000314             0.000314             0.000314
                                               (9.12e-06)         (8.84e-06)          (8.58e-06)          (5.61e-05)           (5.39e-05)           (5.21e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                             0.00359            0.00545             0.00711               0.0153               0.0195               0.0194
                                                (0.00628)          (0.00620)           (0.00614)           (0.00623)            (0.00602)            (0.00597)
Mo Sales                                       -0.000337          -0.000300           -0.000259           -0.000228            -0.000294            -0.000325
                                              (0.000106)         (0.000104)          (0.000103)          (0.000108)           (0.000103)           (0.000103)
Lag Air Pollution                              -0.000351          -0.000294           -0.000301           -0.000317            -0.000305            -0.000434
                                              (0.000328)         (0.000328)          (0.000328)          (0.000347)           (0.000351)           (0.000345)
Air Pollution                                   -8.22e-05         -0.000109           -0.000122            -8.27e-05           -0.000193            -0.000350
                                              (0.000344)         (0.000344)          (0.000344)          (0.000342)           (0.000338)           (0.000329)
Total New Builds                                -1.25e-05          -4.66e-05           -3.81e-05            2.68e-05            -7.23e-06            -8.98e-06
                                               (9.25e-05)         (9.19e-05)          (8.95e-05)          (8.29e-05)           (8.05e-05)           (7.91e-05)
Total Value New Builds                            0.00453            0.00525             0.00550             0.00444              0.00398              0.00419
                                                (0.00171)          (0.00170)           (0.00166)           (0.00160)            (0.00156)            (0.00153)
 Post # Months                                     -0.0156            -0.0200             -0.0199             -0.0204              -0.0182              -0.0162
                                                (0.00776)          (0.00660)           (0.00657)           (0.00667)            (0.00667)            (0.00667)
Zone X Post # Months                                0.0714             0.0784              0.0890               0.107               0.0988               0.0944
                                                  (0.0212)           (0.0162)            (0.0138)            (0.0117)             (0.0104)           (0.00971)
CRS X Post # Months                                  0.151              0.150               0.141               0.143                0.131                0.108
                                                  (0.0698)           (0.0401)            (0.0293)            (0.0240)             (0.0202)             (0.0187)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                            -0.142             -0.136              -0.151              -0.169               -0.154               -0.135
                                                  (0.0755)           (0.0453)            (0.0346)            (0.0286)             (0.0246)             (0.0228)
Constant                                             10.81              10.81               10.80               10.91                10.91                10.90
                                                  (0.0292)           (0.0288)            (0.0282)            (0.0861)             (0.0824)             (0.0811)
Year FE                                                  Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                    Y
Month FE                                                 Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                    Y
County-Year FE                                           Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                    Y
Municipality FE                                          Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                    Y                    Y
House FE                                                 N                  N                   N                   N                    N                    N
Observations                                      128,032            132,186             136,060             141,380              147,174              152,543
R-squared                                            0.643              0.645               0.646               0.619                0.624                0.628
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm.
Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines
the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as
up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See
Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                          82
   Table A33 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Charley ­ Repeated Sales,
                               Controls, Info


                                            (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
Variables:                             Log Price       Log Price     Log Price      Log Price      Log Price      Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                  0.111            0.111         0.109        0.0956          0.0962         0.0944
                                          (0.0398)         (0.0385)      (0.0369)      (0.0320)        (0.0310)       (0.0308)
CRS x Zone                                 -0.0801          -0.0765       -0.0728       -0.0524         -0.0501        -0.0499
                                          (0.0412)         (0.0401)      (0.0382)      (0.0345)        (0.0334)       (0.0332)
Age                                       -0.00167        -0.00185      -0.00197      -0.00157        -0.00172       -0.00182
                                       (0.000538)      (0.000532)    (0.000532)    (0.000412)      (0.000398)     (0.000388)
Living Space                              3.97e-05        4.19e-05      4.60e-05      1.37e-05        1.46e-05       1.55e-05
                                        (2.14e-05)      (1.98e-05)    (2.03e-05)    (1.10e-05)      (1.14e-05)     (1.16e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                     -0.00382        -0.00763      -0.00839      -0.00199        -0.00212       -0.00187
                                          (0.0109)         (0.0104)    (0.00992)     (0.00950)       (0.00891)      (0.00849)
Mo Sales                                -0.000315       -0.000224     -0.000160     -0.000178       -0.000154      -0.000205
                                       (0.000171)      (0.000161)    (0.000152)    (0.000147)      (0.000136)     (0.000131)
Lag Air Pollution                       -0.000152        0.000111      0.000172      0.000186        0.000420       0.000276
                                       (0.000509)      (0.000486)    (0.000471)    (0.000452)      (0.000425)     (0.000411)
Air Pollution                           -0.000736       -0.000706     -0.000770     -0.000556       -0.000191      -0.000357
                                       (0.000501)      (0.000477)    (0.000462)    (0.000443)      (0.000426)     (0.000406)
Total New Builds                         -9.56e-05      -0.000110     -0.000149     -0.000120        -8.95e-05      -7.44e-05
                                       (0.000140)      (0.000132)    (0.000123)    (0.000106)       (9.99e-05)     (9.64e-05)
Total Value New Builds                     0.00393         0.00375       0.00414       0.00451         0.00351        0.00294
                                         (0.00290)       (0.00272)     (0.00255)     (0.00230)       (0.00213)      (0.00206)
 Post # Months                             -0.0227          -0.0191       -0.0182       -0.0176         -0.0173        -0.0168
                                          (0.0121)         (0.0105)      (0.0101)    (0.00975)       (0.00943)      (0.00921)
Zone X Post # Months                         0.0657           0.0707        0.0854        0.0987           0.106          0.116
                                          (0.0413)         (0.0238)      (0.0199)      (0.0164)        (0.0140)       (0.0130)
 CRS X Post # Mos                          -0.0300            0.0145        0.0352        0.0427          0.0591         0.0791
                                          (0.0620)         (0.0602)      (0.0461)      (0.0352)        (0.0324)       (0.0321)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                     0.0127         -0.0393       -0.0865         -0.104          -0.121         -0.148
                                          (0.0800)         (0.0676)      (0.0519)      (0.0400)        (0.0360)       (0.0353)
Constant                                      11.60            11.61         11.60         11.61           11.62          11.64
                                          (0.0447)         (0.0446)      (0.0419)      (0.0361)        (0.0337)       (0.0324)
Year FE                                           Y                Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
Month FE                                          Y                Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
County-Year FE                                    Y                Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
Municipality FE                                   N                N             N             N               N              N
House FE                                          Y                Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
Observations                                 48,201           49,311        50,430        52,063          53,686         55,242
R-squared                                     0.984            0.984         0.982         0.981           0.980          0.979
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period
as up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the
post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5
defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the
storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period.
See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                           83
       Table A34 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina ­ All Sales, No
                                    Controls


                                  (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
Variables:                    Log Price Log Price Log Price Log Price Log Price Log Price
Zone High Risk                0.185       0.185         0.185       0.185       0.185         0.185
                              (0.00429) (0.00429) (0.00429) (0.00429) (0.00429) (0.00429)
 Post # Months                0.441       0.436         0.423       0.432       0.443         0.442
                              (0.0106)    (0.00789) (0.00658) (0.00559) (0.00505) (0.00471)
Zone X Post # Months          0.144       0.148         0.121       0.113       0.0914        0.0963
                              (0.0269)    (0.0197)      (0.0166)    (0.0141)    (0.0126)      (0.0118)
Constant                      12.19       12.19         12.19       12.19       12.19         12.19
                              (0.00195) (0.00195) (0.00195) (0.00195) (0.00195) (0.00195)
Year FE                       N           N             N           N           N             N
Month FE                      N           N             N           N           N             N
County-Year FE                N           N             N           N           N             N
Municipality FE               N           N             N           N           N             N
House FE                      N           N             N           N           N             N
Observations                  178,844     182,491       186,126     190,609     194,668       198,060
R-squared                     0.023       0.030         0.035       0.043       0.049         0.054
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1
defines the post period as up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4
months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4
defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10
months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post #
Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post
period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                  84
      Table A35 - Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina ­ All Sales, Controls

                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Variables:                               Log Price         Log Price        Log Price        Log Price        Log Price        Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.         0.0511            0.0495           0.0439           0.0368           0.0338           0.0280
                                     (0.0243)          (0.0241)         (0.0237)         (0.0231)         (0.0227)         (0.0224)
Zone High Risk                       0.234             0.232            0.231            0.231            0.230            0.229
                                     (0.00804)         (0.00788)        (0.00779)        (0.00757)        (0.00740)        (0.00724)
CRS x Zone                           -0.129            -0.131           -0.131           -0.130           -0.131           -0.128
                                     (0.0127)          (0.0126)         (0.0124)         (0.0122)         (0.0120)         (0.0118)
Age                                  -0.00196          -0.00196         -0.00194         -0.00193         -0.00191         -0.00191
                                     (8.02e-05)        (7.72e-05)       (7.37e-05)       (7.05e-05)       (6.66e-05)       (6.37e-05)
Living Space                         0.000313          0.000314         0.000315         0.000315         0.000315         0.000315
                                     (5.06e-05)        (4.97e-05)       (4.90e-05)       (4.79e-05)       (4.68e-05)       (4.60e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                0.0191            0.0170           0.0144           0.0141           0.0123           0.0109
                                     (0.00592)         (0.00586)        (0.00578)        (0.00571)        (0.00566)        (0.00566)
Mo Sales                             -0.000264         -0.000185        -9.69e-05        -3.35e-05        8.20e-05         0.000152
                                     (0.000100)        (9.75e-05)       (9.57e-05)       (9.44e-05)       (9.32e-05)       (9.20e-05)
Lag Air Pollution                    -0.000414         -0.000409        -0.000366        -0.000361        -0.000259        -0.000230
                                     (0.000341)        (0.000343)       (0.000344)       (0.000344)       (0.000341)       (0.000339)
Air Pollution                        -0.000329         -0.000310        -0.000280        -0.000299        -0.000203        -0.000243
                                     (0.000327)        (0.000324)       (0.000324)       (0.000323)       (0.000321)       (0.000321)
Total New Builds                     1.79e-05          2.22e-05         2.74e-05         8.67e-05         0.000152         0.000154
                                     (7.83e-05)        (7.78e-05)       (7.77e-05)       (7.75e-05)       (7.75e-05)       (7.60e-05)
Total Value New Builds               0.00468           0.00479          0.00513          0.00505          0.00448          0.00455
                                     (0.00150)         (0.00148)        (0.00145)        (0.00141)        (0.00134)        (0.00132)
Post Months                          -0.0188           -0.0144          -0.0105          -0.0100          -0.00751         -0.00726
                                     (0.00864)         (0.00714)        (0.00709)        (0.00708)        (0.00711)        (0.00710)
Zone X Post # Months                 0.117             0.102            0.0876           0.0869           0.0791           0.0787
                                     (0.0194)          (0.0144)         (0.0123)         (0.0106)         (0.00965)        (0.00901)
Constant                             10.89             10.88            10.88            10.87            10.89            10.88
                                     (0.0783)          (0.0765)         (0.0751)         (0.0739)         (0.0715)         (0.0706)
Year FE                              Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
Month FE                             Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
County-Year FE                       Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
Municipality FE                      Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
House FE                             N                 N                N                N                N                N
Observations                         156,561           159,887          163,157          167,290          171,118          174,301
R-squared                             0.630              0.632            0.632           0.634            0.636           0.638
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6
months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10
months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with
Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                85
         Table A36 ­ Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina - Repeated Sales,
                                       Controls


                                                 (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)
Variables:                                    Log Price      Log Price       Log Price      Log Price     Log Price        Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                 0.106          0.102           0.0919         0.0880        0.0841        0.0813
                                             (0.0290)       (0.0286)        (0.0281)       (0.0267)      (0.0263)      (0.0259)
CRS x Zone                                   -0.0619        -0.0595         -0.0496        -0.0470       -0.0472       -0.0466
                                             (0.0315)       (0.0312)        (0.0306)       (0.0294)      (0.0290)      (0.0287)
Age                                          -0.00139       -0.00136        -0.00136       -0.00139      -0.00144      -0.00144
                                             (0.000382)     (0.000372)      (0.000366)     (0.000357)    (0.000349)    (0.000339)
Living Space                                 1.50e-05       1.62e-05        1.72e-05       1.79e-05      1.93e-05      2.04e-05
                                             (1.14e-05)     (1.21e-05)      (1.27e-05)     (1.29e-05)    (1.36e-05)    (1.42e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                        -0.00110       -0.00377        -0.00500       -0.00381      -0.00262      -0.00197
                                             (0.00826)      (0.00814)       (0.00786)      (0.00761)     (0.00732)     (0.00712)
Mo Sales                                     -0.000151      -6.86e-05       -1.33e-05      1.48e-05      8.90e-05      0.000160
                                             (0.000128)     (0.000125)      (0.000120)     (0.000116)    (0.000112)    (0.000109)
Lag Air Pollution                            0.000278       0.000333        0.000424       0.000405      0.000475      0.000520
                                             (0.000404)     (0.000395)      (0.000383)     (0.000377)    (0.000365)    (0.000361)
Air Pollution                                -0.000473      -0.000500       -0.000504      -0.000536     -0.000406     -0.000492
                                             (0.000400)     (0.000389)      (0.000383)     (0.000377)    (0.000371)    (0.000365)
Total New Builds                             -8.17e-05      -8.92e-05       -0.000115      -0.000121     -0.000100     -0.000114
                                             (9.39e-05)     (9.23e-05)      (9.04e-05)     (8.85e-05)    (8.44e-05)    (8.33e-05)
Total Value New Builds                       0.00409        0.00445         0.00552        0.00594       0.00590       0.00611
                                             (0.00200)      (0.00194)       (0.00190)      (0.00182)     (0.00169)     (0.00165)
 Post Months                                 -0.0305        -0.0289         -0.0280        -0.0249       -0.0232       -0.0208
                                             (0.0105)       (0.00899)       (0.00874)      (0.00859)     (0.00840)     (0.00828)
Zone X Post # Months                         0.0909         0.0906          0.0967         0.0945        0.0994        0.0978
                                             (0.0222)       (0.0184)        (0.0150)       (0.0133)      (0.0118)      (0.0110)
Constant                                     11.61          11.57           11.56          11.57         11.56         11.56
                                             (0.0319)       (0.0349)        (0.0319)       (0.0305)      (0.0292)      (0.0289)
Year FE                                      Y              Y               Y              Y             Y             Y
Month FE                                     Y              Y               Y              Y             Y             Y
County-Year FE                               Y              Y               Y              Y             Y             Y
Municipality FE                              N              N               N              N             N             N
House FE                                     Y              Y               Y              Y             Y             Y
Observations                                 60,138         61,111          62,137         63,449        64,650        65,626
R-squared                                    0.980          0.979           0.978          0.977         0.977         0.976
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to
6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up
to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables
interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                             86
            Table A37 - Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina ­ Information, All
                                        Sales, Controls

                                          (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
Variables:                               Log Price          Log Price         Log Price       Log Price          Log Price          Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.          0.0508             0.0472            0.0399          0.0316             0.0278             0.0219
                                      (0.0243)           (0.0240)          (0.0236)        (0.0231)           (0.0226)           (0.0223)
Zone High Risk                        0.234              0.232             0.230           0.229              0.228              0.226
                                      (0.00798)          (0.00782)         (0.00771)       (0.00747)          (0.00731)          (0.00716)
CRS x Zone                            -0.129             -0.128            -0.124          -0.120             -0.119             -0.116
                                      (0.0128)           (0.0127)          (0.0126)        (0.0125)           (0.0124)           (0.0123)
Age                                   -0.00196           -0.00196          -0.00194        -0.00193           -0.00191           -0.00191
                                      (8.01e-05)         (7.71e-05)        (7.36e-05)      (7.04e-05)         (6.66e-05)         (6.36e-05)
Living Space                          0.000313           0.000314          0.000315        0.000315           0.000315           0.000315
                                      (5.06e-05)         (4.97e-05)        (4.90e-05)      (4.80e-05)         (4.68e-05)         (4.60e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                 0.0191             0.0168            0.0141          0.0136             0.0117             0.0103
                                      (0.00593)          (0.00588)         (0.00582)       (0.00575)          (0.00571)          (0.00571)
Mo Sales                              -0.000264          -0.000189         -0.000104       -4.23e-05          7.08e-05           0.000141
                                      (0.000100)         (9.75e-05)        (9.57e-05)      (9.44e-05)         (9.31e-05)         (9.19e-05)
Lag Air Pollution                     -0.000414          -0.000411         -0.000369       -0.000362          -0.000262          -0.000233
                                      (0.000341)         (0.000343)        (0.000344)      (0.000344)         (0.000341)         (0.000339)
Air Pollution                         -0.000330          -0.000313         -0.000284       -0.000304          -0.000206          -0.000245
                                      (0.000327)         (0.000324)        (0.000324)      (0.000323)         (0.000321)         (0.000321)
Total New Builds                      1.95e-05           2.54e-05          3.09e-05        9.17e-05           0.000157           0.000159
                                      (7.86e-05)         (7.80e-05)        (7.79e-05)      (7.77e-05)         (7.78e-05)         (7.63e-05)
Total Value New Builds                0.00467            0.00476           0.00511         0.00506            0.00446            0.00453
                                      (0.00150)          (0.00148)         (0.00145)       (0.00141)          (0.00134)          (0.00132)
 Post Months                          -0.0190            -0.0165           -0.0132         -0.0123            -0.00969           -0.00904
                                      (0.00862)          (0.00709)         (0.00704)       (0.00703)          (0.00705)          (0.00703)
Zone X Post Months                    0.123              0.117             0.108           0.113              0.105              0.103
                                      (0.0245)           (0.0177)          (0.0151)        (0.0132)           (0.0122)           (0.0113)
CRS X Post # Months                   0.00514            0.0396            0.0464          0.0382             0.0382             0.0329
                                      (0.0458)           (0.0337)          (0.0273)        (0.0226)           (0.0204)           (0.0192)
 CRS X Zone X Post Mos                -0.0221            -0.0776           -0.0970         -0.105             -0.106             -0.0986
                                      (0.0582)           (0.0425)          (0.0355)        (0.0299)           (0.0266)           (0.0248)
Constant                              10.89              10.88             10.88           10.88              10.89              10.89
                                      (0.0782)           (0.0765)          (0.0751)        (0.0739)           (0.0716)           (0.0706)
Year FE                               Y                  Y                 Y               Y                  Y                  Y
Month FE                              Y                  Y                 Y               Y                  Y                  Y
County-Year FE                        Y                  Y                 Y               Y                  Y                  Y
Municipality FE                       Y                  Y                 Y               Y                  Y                  Y
House FE                              N                  N                 N               N                  N                  N
Observations                          156,561            159,887           163,157         167,290            171,118            174,301
R-squared                             0.630              0.632             0.632           0.634              0.636              0.638
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2 months
after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after
the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the
storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are
consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                 87
        Table A38 - Sale Price Response to Hurricane Katrina ­ Repeated Sales,
                                    Controls, Info

                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
Variables:                                    Log Price      Log Price        Log Price      Log Price     Log Price       Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                 0.106          0.101            0.0894         0.0826        0.0779         0.0734
                                             (0.0290)       (0.0288)         (0.0283)       (0.0271)      (0.0267)       (0.0264)
CRS x Zone                                   -0.0609        -0.0570          -0.0442        -0.0373       -0.0354        -0.0324
                                             (0.0315)       (0.0313)         (0.0307)       (0.0297)      (0.0293)       (0.0291)
Age                                          -0.00140       -0.00136         -0.00137       -0.00141      -0.00146       -0.00147
                                             (0.000383)     (0.000372)       (0.000366)     (0.000358)    (0.000350)     (0.000341)
Living Space                                 1.50e-05       1.62e-05         1.73e-05       1.80e-05      1.94e-05       2.05e-05
                                             (1.14e-05)     (1.22e-05)       (1.27e-05)     (1.29e-05)    (1.37e-05)     (1.43e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                        -0.00147       -0.00431         -0.00549       -0.00441      -0.00301       -0.00209
                                             (0.00827)      (0.00813)        (0.00782)      (0.00758)     (0.00730)      (0.00709)
Mo Sales                                     -0.000150      -6.82e-05        -1.79e-05      5.95e-06      7.43e-05       0.000138
                                             (0.000128)     (0.000125)       (0.000120)     (0.000116)    (0.000112)     (0.000108)
Lag Air Pollution                            0.000287       0.000336         0.000427       0.000410      0.000474       0.000524
                                             (0.000404)     (0.000395)       (0.000384)     (0.000377)    (0.000365)     (0.000361)
Air Pollution                                -0.000477      -0.000497        -0.000498      -0.000531     -0.000394      -0.000473
                                             (0.000401)     (0.000389)       (0.000383)     (0.000378)    (0.000371)     (0.000364)
Total New Builds                             -7.52e-05      -8.38e-05        -0.000111      -0.000117     -9.65e-05      -0.000111
                                             (9.39e-05)     (9.22e-05)       (9.03e-05)     (8.84e-05)    (8.43e-05)     (8.32e-05)
Total Value New Builds                       0.00413        0.00443          0.00545        0.00590       0.00578        0.00595
                                             (0.00201)      (0.00194)        (0.00190)      (0.00182)     (0.00169)      (0.00165)
 Post # Months                               -0.0288        -0.0310          -0.0306        -0.0280       -0.0263        -0.0243
                                             (0.0106)       (0.00914)        (0.00889)      (0.00873)     (0.00853)      (0.00840)
Zone X Post # Months                         0.124          0.114            0.122          0.123         0.127          0.126
                                             (0.0299)       (0.0232)         (0.0184)       (0.0159)      (0.0139)       (0.0128)
 CRS X Post # Mos                            -0.0376        0.0424           0.0517         0.0648        0.0697         0.0807
                                             (0.0416)       (0.0610)         (0.0472)       (0.0396)      (0.0347)       (0.0322)
 CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                     -0.0575        -0.105           -0.116         -0.140        -0.146         -0.157
                                             (0.0560)       (0.0679)         (0.0533)       (0.0452)      (0.0397)       (0.0370)
Constant                                     11.61          11.57            11.56          11.57         11.57          11.56
                                             (0.0319)       (0.0351)         (0.0320)       (0.0305)      (0.0293)       (0.0289)
Year FE                                      Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y
Month FE                                     Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y
County-Year FE                               Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y
Municipality FE                              N              N                N              N             N              N
House FE                                     Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y
Observations                                 60,138         61,111           62,137         63,449        64,650         65,626
R-squared                                    0.980          0.979            0.978          0.977         0.977          0.976
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up
to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as
up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables
interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                            88
Table A39 ­ Sale Price Response to 2007 Hurricanes ­ All Sales, No Controls


                                     (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
Variables:                       Log Price     Log Price      Log Price       Log Price     Log Price      Log Price
Zone High Risk                         0.190          0.190         0.190           0.190         0.190          0.190
                                  (0.00392)     (0.00392)      (0.00392)       (0.00392)     (0.00392)      (0.00392)
 Post # Months                         0.338          0.337         0.337           0.344         0.363          0.365
                                   (0.0127)     (0.00956)      (0.00810)       (0.00713)     (0.00653)      (0.00619)
Zone X Post # Months                   0.161          0.156         0.132           0.168         0.144          0.133
                                   (0.0318)       (0.0243)       (0.0192)       (0.0162)      (0.0148)       (0.0139)
Constant                               12.29          12.29         12.29           12.29         12.29          12.29
                                  (0.00174)     (0.00174)      (0.00174)       (0.00174)     (0.00174)      (0.00174)
Year FE                                    N              N             N               N             N              N
Month FE                                   N              N             N               N             N              N
County-Year FE                             N              N             N               N             N              N
Municipality FE                            N              N             N               N             N              N
House FE                                   N              N             N               N             N              N
Observations                        219,792        221,772       223,921         226,601       228,800        230,592
R-squared                              0.016          0.018         0.020           0.025         0.028          0.030
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post
period as up to 2 months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column
3 defines the post period as up to 6 months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after
the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10 months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as
up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with Post # Months are consistent with these
definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                         89
            Table A40 ­ Sale Price Response to 2007 Hurricanes­ All Sales, Controls


                                              (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
Variables:                               Log Price          Log Price         Log Price       Log Price        Log Price         Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                    0.0162            0.0171             0.0176          0.0179          0.0159             0.0148
                                              (0.0201)          (0.0199)           (0.0198)        (0.0196)        (0.0194)           (0.0194)
Zone High Risk                                    0.236             0.236              0.236           0.237           0.237              0.237
                                            (0.00648)          (0.00641)         (0.00635)       (0.00626)        (0.00615)         (0.00607)
CRS x Zone                                       -0.124            -0.125             -0.127          -0.129          -0.130             -0.130
                                              (0.0109)          (0.0109)           (0.0108)        (0.0106)        (0.0106)           (0.0105)
Age                                          -0.00184           -0.00185          -0.00185        -0.00187         -0.00187          -0.00187
                                           (5.19e-05)         (5.15e-05)        (5.12e-05)      (5.09e-05)       (5.07e-05)        (5.06e-05)
Living Space                                0.000310           0.000309          0.000310        0.000310         0.000310          0.000310
                                           (4.02e-05)         (3.96e-05)        (3.94e-05)      (3.90e-05)       (3.84e-05)        (3.81e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                          0.00291           0.00277            0.00249         0.00174         0.00156         0.000685
                                            (0.00518)          (0.00511)         (0.00508)       (0.00505)        (0.00501)         (0.00503)
Mo Sales                                    0.000396           0.000392          0.000387        0.000398         0.000410          0.000427
                                           (8.28e-05)         (8.18e-05)        (8.02e-05)      (7.93e-05)       (7.83e-05)        (7.76e-05)
Lag Air Pollution                          -0.000251          -0.000241         -0.000219       -0.000223        -0.000285         -0.000185
                                          (0.000339)         (0.000339)        (0.000340)      (0.000340)       (0.000338)        (0.000335)
Air Pollution                              -0.000428          -0.000430         -0.000441       -0.000446        -0.000502         -0.000371
                                          (0.000316)         (0.000316)        (0.000316)      (0.000316)       (0.000315)        (0.000314)
Total New Builds                            0.000219           0.000240          0.000248        0.000266         0.000296          0.000312
                                           (6.90e-05)         (6.84e-05)        (6.77e-05)      (6.78e-05)       (6.86e-05)        (6.85e-05)
Total Value New Builds                         0.00584           0.00538            0.00518         0.00525         0.00535            0.00502
                                            (0.00120)          (0.00117)         (0.00116)       (0.00115)        (0.00113)         (0.00113)
Post # Months                                  -0.0772           -0.0843            -0.0821         -0.0826         -0.0817            -0.0815
                                            (0.00992)          (0.00888)         (0.00868)       (0.00872)        (0.00869)         (0.00866)
Zone X Post # Months                            0.0537            0.0634             0.0517          0.0539          0.0504             0.0482
                                              (0.0226)          (0.0187)           (0.0157)        (0.0132)        (0.0125)           (0.0116)
Constant                                          10.88             10.88              10.89           10.89           10.89              10.89
                                              (0.0642)          (0.0640)           (0.0635)        (0.0627)        (0.0615)           (0.0612)
Year FE                                               Y                 Y                  Y               Y               Y                  Y
Month FE                                              Y                 Y                  Y               Y               Y                  Y
County-Year FE                                        Y                 Y                  Y               Y               Y                  Y
Municipality FE                                       Y                 Y                  Y               Y               Y                  Y
House FE                                              N                 N                  N               N               N                  N
Observations                                   193,598           195,244            197,004         199,238         201,038            202,516
R-squared                                         0.643             0.643              0.643           0.645           0.645              0.646
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6
months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10
months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with
Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                  90
              Table A41 ­ Sale Price Response to 2007 Hurricanes­ Repeated Sales,
                                           Controls


                                              (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
Variables:                               Log Price          Log Price         Log Price       Log Price        Log Price         Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                    0.0659            0.0657             0.0610          0.0614          0.0588             0.0602
                                              (0.0232)          (0.0230)           (0.0231)        (0.0235)        (0.0233)           (0.0232)
CRS x Zone                                     -0.0227           -0.0214            -0.0148         -0.0159         -0.0131            -0.0147
                                              (0.0263)          (0.0261)           (0.0262)        (0.0266)        (0.0264)           (0.0262)
Age                                          -0.00201           -0.00208          -0.00210        -0.00222         -0.00227          -0.00231
                                          (0.000333)         (0.000333)        (0.000329)      (0.000323)       (0.000321)        (0.000317)
Living Space                                 2.72e-05           2.78e-05          2.83e-05        2.88e-05         2.93e-05          2.93e-05
                                           (1.68e-05)         (1.71e-05)        (1.70e-05)      (1.69e-05)       (1.69e-05)        (1.67e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                        -0.00515           -0.00592          -0.00750        -0.00649         -0.00723          -0.00746
                                            (0.00610)          (0.00600)         (0.00589)       (0.00580)        (0.00570)         (0.00564)
Mo Sales                                    0.000376           0.000413          0.000442        0.000438         0.000474          0.000494
                                           (9.22e-05)         (9.02e-05)        (8.78e-05)      (8.57e-05)       (8.40e-05)        (8.29e-05)
Lag Air Pollution                           0.000609           0.000631          0.000595        0.000621         0.000589          0.000644
                                          (0.000341)         (0.000338)        (0.000336)      (0.000332)       (0.000330)        (0.000328)
Air Pollution                              -0.000674          -0.000677         -0.000694       -0.000649        -0.000700         -0.000519
                                          (0.000342)         (0.000340)        (0.000338)      (0.000335)       (0.000332)        (0.000330)
Total New Builds                            -7.11e-05          -5.44e-05         -4.82e-05       -2.48e-05        -1.05e-05          9.96e-06
                                           (6.94e-05)         (6.91e-05)        (6.79e-05)      (6.68e-05)       (6.61e-05)        (6.58e-05)
Total Value New Builds                         0.00559           0.00498            0.00499         0.00496         0.00467            0.00420
                                            (0.00138)          (0.00137)         (0.00135)       (0.00133)        (0.00131)         (0.00129)
Post # Months                                  -0.0885           -0.0929            -0.0910         -0.0892         -0.0885            -0.0877
                                              (0.0130)          (0.0114)           (0.0112)        (0.0111)        (0.0110)           (0.0109)
Zone X Post # Months                            0.0663            0.0410             0.0371          0.0360          0.0381             0.0340
                                              (0.0385)          (0.0260)           (0.0199)        (0.0166)        (0.0149)           (0.0137)
Constant                                          11.57            11.55               11.56           11.58          11.59               11.60
                                              (0.0283)          (0.0319)           (0.0287)        (0.0280)        (0.0277)           (0.0275)
Year FE                                               Y                Y                   Y               Y              Y                   Y
Month FE                                              Y                Y                   Y               Y              Y                   Y
County-Year FE                                        Y                Y                   Y               Y              Y                   Y
Municipality FE                                       N                N                   N               N              N                   N
House FE                                              Y                Y                   Y               Y              Y                   Y
Observations                                    74,550            75,061             75,663          76,388          76,975             77,488
R-squared                                         0.973            0.973               0.973           0.973          0.972               0.972
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6
months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10
months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with
Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                  91
           Table A42 ­ Sale Price Response to 2007 Hurricanes ­ All Sales, Controls,
                                        Information


                                              (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
Variables:                               Log Price          Log Price         Log Price       Log Price        Log Price         Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                    0.0164            0.0171             0.0161          0.0144          0.0127             0.0117
                                              (0.0201)          (0.0199)           (0.0198)        (0.0196)        (0.0195)           (0.0194)
Zone High Risk                                    0.236             0.236              0.235           0.235           0.235              0.235
                                            (0.00650)          (0.00641)         (0.00633)       (0.00624)        (0.00614)         (0.00607)
CRS x Zone                                       -0.124            -0.124             -0.124          -0.123          -0.123             -0.122
                                              (0.0110)          (0.0110)           (0.0109)        (0.0108)        (0.0108)           (0.0108)
Age                                          -0.00184           -0.00185          -0.00186        -0.00187         -0.00187          -0.00187
                                           (5.19e-05)         (5.15e-05)        (5.12e-05)      (5.09e-05)       (5.07e-05)        (5.06e-05)
Living Space                                0.000310           0.000309          0.000310        0.000310         0.000310          0.000310
                                           (4.02e-05)         (3.96e-05)        (3.94e-05)      (3.90e-05)       (3.84e-05)        (3.81e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                          0.00246           0.00236            0.00206         0.00158         0.00112         0.000141
                                            (0.00518)          (0.00512)         (0.00509)       (0.00506)        (0.00502)         (0.00504)
Mo Sales                                    0.000409           0.000404          0.000399        0.000404         0.000425          0.000447
                                           (8.28e-05)         (8.16e-05)        (8.01e-05)      (7.91e-05)       (7.82e-05)        (7.75e-05)
Lag Air Pollution                          -0.000257          -0.000248         -0.000230       -0.000232        -0.000291         -0.000193
                                          (0.000339)         (0.000339)        (0.000340)      (0.000339)       (0.000338)        (0.000335)
Air Pollution                              -0.000433          -0.000436         -0.000448       -0.000450        -0.000504         -0.000371
                                          (0.000316)         (0.000316)        (0.000316)      (0.000315)       (0.000315)        (0.000314)
Total New Builds                            0.000220           0.000241          0.000244        0.000260         0.000288          0.000301
                                           (6.90e-05)         (6.84e-05)        (6.76e-05)      (6.77e-05)       (6.85e-05)        (6.85e-05)
Total Value New Builds                         0.00583           0.00539            0.00525         0.00533         0.00546            0.00519
                                            (0.00120)          (0.00118)         (0.00116)       (0.00115)        (0.00113)         (0.00113)
Post # Months                                  -0.0735           -0.0827            -0.0821         -0.0847         -0.0828            -0.0821
                                              (0.0101)         (0.00901)         (0.00876)       (0.00881)        (0.00876)         (0.00872)
Zone X Post # Months                            0.0976            0.0917             0.0937          0.0969            0.101              0.100
                                              (0.0302)          (0.0261)           (0.0209)        (0.0174)        (0.0161)           (0.0151)
CRS X Post # Months                            -0.0704           -0.0237             0.0182          0.0469          0.0261             0.0180
                                              (0.0460)          (0.0331)           (0.0272)        (0.0233)        (0.0208)           (0.0196)
CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                        -0.0288           -0.0418              -0.113          -0.134          -0.131             -0.129
                                              (0.0621)          (0.0466)           (0.0372)        (0.0319)        (0.0292)           (0.0273)
Constant                                          10.88             10.88              10.88           10.89           10.89              10.89
                                              (0.0642)          (0.0640)           (0.0635)        (0.0627)        (0.0615)           (0.0613)
Year FE                                               Y                 Y                  Y               Y               Y                  Y
Month FE                                              Y                 Y                  Y               Y               Y                  Y
County-Year FE                                        Y                 Y                  Y               Y               Y                  Y
Municipality FE                                       Y                 Y                  Y               Y               Y                  Y
House FE                                              N                 N                  N               N               N                  N
Observations                                   193,598           195,244            197,004         199,238         201,038            202,516
R-squared                                         0.643             0.643              0.643           0.645           0.645              0.646
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6
months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10
months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with
Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                  92
              Table A43 ­ Sale Price Response to 2007 Hurricanes ­ Repeated Sales,
                                         Controls, Info


                                              (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
Variables:                               Log Price          Log Price         Log Price       Log Price        Log Price         Log Price
CRS Public Info and Map Par.                    0.0660            0.0657             0.0608          0.0604          0.0575             0.0579
                                              (0.0232)          (0.0230)           (0.0232)        (0.0234)        (0.0232)           (0.0231)
CRS x Zone                                     -0.0225           -0.0207            -0.0134         -0.0133        -0.00993            -0.0101
                                              (0.0263)          (0.0261)           (0.0262)        (0.0265)        (0.0263)           (0.0262)
Age                                          -0.00201           -0.00209          -0.00211        -0.00223         -0.00228          -0.00232
                                          (0.000333)         (0.000334)        (0.000329)      (0.000324)       (0.000321)        (0.000318)
Living Space                                 2.72e-05           2.78e-05          2.83e-05        2.89e-05         2.94e-05          2.94e-05
                                           (1.68e-05)         (1.71e-05)        (1.70e-05)      (1.69e-05)       (1.70e-05)        (1.68e-05)
Mo Sales/Avg Mo Sales                        -0.00545           -0.00622          -0.00770        -0.00666         -0.00744          -0.00754
                                            (0.00611)          (0.00602)         (0.00591)       (0.00581)        (0.00571)         (0.00565)
Mo Sales                                    0.000384           0.000421          0.000446        0.000444         0.000481          0.000497
                                           (9.24e-05)         (9.03e-05)        (8.79e-05)      (8.61e-05)       (8.43e-05)        (8.31e-05)
Lag Air Pollution                           0.000606           0.000628          0.000591        0.000616         0.000586          0.000642
                                          (0.000341)         (0.000338)        (0.000336)      (0.000332)       (0.000330)        (0.000328)
Air Pollution                              -0.000679          -0.000684         -0.000701       -0.000658        -0.000708         -0.000523
                                          (0.000342)         (0.000340)        (0.000338)      (0.000335)       (0.000332)        (0.000329)
Total New Builds                            -6.97e-05          -5.28e-05         -4.91e-05       -2.79e-05        -1.40e-05          3.92e-06
                                           (6.95e-05)         (6.91e-05)        (6.79e-05)      (6.68e-05)       (6.61e-05)        (6.57e-05)
Total Value New Builds                         0.00557           0.00497            0.00502         0.00503         0.00475            0.00435
                                            (0.00138)          (0.00137)         (0.00135)       (0.00133)        (0.00131)         (0.00129)
Post # Months                                  -0.0866           -0.0924            -0.0911         -0.0899         -0.0893            -0.0892
                                              (0.0133)          (0.0112)           (0.0111)        (0.0109)        (0.0109)           (0.0108)
Zone X Post # Months                            0.0887            0.0705             0.0617          0.0675          0.0694             0.0690
                                              (0.0434)          (0.0308)           (0.0223)        (0.0194)        (0.0175)           (0.0162)
CRS X Post # Months                            -0.0400          -0.00960             0.0130          0.0254          0.0242             0.0396
                                              (0.0525)          (0.0600)           (0.0460)        (0.0379)        (0.0344)           (0.0323)
CRS X Zone X Post # Mos                        -0.0180           -0.0599            -0.0745         -0.0985         -0.0959              -0.117
                                              (0.0935)          (0.0751)           (0.0564)        (0.0459)        (0.0410)           (0.0379)
Constant                                          11.57            11.56               11.57           11.59          11.59               11.60
                                              (0.0283)          (0.0320)           (0.0287)        (0.0280)        (0.0277)           (0.0275)
Year FE                                               Y                Y                   Y               Y              Y                   Y
Month FE                                              Y                Y                   Y               Y              Y                   Y
County-Year FE                                        Y                Y                   Y               Y              Y                   Y
Municipality FE                                       N                N                   N               N              N                   N
House FE                                              Y                Y                   Y               Y              Y                   Y
Observations                                    74,550            75,061             75,663          76,388          76,975             77,488
R-squared                                         0.974            0.973               0.973           0.973          0.972               0.972
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is listed in the column header. Column 1 defines the post period as up to 2
months after the storm. Column 2 defines the post period as up to 4 months after the storm. Column 3 defines the post period as up to 6
months after the storm. Column 4 defines the post period as up to 8 months after the storm. Column 5 defines the post period as up to 10
months after the storm. Column 6 defines the post period as up to 12 months after the storm. Post # Months and variables interacted with
Post # Months are consistent with these definitions of the post period. See Table A2 for more information.




                                                                                                                                  93
II.   Appendix Figures

               Figure A1 - Trends for High Risk and Low Risk Zones
                    Allison     2002 Storms    Charley   Katrina     2007 Storms
       13.2
        13
       12.8
       12.6
       12.4
       12.2
        12
       11.8
       11.6
       11.4
       11.2
              2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

                       Log Avg Price Non-Zone High                     Log Avg Price Zone High




                  Figure A2 - Trends for CRS x Zone and Control
                     Allison     2002 Storms   Charley   Katrina      2007 Storms
       13.5


        13


       12.5


        12


       11.5


        11
              2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

                              Log Avg Price Control                Log Avg Price CRS X Zone




                                                                                                 94
                    Figure A3 - Trends Across All Storms

13.5     Allison   2002 Storms   Charley   Katrina   2007 Storms




 13



12.5



 12



11.5




       Log Avg Price Control         Log Avg Price Zone High       Log Avg Price CRS X Zone




                                                                                              95
