                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HOW DO ALTERNATIVE WORK ARRANGEMENTS AFFECT INCOME RISK
                      AFTER WORKPLACE INJURY?

                                      Nicholas Broten
                                      Michael Dworsky
                                       David Powell

                                     Working Paper 25989
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25989


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




We thank conference attendees at the 2018 Conference of the American Society of Health
Economists and the 2018 Disability Research Consortium Meeting for helpful discussions and
comments, especially our discussants Nick Ziebarth and David Mann. Roald Euller at RAND
provided invaluable programming support. This research was supported by the U.S. Social
Security Administration through grant #5 DRC12000002-06 to the National Bureau of Economic
Research as part of the SSA Disability Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions
expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, any agency of
the Federal Government, or the NBER. The authors are grateful to the California Department of
Industrial Relations for providing the data used in this study.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Nicholas Broten, Michael Dworsky, and David Powell. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Alternative Work Arrangements Affect Income Risk After Workplace Injury?
Nicholas Broten, Michael Dworsky, and David Powell
NBER Working Paper No. 25989
June 2019
JEL No. J28,J81

                                          ABSTRACT

Alternative work arrangements, including temporary and contract work, have become more
widespread. There is interest in understanding the effects of these types of arrangements on
employment and earnings risk for workers and the potential for existing social insurance
programs to address this risk. We study employment and earnings risk in the context of
workplace injuries among temporary and contract workers. We link administrative workers'
compensation claims to earnings records to measure the employment and earnings risk posed by
workplace injuries, comparing labor market outcomes after injury between temporary and
contract workers and direct-hire workers injured doing the same job. We use a triple-difference
identification strategy to isolate the effect of alternative work arrangements. We find that
temporary workers have significantly lower probabilities of employment post-injury relative to
similar direct-hire workers; temporary workers also have more severe earnings losses, which
persist for at least three years after injury. This difference in income risk cannot be explained by
differences in employment dynamics between temporary and direct-hire workers. We find
evidence that the additional earnings losses suffered by temporary workers are offset by workers'
compensation benefits, suggesting that the program provides insurance for the incremental risk
faced by temporary workers.

Nicholas Broten RAND                             David Powell
Corporation 1776 Main                            RAND Corporation 1776
Street                                           Main Street
P.O. Box 2138                                    P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407                           Santa Monica, CA 90407
nbroten@rand.org                                 powelld@nber.org

Michael Dworsky RAND
Corporation 1776 Main
Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407
mdworsky@rand.org
1       Introduction
A growing number of jobs are being filled through various types of alternative work ar-
rangements, including independent contracting, employment through temporary help agen-
cies, or participation in the "gig economy" of jobs arranged through online intermediaries
such as Uber and TaskRabbit (Katz and Krueger, 2019).1 Workers in alternative work
arrangements--who we also refer to as nonstandard workers --are unlikely to be eligible
for employee benefits such as employer-sponsored health insurance or to be covered under
social insurance programs such as unemployment insurance or workers' compensation. Ob-
servers have thus raised concerns that alternative work arrangements shift economic risks
from employers and social insurance programs to workers and their families. However, there
is little evidence directly comparing the economic risks faced by nonstandard and direct-hire
workers or examining the suitability of traditional social insurance arrangements for workers
employed through alternative work arrangements.

         In this paper, we study earnings and employment risk faced by both direct-hire
workers and nonstandard workers hired through temporary help agencies or contract firms
in the context of workplace injuries. Unlike independent contractors, workers employed by
temporary help agencies or other contract firms are covered by workers' compensation, and
so administrative records from the workers' compensation system create a rare opportunity
to examine the effects of alternative work arrangements on an important form of income risk
for a fast-growing segment of the nonstandard worker population. We use a unique data
set from California to provide the first evidence comparing employment risk after workplace
injury between workers in alternative work arrangements and direct-hire workers who are
injured doing similar jobs. The data set includes administrative records from the universe
    1
    An earlier paper by Katz and Krueger (2016) suggested even higher rates of growth in alternative work
arrangements. The 2019 paper concludes that there has been a "modest upward trend."



                                                   1
of California workers' compensation claims from 2005 to 2011. We linked workers to ad-
ministrative Unemployment Insurance (UI) earnings records to provide pre- and post-injury
earnings and employment outcomes, permitting us to compare the trajectory of labor market
outcomes through workplace injury across different categories of workers.

        In our data, we can identify direct-hire workers as well as temporary workers and
contract workers. These workers do not encompass the entire nonstandard workforce, as
independent contractors generally are not covered by workers' compensation and their earn-
ings may not be captured in administrative records on wage and salary income since they are
unlikely to participate in state Unemployment Insurance programs. In contrast, temporary
and contract workers are covered by both workers' compensation and Unemployment Insur-
ance so it is possible to observe injuries and post-injury labor market outcomes for these
groups of nonstandard workers. The outcomes of temporary workers can thus shed light
on how income risk after injury and the generosity of the existing workers' compensation
system compare between workers who are and who are not direct-hires. Because we are able
to control for job tenure at injury and the type of work being done at the establishment
where the injury took place, we are able to identify differences in employment risk due to
differences in work arrangements while holding constant confounding factors like job tenure,
demographics, and the type of work.

        A major challenge in studying the labor market outcomes of temporary workers is
that temporary workers are likely to have different employment trajectories than direct-hire
workers even in the absence of a workplace injury. Our preferred analysis accordingly uses
medical-only workers' compensation claims as an additional control group for more severe,
lost-time injuries. Medical-only claims are claims for minor injuries that do not result in
payment of indemnity (or cash) benefits for either temporary or permanent disability; in
California, this means that the worker experienced no more than three days of work absence


                                             2
due to the injury. We estimate a triple-difference regression specification that compares
the post-injury labor market outcomes of workers with lost-time injuries to workers with
medical-only injuries who were hurt doing a similar job and who had the same type of work
arrangement (direct-hire or temporary worker). By using other workers with the same type
of work arrangement as an additional control group, this identification strategy allows us to
distinguish the effect of alternative work arrangements on post-injury labor market outcomes
from other differences in employment dynamics between temporary and direct-hire workers.
Event-study estimates of these triple-differences models indicate that this strategy eliminates
differential pre-injury trends in labor market outcomes, suggesting that our triple-difference
identification strategy may capture the causal effect of temporary work on post-injury labor
market outcomes.

        We find that temporary workers have significantly lower post-injury employment
and earnings than we would expect if these workers were direct hires at the time of injury
instead. One year after injury, temporary workers are 4.3 percentage points less likely to be
employed. This gap in employment closes gradually over the second year after injury and
disappears by the end of the third year after injury. Even though reductions in employment
appear to be transitory, earnings losses for temporary workers continue through the end
of the third year after injury, indicating that these workers experience some combination of
slower wage growth and reduced hours even after returning to work: temporary workers with
a lost-time injury earn 9.1 percent less than they otherwise would have over the three years
following injury. This pattern of results holds even when we compare temporary (at time
of injury) workers who were recently employed as direct hire workers to direct hire workers
who were recently working as temporary workers, further suggesting that the results are not
simply indicative of unobserved differences between temporary and direct-hire workers. To
sum up, our findings show that temporary workers face a larger magnitude of earnings and
employment risk after a lost-time workplace injury than they would if they were working as

                                              3
direct-hire employees at the time of injury.

        This difference in earnings risk raises the question of whether workers' compensation
benefits are designed in a way that provides temporary workers with the additional compen-
sation needed to offset their greater earnings losses, an important question given concerns
about the adequacy of existing social insurance programs if expanded to nonstandard work-
ers. Since we observe a set of nonstandard workers eligible for workers' compensation, we
are able to address this question by adapting our triple-difference regression model for labor
earnings to estimate the effect of alternative work arrangements on a measure of income that
includes both labor earnings and workers' compensation benefits. The goal of this exercise
is to examine whether the difference in earnings losses results in a difference in uncom-
pensated losses net of workers' compensation benefits. The workers' compensation system
in California provides separate benefits for temporary disability and permanent disability;
lump-sum settlements are also important. We add these different types of benefits to labor
earnings sequentially in order to provide evidence on which components of the overall work-
ers' compensation benefit structure are most important for offsetting the greater risk faced
by temporary workers.

        We find that temporary and permanent disability benefits reduce, but do not elim-
inate, the gap in post-injury income between temporary and direct-hire workers; the 9.1%
reduction in labor earnings attributable to temporary status falls to 6.3% when temporary
total disability benefits are included and to 4.0% when permanent partial disability benefits
are included. When lump-sum settlements are added to the income measure, however, the
decline in post-injury income due to temporary worker status is eliminated. Our findings
suggest that, even though temporary workers face greater earnings risk after injury than do
direct-hire workers, the current workers' compensation system in California is more or less
successful ­ on average ­ at providing benefits that are sufficient to offset this higher level


                                               4
of risk.

           This study provides the first empirical estimates of how the shift from direct-hire
employment to alternative work arrangements affects an important dimension of household
income risk: earnings and employment loss due to workplace injury. Previous studies have
documented that temporary work is associated with worse occupational health (Underhill
and Quinlan, 2011; Quinlan, 2015) and substantially higher rates of workers' compensation
claiming (Park and Butler, 2001; Smith et al., 2010; Zaidman, 2017). However, the em-
ployment and earnings outcomes of temporary workers who are injured on the job have not
previously been examined. Besides facing a higher risk of experiencing a workplace injury,
our findings indicate that temporary workers face more severe economic consequences when
workplace injuries occur. Beyond the question of the health and safety implications of alter-
native work arrangements, our study adds to our understanding of the impact of alternative
work arrangements on job quality, an area identified by Bernhardt et al. (2016) as a major
gap in knowledge. Our study also represents, to our knowledge, the first attempt to assess
the suitability of an existing social insurance program for the risks faced by nonstandard
workers. As such, our analysis comparing losses to benefits may help to inform ongoing
state and federal debates about worker classification and coverage of social insurance for
independent contractors and other types of nonstandard workers.

           The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background
and a literature review on workers' compensation and temporary help agencies. Section 3
describes our data sources. Section 4 describes our empirical strategy. Section 5 presents
our results. Section 6 discusses policy implications and suggests priorities for future re-
search.




                                               5
2     Background
In 2015, there were 2.9 million reported nonfatal occupational injuries and illnesses in the
U.S. (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2017). These injuries impose a substantial economic cost
on workers and the economy as a whole: Leigh (2011) estimates that the total social cost
of workplace injuries in the United States was $250 billion per year as of 2007. In order
to help protect workers against the financial and health risks arising from workplace injury
and illness, workers' compensation (WC) systems have been established in every state to
ensure that injured workers have access to needed medical care and rehabilitation services.
In 2016, state workers' compensation systems paid a total of $61.9 billion in medical and cash
benefits to injured workers (McLaren et al., 2018). Cash benefits in workers' compensation
are untaxed and designed to provide partial insurance against earnings losses due to injury,
typically paying workers two-thirds of their weekly wage at the time of injury (subject to
a minimum and maximum benefit) during an initial spell of temporary total disability and
providing additional permanent disability benefits to workers whose injuries result in long-
term impairment. Workers' compensation provides only partial wage replacement, a design
feature that is justified by strong evidence that disability duration (and thus the cost of
providing benefits) is responsive to the level of benefits or the wage replacement rate (Meyer
et al., 1995; Butler et al., 2013).

         When injured workers experience severe disability following injury, they are likely to
use social insurance programs beyond the workers' compensation system: Leigh and Marcin
(2012) estimated that occupational injuries result in about $1 of federal costs due to increased
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), Medicare, and Medicaid benefits for every $2
paid by state WC systems. In a study suggesting that such cost spillovers could be quite
widespread, Reville and Schoeni (2004) estimated that 1 in 3 SSDI recipients over the age of
50 reported being disabled due to a work-related injury. The most compelling evidence on

                                               6
the link between occupational injury and federal disability program participation comes from
a series of studies involving SSA researchers that linked workers' compensation claims from
New Mexico to SSA records on earnings, SSDI receipt, and mortality. An important finding
from this work is that lost-time injuries result in highly persistent earnings losses up to ten
years after injury; even workers with moderately severe injuries (defined to include those
with less than 8 weeks of total disability and no permanent disability benefits) experienced
long-term earnings losses of 10% or more. O'Leary et al. (2012) confirms that workers
with lost-time workers' compensation claims face an elevated risk of SSDI receipt over the
subsequent decade, while a follow-up study shows that injured workers even face elevated
mortality risk (Boden et al., 2016).

        State workers' compensation laws operate by establishing a statutory responsibility
for employers to provide specified wage replacement and medical benefits to injured workers.
Employers typically meet these obligations by purchasing workers' compensation insurance
or through self-insurance. The role of employers in financing and arranging workers' compen-
sation coverage for their employees reflects the historical origins of workers' compensation
as an alternative to tort liability for employers. By expanding the ranks of workers who do
not have a traditional, direct-hire employment relationship with their employers, the rise of
outsourcing and alternative work arrangements in the United States has created a number
of challenges for workers' compensation policy. The most visible challenge for workers' com-
pensation posed by the rise of alternative work arrangements is the growth of non-covered
employment. Outside of Texas, where participation in the workers' compensation system is
optional for employers, workers' compensation is essentially universal for wage and salary
employees in all states, with 97.2 percent of UI-covered workers covered by workers' compen-
sation (McLaren and Baldwin, 2017). Independent contractors, who are not legally classified
as employees, are typically not covered by workers' compensation even if they are working
for businesses whose direct-hire employees must be covered by workers' compensation.

                                              7
2.1    Temporary Work, Workplace Safety, and Income Dynamics

Unlike gig economy workers and other independent contractors, temporary and contract
employees are classified as wage and salary employees. However, they are not wage and
salary employees of the host employer--the firm that is using the worker's labor to produce
goods and services--but instead are employees of a temporary agency or contract firm.
Because they are employees of a labor intermediary, temporary and contract workers are
covered by mandatory employee benefits such as workers' compensation and unemployment
insurance, and are subject to the same labor laws and regulations that govern direct-hire
workers. Workers' compensation coverage is typically provided by the temporary agency
rather than the host employer. Temporary work is commonly used for many low-skilled
occupations as well as higher-skilled jobs which require less firm-specific specialization, such
as nursing and computer programming (Kilcoyne, 2004). Table 1 shows the occupations in
California with the highest shares of temporary workers using data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program.

        Legally, both the temporary agency and the host employer are responsible for pro-
viding safe working conditions (Howard, 2016). In practice, however, the temporary agency
may have little or no control over the temporary worker's activities and work environment at
the job site, and a number of studies have found that temporary workers have higher workers'
compensation injury claim rates than direct-hires in the same industries (Park and Butler,
2001; Smith et al., 2010; Zaidman, 2017). These studies have reached differing conclusions
about the extent to which higher claim rates reflect moral hazard or actual safety differences.
Park and Butler (2001) argue that temporary workers may be less deterred from filing claims
by the threat of retaliation than direct-hire employees (for whom there is an implicit contract
offering continued employment), resulting in greater claim-filing moral hazard (i.e., higher
claim-filing rates conditional on injury occurrence and severity). While such a mechanism


                                               8
is likely to affect claiming behavior, a growing literature has also provided evidence for im-
portant safety and health differences between temporary and direct-hire workers (Benavides
et al., 2006; Underhill and Quinlan, 2011). Many of these differences are attributable to
observable differences in risk factors such as age and job tenure, so unconditional differences
in claim rates should not be interpreted as the causal effect of the work arrangement (Zaid-
man, 2017). However, the type of work arrangement is also likely to have an independent
effect on safety due to lower access to safety training and worse communication with co-
workers (Foley, 2017). Analysis of the injury mix for temporary workers bolsters the idea
that poor working conditions and worse hazard communication contribute to higher injury
risk: "struck by or against" and "caught in" injuries are more common among temporary
and contract workers (Smith et al., 2010).

        Temporary and contract workers are sharply distinguished from other nonstandard
workers such as independent contractors by their status as wage and salary employees. Nev-
ertheless, temporary workers share certain vulnerabilities with independent contractors. In
the absence of linked injury claims and earnings data covering independent contractors, it
is worth noting the structural similarities between temporary workers and independent con-
tractors in order to assess the external validity of our findings for independent contractors
and other groups of nonstandard workers.

        The defining feature of all these alternative work arrangements is that workers are
likely to have weaker connections--in the sense that they lack an implicit contract promis-
ing continued employment--with their host employers than would be the case if they were
direct-hire workers. To the extent that the gaps in safety training and hazard communica-
tion identified by Foley (2017) reflect privately optimal employer behavior in settings where
returns to firm-specific human capital are limited and turnover costs are low, then we would
expect to find similar safety challenges for independent contractors and other alternative


                                              9
work arrangements. Researchers have also identified loopholes in workers' compensation
experience-rating that weaken employers' financial incentives to provide safe working con-
ditions to temporary workers (MacEachen et al., 2016). Independent contractors, as non-
covered workers, are also likely to present host employers with weak or non-existent financial
incentives for safety.

         Beyond occupational health and safety, a literature in labor economics has exam-
ined the broader question of whether temporary employment is beneficial to workers' career
development, or whether job experience as a temporary worker somehow results in less skill
development. This has been a difficult question to answer because different workers are
likely to sort into temporary versus direct-hire employment on the basis of productivity,
labor market experience, or labor supply preferences, and because it is unclear whether the
right counterfactual for temporary employment is direct-hire employment in a similar job
or, perhaps, unemployment.

         In general, there have been two different views of temporary work in the labor
economics literature. Some researchers and observers have viewed temporary agency work
as a stepping-stone to permanent and higher-wage employment for entry-level workers such
as young adults or mothers transitioning off of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
program after welfare reform. Other researchers, however, have argued that temporary
work fails to promote career progression since workers may fail to develop skills and lack
opportunities for promotion. To the extent that temporary work is associated with greater
health and safety risks as well as reduced access to retirement accounts and other benefits, it
might even be seen as an obstacle to accumulating wealth or human capital. Early studies on
temporary work were broadly consistent with the stepping-stone theory (Lane et al., 2003;
Heinrich et al., 2005). However, Autor and Houseman (2010) revisited this question with an
instrumental variables strategy that leveraged quasi-random variation in job placement for


                                              10
welfare leavers.2 They found that temporary work failed to increase employment at the end
of the initial job assignment, suggesting that temporary workers were very likely to revert
to non-employment rather than using the job to build a career.

         These findings are not likely to be directly applicable to our setting since many of
the temporary workers in our sample are likely to have more employment experience than
the welfare leavers that have largely been the focus of public economics and labor economics
literature on temporary workers. Rather, these findings are relevant because they suggest
that employment dynamics are likely to be systematically different for temporary and direct-
hire workers, a pattern that we find in our data for workers incurring workplace injuries. We
address these concerns by focusing on a triple-difference specification that uses temporary
workers with less severe injuries to control for temporary workers with lost-time injuries, as
we discuss below.


3       Data
In this paper, we use administrative records on workers' compensation claims reported to
the California Department of Industrial Relations (DIR). These data were linked to adminis-
trative earnings data maintained by the state Employment Development Department, which
administers California's Unemployment Insurance (UI) program. We briefly discuss these
data sets below as well as the variables that we constructed for our analysis.


3.1     Workers' Compensation Claims

Our primary data source for identifying injured workers in California is the Workers' Com-
pensation Information System (WCIS), an all-payer database of workers' compensation
claims collected and maintained by the Division of Workers' Compensation (DWC) in the
    2
    Autor et al. (2016) studies the distributional consequences of temporary job placement using quantile
regression methods.


                                                   11
California DIR for years 2005 to 2011.3 California law requires workers' compensation claims
administrators (insurers, self-insured employers, and third-party administrators) to report
new workers' compensation claims to the WCIS, and to submit additional reports reflecting
material changes in the status of the claim, such as claim closure or the start or end of ben-
efit payments. The WCIS contains basic demographic information about injured workers
(age at injury and gender). We also rely on codes for the Nature, Origin, and Cause of
Injury to classify injuries based on initial characteristics observed as of the date of injury.
The workers' compensation data also allow us to identify workers who receive settlements
or benefit payments for Temporary Total Disability (TTD) or Permanent Partial Disability
(PPD), and to observe the total amount of payments to date.4

         In addition to these variables, we use workers' compensation classification codes (re-
ferred to as class codes ) to proxy for the level of job demand and injury risk faced by workers
within an industry. Class codes in California are developed by the Workers' Compensation
Insurance Rating Bureau (WCIRB) to allow efficient risk segmentation in the pricing of
workers' compensation coverage. Class codes are meant to group workplaces on the basis of
risk and expected cost for workers' compensation insurers. Class codes thus are not directly
comparable to either industry or occupation codes, but are likely to incorporate information
about both industry and occupation that affects injury risk and disability costs across work-
places and, in cases where low-risk workers are employed at high-risk workplaces, between
   3
     Further information about the WCIS is available at https://www.dir.ca.gov/dwc/wcis.htm.
   4
     We casewise-deleted cases with missing data on any variables used in our analysis: out of 4.61 million
cases with a first report of injury for injury years 2005-2011 that had been reported as of the time of data
collection, 19% were casewise-deleted due to missing WCIS data, leaving 3.7 million complete records workers'
compensation claims. After linkage to the EDD base wage file and exclusion of workers with inconsistent
names over time in the EDD data (a sign of potentially contaminated data), we were left with about 3.1
million complete records workers' compensation claims linked to usable EDD earnings histories. Our analytic
sample for this paper was further limited based on industry and class code, as described below. Additional
details on data collection and construction methods are presented in Chapter 3 of Dworsky et al. (2016).




                                                     12
employees within workplaces.5

          Our research design is made possible by the fact that class codes for temporary and
contract workers are defined based on the work activities and level of risk exposure at the
host employer, not the firm that employs the worker.6 This distinction is critical in this
context because the employer of record for temporary and contract workers differs from the
host employer, which is not the case for direct-hire workers. We are thus able to identify the
type of work that the worker engaged in and the corresponding risk of injury and disability.
As we discuss below, we rely on class codes to compare temporary and direct-hire workers
injured doing the same type of job.


3.2      Earnings and Employment Outcomes

We linked the WCIS data with administrative earnings records. The EDD base wage file
captures all quarterly wage and salary income earned by UI-covered workers in California.
Under an interagency agreement between DIR and EDD, we submitted programs for EDD
staff to link individuals appearing in the WCIS to their earnings histories in the Base Wage
File. Linkage was performed primarily using the injured worker's Social Security Number
(SSN). 6-digit NAICS codes reported to EDD were provided to identify the industry of
employers appearing in the linked data. After identifying injured workers and excluding
individuals with inconsistent name information in the Base Wage File, the data were de-
   5
     In general, the highest-risk classification present at an establishment is the governing classification that is
used to set workers' compensation premiums. However, California and other states allow for covered payroll
to be divided into higher- and lower-risk classifications under some circumstances. The most important stan-
dard exception is for clerical employees at high-risk workplaces (e.g., a receptionist at a shipping warehouse)
whose work is physically separated from the high-risk production processes. See Workers' Compensation
Insurance Rating Bureau of California (2018) for further details.
   6
     Rule 8 of Part 3, Section IV of the California Workers' Compensation Uniform Statistical Reporting Plan,
which provides workers' compensation insurers with instructions for the determination of class codes, states
that "the classification of workers provided to a client under any type of employee leasing arrangement
(temporary or otherwise) shall be determined as though the workers are employees of the client. The
limitations and conditions of the classification(s) so assigned and all Standard Classification System rules
pertaining thereto shall be applicable." See Workers' Compensation Insurance Rating Bureau of California
(2018) for further details.


                                                        13
identified and assigned an ID number that could be used to match to the WCIS data.7
To produce estimates that are representative for the population of cases reported to the
WCIS, we constructed sampling weights, which we used in all our estimates.8 We show that
weighted and unweighted estimates are very similar.

          We used the wage records to create a measure of total quarterly wage and salary
earnings by summing earnings over all employers in each quarter.9 We also created an
indicator variable for employment, which we define as having quarterly earnings from all
employers greater than $200. We are especially interested in understanding the full trajectory
of post-injury outcomes as well as testing for observable differences prior to the injury. We
constructed a balanced panel containing, for each injured worker, 17 quarters of earnings and
employment data (from four quarters prior to injury to twelve quarters after injury).


3.3     Sample Definition and Ascertainment of Temporary Status

Our treated group consists of workers whose employer reported NAICS industry code 56132
(temporary help services) or 56133 (professional employer organizations [PEOs]) to EDD.
We observe 49,669 injured workers in these categories, with the majority (80%) employed by
temporary help agencies; for convenience, we refer to employers of either temporary agencies
or PEOs as temporary workers. Nationally, these categories of workers are estimated to
constitute 22% to 31% of the nonstandard workforce, depending on the survey used (Katz
    7
      Additional details on earnings data collection can be found in Dworsky et al. (2018), specifically Chapter
2 and the Appendix.
    8
      Specifically, we reweighted the sample of complete records WCIS claims with matched EDD wage data
so that the joint distribution of age, gender, geographic region within California, year and quarter of injury,
firm size, and quartiles of annual pre-injury earnings matches the joint distribution of these variables among
all observations with complete records on these variables.
    9
      To avoid results being driven by very high earners, outliers were removed. The outlier threshold was
defined by calculating the 99.8th percentile of CPI-adjusted total earnings for each quarter in the analysis
(before, during, and after the injury) for injured workers only, and taking the minimum value across quarters
relative to injury. The resulting outlier threshold in the merged sample was $72,540 per quarter, or $290,160
in annualized terms. If an injured or control worker's CPI-adjusted total earnings exceeded this value in any
quarter, they were classified as an outlier and removed. 1.3% of injured workers in the merged data met this
criterion.


                                                      14
and Krueger, 2019).10 We assume that all other injured workers are direct-hires.

           The prevalence of temporary and contract work varies widely across industries and
occupations, and many class codes have very few injuries among temporary workers. Table
2 presents temporary worker shares by class code in our data. The categories with the
highest shares, while not directly comparable to occupation codes, suggest overlap with
the occupations observed in Table 1. In particular, class codes likely to involve material
moving, packaging, and assembly have high rates of temporary employment among injured
workers.

           Because we are interested in comparing temporary and direct-hire workers injured
doing similar jobs, class codes without substantial temporary/contract employment do not
contribute to our empirical strategy. We therefore limit our analysis sample to class codes
with a sufficiently large number of injuries among both temporary and direct-hire workers.
Specifically, we tabulated the number of temporary and direct-hire injuries by class code and
restricted the sample to class codes in which there was at least one calendar quarter between
2005-2011 with 20 or more injuries among temporary or contract workers. As discussed
below, we include separate fixed effects for class code-quarter of injury interactions in our
regression models, ensuring that temporary workers are always compared to direct-hires who
are injured at roughly the same time doing the same type of job.

           This sample restriction leaves us with 62 class codes represented in our analysis
sample (see Appendix A for a list of all included class codes). The included class codes
correspond closely to the occupational distribution shown above in Table 1. As suggested
  10
     It has proven challenging to measure trends in alternative work arrangements using household sur-
veys, as discussed in a recent working paper by Katz and Krueger (2019). Despite this ambiguity, estab-
lishment survey estimates from the BLS Current Employment Statistics (CES) indicate that headcount
employment by temporary agencies and PEOs has grown much faster than total nonfarm employment in
recent decades, from 1.3 million employees in 1990 to 3.3 million employees in 2017. Source: BLS Se-
ries ID CEU6056132001 (All employees, thousands, temporary help services, not seasonally adjusted) and
CEU6056133001 (All employees, thousands, professional employer organizations, not seasonally adjusted).
Available from https://data.bls.gov/PDQWeb/ce, accessed January 23, 2019.


                                                  15
by Table 2, transportation and warehousing, low-wage construction, and manufacturing
are well-represented, as are some higher-wage occupations with a high temporary/contract
worker prevalence (such as health care professions and computer programming).

        Tables 3 and 4 show summary statistics for injured workers who received cash bene-
fits ("indemnity claims"), which indicates that their injuries resulted in temporary disability
beyond three days, permanent disability, or both. Table 3 shows differences in demographics,
job characteristics, and injury mix between direct-hire workers and temporary workers with
indemnity claims. Overall, the temporary workers have lower weekly wages, have shorter
tenures at the at-injury firm, and are less likely to work full-time. They are also less likely
to be female and are younger on average. Temporary workers also have fewer cumulative
injuries, which is consistent with less tenure at the firm. Cause of injury differences between
temporary and direct-hire workers resemble the patterns highlighted by Foley (2017), with
temporary workers disproportionately likely to be injured by being caught in, being rubbed
by, striking, or being struck by external objects.

        Using the linked earnings data, Table 4 compares earnings and employment across
our different categories. The unadjusted changes in means presented in Table 4 show that
temporary workers ­ proportional to pre-injury outcomes ­ have worse post-injury outcomes.
This gap appears to shrink over time. The post-injury employment of temporary workers
sinks to 75.7% of pre-injury levels in the first year post-injury, compared to 80.2% for direct-
hires. However, Table 4 also shows that direct-hires have much higher earnings and employ-
ment than temporary workers prior to the injury. These pre-injury differences motivate our
use of a triple-difference empirical strategy which accounts for these differences.




                                              16
4     Empirical Strategy
The goal of our empirical strategy is to isolate the effect of work arrangements on post-
injury worker outcomes while controlling for the observable differences between direct-hire
and temporary workers documented above, as well as any unobservable differences between
these groups of workers that would affect post-injury employment dynamics. Our data
permit us to compare outcomes after an injury to labor outcomes before the injury, and we
will study quarterly outcome changes for temporary workers receiving indemnity benefits due
to missed work days to direct-hires also receiving indemnity benefits. The focus on outcome
changes is motivated by the differences between direct hire and temporary employees even
prior to injury. Given the nature of these different types of work arrangements, it is not
surprising that temporary workers have lower employment propensities and earnings before
the injury. We will show the full trajectory of these outcomes to analyze outcome changes,
accounting for level differences across work arrangement types.


4.1    Difference-in-Differences

A natural research design in this setting is a difference-in-differences approach comparing
changes in employment between temporary and direct-hire workers with indemnity benefits.
The obvious concern with this empirical strategy is that temporary workers may have differ-
ent employment and earnings trajectories compared to direct hires even in the absence of an
injury. Some of these differences can be explained by differences in observable characteristics
between the different categories of workers. Younger workers or workers in certain industries
and occupations should not necessarily be expected to have the same future employment tra-
jectories, regardless of whether they are currently direct-hires or temporary workers. Given
our data, we are able to account for a rich set of observable characteristics which predict
future labor outcomes.


                                              17
          We begin by estimating difference-in-differences event studies for workers receiv-
ing indemnity benefits after incurring a workplace injury. This specification is represented
by
                                          12
                                                T
                      yicqt =cqt +              s Ti 1{t - q = s}           (temp vs. direct hire)
                                         s=-4
                                    12
                                              X                                                                    (1)
                               +          X i s 1{t - q = s}          (observable characteristics)
                                   s=-4

                               + icqt .

where yicqt is a labor outcome for individual i in class c injured at time-relative-to-injury
t for an injury incurred in calendar year-quarter q . The fixed effects cqt account for the
employment propensity of a worker in class c injured at time q and time-relative-to-injury t.11
We note that, due to the inclusion of these fixed effects, all comparisons are made between
workers injured in the same quarter at the same type of job. Ti is an indicator variable that
is equal to 1 if the worker was a temporary worker and zero if the worker was a direct-hire.
We have not included the temporary worker indicator Ti separately, but instead include all
                                  T
the event-study interaction terms s Ti 1{t - q = s} so the model fully saturates differences
between direct-hire and temporary workers. We do not omit any of the quarter relative to
injury indicators, and these estimates, consequently, are not normalized to the difference in
                                                    T
a specific quarter relative to injury. Instead, the s coefficients trace out the difference, s
quarters after the injury, in the probabilities of employment for temporary workers compared
to direct-hire workers.12
  11
     For example, there is a full profile of time-relative-to-injury (t = -4, -3, . . . 12) effects for workers injured
in Landscape Gardening (Class Code 0042) in 2005Q1, corresponding to labor market outcomes from 2004Q1
to 2008Q1. There is a separate profile for workers in Landscape Gardening injured in the second quarter of
2005, and so on for all possible combinations of injury date and class code.
  12
     To interpret equation (1) as a more traditional difference-in-differences specification, the cqt fixed effect
can be thought of as the "calendar time" fixed effect. Here, it is interacted with time-relative-to-injury and
class code to more flexibly account for secular trends and underlying outcome trajectories. A traditional
difference-in-differences specification would then interact a "post" dummy with a temporary worker (i.e,
treatment) dummy. We trace out the trajectory by interacting the temporary worker dummy with a full set
of time-relative-to-injury indicators, permitting pre- and post-injury comparisons.



                                                          18
         We also include individual characteristics (Xi ) interacted with time-to-event indica-
tors as control variables. This specification permits observable characteristics to have differ-
ent effects based on time relative to injury, which is recommended in difference-in-differences
designs (Jaeger et al., 2018). In this setting, we wish to avoid attributing labor market dy-
namics associated with differences in age, job tenure, or other observable differences between
temporary and direct-hire workers, to the work arrangement. We interact indicators based on
the following variables with quarter-relative-to-injury indicators: age group-gender interac-
tions,13 job tenure, type of injury, geographic region within California,14 full-time/part-time
status, and the weekly wage as reported on the workers' compensation claim. We note that
the weekly wage reported on the workers' compensation claim determines the level of indem-
nity benefits and thus can be viewed as a way to control for differences in post-injury labor
supply incentives due to differences in the wage replacement rate.15


4.2     Triple-Difference Model

In addition to concerns about observable differences, direct hire and temporary workers may
also be different on unobserved dimensions that affect post-injury employment dynamics.
Our preferred specification, therefore, uses "medical-only" workers' compensation claims as
an additional comparison group to account for differential underlying trends between direct-
hires and temporary workers. "Medical-only" claims are injury claims which result in no
more than three days of lost work; these workers receive medical care through the workers'
compensation system, but do not receive any indemnity benefits or settlements for either
permanent or total disability. We use these claims to account for natural differences in labor
  13
     We include indicators for the following age bins, with age measured at the time of injury: 16-25; 26-35;
36-45; 46-55; 56-65; 66-70.
  14
     DWC groups the 58 counties in California into 10 regions for system monitoring purposes. Definitions of
these regions (e.g., "Los Angeles," "Inland Empire," "Central Valley") are available at https://www.dir.
ca.gov/dwc/wcis/WCIS_tables/TABLE-7/WCIS_Reports-Table7.html.
  15
     The weekly wage varies independently of earnings due to variation in hours.




                                                     19
outcomes before and after workplace injuries between direct-hires and temporary workers
unrelated to the injury. Thus, we rely on a triple difference specification in which the main
variables are the interactions of (1) a temporary worker indicator; (2) an injured worker
receiving indemnity benefits indicator; and (3) time-relative-to-injury indicators. We also
include indicators controlling for two-way interactions of these categories in the specification.
This approach results in an event-study analog of a triple differences empirical strategy,
tracing out the relative labor outcomes in each quarter-relative-to-injury. Thus, we can test
for systematic differences before the injury and study the timing of post-injury employment
effects.

           The disadvantage of the triple-differences approach is that the "medical-only" claims
may include part of the effect that we are interested in if temporary workers with medical-only
claims also causally suffer relatively worse post-injury outcomes. Consequently, our estimates
are likely biased against finding an effect and should represent lower bounds (in terms of the
absolute magnitude of the coefficients) on the true effects of temporary work on post-injury
outcomes. The differences-in-differences estimates, meanwhile, are likely represent upper
bounds on the absolute magnitude of the effect of temporary work on post-injury outcomes
due to the potential for differences in employment dynamics that would violate the parallel
trends assumption.

           In our triple-differences specifications, we also include fixed effects for four-way in-
teractions of categorical variables for the following worker and injury characteristics: class
codes, calendar time of injury, time-relative-to-injury, and contract type (direct hire or tem-
porary). By including these fixed effects, we are comparing temporary and direct hire em-
ployees working in the same type of job at the same time (both in calendar time and time-
relative-to-injury). As in the difference-in-differences specification introduced above, we also
control for observable differences between temporary and direct-hire workers by including


                                                 20
time-varying controls for worker, job, and injury characteristics.

        Our triple-difference event-study specification can be represented by

                                12
                                      I
            yicdqt =µcdqt +           s Ii 1{t - q = s}   (indemnity difference from medical-only)
                               s=-4
                         12
                               TI
                    +          s  Ti Ii 1{t - q = s}         (indemnity X temp triple-difference)
                        s=-4                                                                         (2)
                         12
                                   X
                    +          X i s 1{t - q = s}                     (observable characteristics)
                        s=-4

                    + icdqt ,


where yicdqt is a labor outcome for individual i in class c and contract type (work arrangement)
d injured at time-relative-to-injury t for an injury incurred in calendar year-quarter s. The
µcdqt interactions account for the trajectory of employment over time relative to injury, while
flexibly allowing these trajectories to vary by calendar time, class code, and for whether the
worker is a direct-hire or temporary worker. As before, Ti is equal to 1 if the worker was a
temporary worker when injured while Ii is equal to 1 for indemnity claims (0 for medical-only
                   I
claims). Thus, the s estimates capture differences in employment patterns (relative to time
of injury) for all (medical-only and indemnity benefit) injured temporary workers.

                                                     TI
        The coefficients of primary interest are the s  terms, which trace out the incre-
mental difference in the probability of employment for injured temporary workers receiving
indemnity benefits relative to what would be expected if the employment effects of tem-
porary work and indemnity injury were additive. We study the relative trajectory of labor
outcomes for 4 quarters prior to injury up to 8 quarters after injury, plotting the estimates of
TI
s  . As with the difference-in-differences event-study specification introduced in Equation
1 above, the interaction Ti Ii between temporary work and indemnity benefit receipt is fully
absorbed by (i.e., does not appear separately from) the event-study coefficients and so there


                                                   21
is no normalization or omitted category for these event-study coefficients.

        Equation 2 is analogous to a triple-difference regression specification in that all
two-way interactions are included in the model (or are spanned by more flexible controls).
Interactions between time relative to injury and temporary worker status are absorbed by the
fixed effects µcdqt , while interactions between time relative to injury and indemnity benefit
                                              I
receipt are absorbed by the event-study terms s Ii 1{t - q = s}. A flexible triple-difference
model would include a time-invariant two-way interaction Ti Ii between indemnity benefit
receipt and temporary worker status, and the triple-difference treatment effect would be
identified by an interaction between this two-way interaction term and an indicator for time
periods after the injury. In Equation 2, the two-way interaction Ti Ii is fully absorbed by the
                  TI
event-study terms s  Ti Ii 1{t - q = s}. We use this specification to capture the dynamics
of temporary worker employment before and after a lost-time injury, and to evaluate the
credibility of a triple-difference design: coefficients of zero for the pre-injury event-study
          TI
variables s  , s < 0 indicate that any pre-injury differences in employment trajectories be-
tween temporary workers with lost-time injuries and those with medical-only injuries are
indistinguishable from the difference in employment trajectories between direct-hire workers
with lost-time and medical-only injuries. Throughout this paper, standard errors are ad-
justed for clustering based on class code, and we signify statistical significance at the 5%,
1%, and 0.1% levels. We include this lower threshold given the size of our data.

        After estimating Equation 2, we use a more conventional triple-difference model
to obtain our best estimates of the effect of temporary work on post-injury outcomes at
various time horizons after injury, summarizing the overall effects. In this specification, we
                              TI
replace the event-study terms s  Ti Ii 1{t - q = s} with a fixed effect Ti Ii for injured workers
with indemnity benefits and an interaction between this term and post-injury indicators
corresponding to outcomes one, two, and three years post-injury (s = 4, 8, 12 quarters post-


                                               22
injury). To reduce computational burden, we limited the sample to one pre-injury quarter
(s = -4) and these three post-injury quarters (s = 4, 8, 12):



                       yicdqt =µcdqt +  I Ii +                   I
                                                              Ii s 1{t - q = s}
                                                   s=4,8,12

                               +  T I Ti Ii +               TI
                                                            s  Ti Ii 1{t - q = s}          (3)
                                                 s=4,8,12

                                                 X
                               +                 s Xi 1{t - q = s} + icdqt .
                                   s=-4,4,8,12


                                                                                          TI
        With the addition of the two-way interaction fixed effect Ti Ii to the model, the s
terms become triple-difference coefficients for s = 4, 8, 12 quarters post-injury, providing
estimated effects relative to the pre-period (s = -4). We report the  T I coefficient as a
measure of pre-injury differences.

        We also report the triple-difference estimates and test for pairwise equality between
    TI
the s  estimates to one another to assess whether the post-injury dynamics observed in the
event-study model are statistically significant. When analyzing employment as the outcome
variable, we estimate Equations 1, 2, and 3 above as linear probability models using OLS.
We are also interested in quantifying earnings dynamics after injury, and so we also use the
specifications above in Poisson regressions, exponentiating the right-hand side, for quarterly
labor earnings. We rely on the sparser model (equation (3)) when estimating earnings
dynamics given the computational burden required for Poisson regression with the size of
our data and rich set of interactions in the full model. We use Poisson regression for earnings
given the skewed nature of this variable (Silva and Tenreyro, 2006).




                                                   23
5      Results

5.1     Employment Dynamics Before and After Injury

We first present unadjusted employment propensities for four groups of injured workers:
direct-hires with indemnity benefits, medical only direct-hires, temporary workers with in-
demnity benefits, and medical only temporary workers. All four trend lines ­ presented in
Figure 1 ­ peak mechanically at the quarter of injury because workers must be working to
experience a workplace injury but were not necessarily working in the other quarters.16 We
observe very different post-injury dynamics between the direct-hires and temporary workers.
However, we find that the pre-injury employment trends for these groups are also very dif-
ferent. Four quarters prior to injury, under 70% of the temporary workers are working while
nearly 90% of direct-hires are working. Accounting for these differential employment pat-
terns is necessary to distinguish the differential effects of workplace injuries from variation
in unobserved attachment to the labor force.

         However, Figure 1 also suggests that workers with medical only injuries have similar
pre-injury employment patterns as workers with lost-time injuries. The pre-employment
levels and trends are similar between injury types within both work arrangements, suggesting
that the medical-only groups potentially provide a useful counterfactual for understanding
future employment patterns in the absence of an injury requiring missed work.

         Figure 1 provides some preliminary, unadjusted evidence of the differential effects of
workplace injuries for temporary workers. We see that temporary workers have much worse
post-injury outcomes than direct-hires. Some of this difference is due to underlying differ-
ences in employment trajectories between the two groups, as we observe from the medical
  16
    Since we define "working" as earning more than $200 in a quarter, these propensities are slightly less
than 100% in the quarter of injury.



                                                   24
only injuries. However, there are still large differences between the two groups. We discuss
magnitudes more formally in the next sections.


5.2     Difference-in-Differences Estimates

Our difference-in-differences strategy compares the relative employment propensities of tem-
porary workers to direct-hires in each quarter relative to injury. We examine these differ-
ences for workers receiving indemnity benefits and then, as a way to understand our triple-
differences estimates in the next section, for medical only injuries. We estimate equation (1)
for both sets of injured workers and present the results graphically.

         Figure 2 presents the estimates for those receiving indemnity benefits. In panel
A, we include only fixed effects for quarter of injury, time relative to injury, and class
codes. Introducing controls for job tenure, age, region, type of injury, wage quartiles, and
full- or part-time status in panel B significantly moderates the pre- and post-injury trends.
Nonetheless, both panels show a rise in employment before the injury, followed by a sharp
relative decline for temporary workers after the injury. In the adjusted figure, this gap is more
than 12 percentage points in the third quarter after injury and moderates to 7 percentage
points three years after injury.

         Figure 3 presents the corresponding difference-in-differences figures for the medical-
only claims. Again, we see that introducing controls significantly moderates the pre-injury
trend and adjusts post-injury relative employment upward. The employment dynamics de-
picted in Figure 3 can be thought of as defining the counterfactual used in the triple-difference
specification below.17 Here, we also observe pre-existing differential increases in employment
propensities. One advantage of the triple-differences specification is that we account for
these underlying differences between temporary and direct-hire workers that exist even prior
  17
    We note that the results in the next section are not mechanically equal to the differences between Figures
2 and 3 given the inclusion of control variables in the model which are not fully interacted.


                                                     25
to injury. We observe similar pre-injury trends for both the medical only and indemnity
benefit groups, suggesting that these trends represent the natural (differential) progression
of employment rates prior to a workplace injury for each work arrangement.

         In Figure 3, we also observe a large relative decrease in employment post-injury
(between 6 and 8 percentage points), but we do not observe the same recovery in relative
employment over the three years post-injury that we saw for indemnity injuries. However,
the medical only group also provides a useful counterfactual for the differences in employ-
ment trajectories that we might expect between temporary workers and direct-hires: as
suggested by the employment trajectories leading up to injury depicted in Figure 1, substan-
tial post-injury differences in employment between temporary and direct-hire workers should
be expected due solely to mean-reversion (since there is a mechanical employment peak at
time-of-injury) and different employment propensities even if there were no effect of injury
on labor market outcomes. The evidence in this section also shows that our triple-difference
estimates below are not driven by differentially positive employment experiences for tempo-
rary workers with medical only claims. Since our triple-difference estimates difference out
the losses depicted in Figure 3, they will likely represent a lower bound (in magnitude) on
the true effect.


5.3    Triple-Difference Estimates

In the previous section, we provided difference-in-difference estimates for workers suffering
injuries requiring lost work time. Those estimates strongly suggested that temporary workers
and direct-hires would have different employment trajectories even in the absence of injuries,
so we present triple-differences estimates from the specification represented by equation 2.
As with our event-study difference-in-difference models, we present our results graphically,
showing the full trajectory of relative employment outcomes. Our main results are shown
in Figure 4. Panel A presents the unadjusted differences, estimated from a specification

                                             26
without additional covariates (Xi ). Panel B includes the control variables interacted with
time-relative-to-injury indicators. Coefficient estimates for the control variables are reported
in Appendix A.

        Figure 4 shows little indication of differential pre-injury employment trends or levels.
In fact, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that pre-employment differences remain zero
throughout the pre-period. Upon injury, however, we observe large decreases in employment
for temporary workers. We estimate that employment falls by 7.1 percentage points more for
temporary workers than for direct-hires (relative to their medical only differential) in the first
quarter after injury. Over time, however, we find that these differences converge. The differ-
ential shrinks to 1.8 percentage points by seven quarters after injury, a meaningful difference
but roughly one-quarter the size of the original differential. The gap continues to shrink,
eventually disappearing around 3 years after the injury. Overall, we can statistically reject
that temporary and direct-hire workers experience the same employment effects throughout
the post-injury period. This effect disappears in the long term, but only after substantial
short- and medium-term effects. These results are consistent with very large differential
employment reductions immediately after injury, followed by gradual adjustments.

        We also observe little difference between the two set of estimates depending on
whether we condition on a rich set of observable characteristics. The similarity of the Panel
A and Panel B estimates suggest that the medical-only injuries are providing an appropriate
counterfactual for the underlying employment differences between temporary workers and
direct-hires. This contrasts with our difference-in-difference event-study estimates shown in
Figures 2 and 3, which were highly sensitive to the inclusion of control variables accounting
for observable differences.

        To summarize the event-study estimates, we estimate equation 3, which uses our
triple-difference identification strategy to estimate the incremental employment and earnings


                                               27
losses due to temporary work at three post-injury time horizons: 4, 8, and 12 quarters after
the quarter of injury (i.e., at the end of the first, second, and third full years after the
quarter of injury). As discussed in Section 4 above, the baseline (pre-injury) period in
this specification is four quarters prior to injury. Equation 3 imposes the assumption that
there are no differential pre-injury trends, an assumption corroborated by the event-study
estimates presented above.

        We also use this triple-difference specification to estimate the effect of temporary
worker status on post-injury earnings. When the outcome is quarterly earnings, we estimate
an exponential conditional mean specification using Poisson regression due to the heavily
skewed nature of the earnings variable and the frequency of observations with zero earnings
(13% in the fourth-quarter before injury and 29% in the 12th quarter after injury). Unlike
log-linear regression using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS), Poisson regression provides a func-
tional form capable of handling both zero and positive observations while avoiding reliance
on the restrictive statistical assumptions implied by log-linear OLS, as discussed in Silva
and Tenreyro (2006). Consistency of alternative estimators of the exponential conditional
mean model, such as negative binomial regression, requires strong assumptions on the form
of conditional heteroskedasticity; Poisson regression, in contrast remains consistent under ar-
bitrary heteroskedasticity as long as the error term is mean-independent of the explanatory
variables (see Silva and Tenreyro (2006) and Ciani and Fisher (2019) for more details).

        For the full sample, we estimate that temporary workers incur earnings losses of
11.5% in the fourth quarter after injury. This earnings gap shrinks but remains large three
years after injury: tests for equality of coefficients across different time horizons confirm that
employment losses are significantly different at each time horizon examined, while we fail to
reject equality of the earnings losses across adjacent years. Interestingly, while we find no
evidence of employment differences three years after injury, we still estimate large earnings


                                               28
differences. This combination of results suggests that temporary workers in the long-term
may not experience a disproportionate disemployment effect due to injury, but they may
return to lower-paying jobs due to fewer hours (e.g., part-time work) or lower wages because
of reduced productivity (or other mechanisms).18

         In short, we observe rather striking evidence of a large employment reduction for
temporary workers relative to a counterfactual based on direct-hires injured in the same job
at the same time. Despite the convergence of these post-injury trends over time, we find
large effects even two years after the date of the injury. At one year post-injury, we estimate
a 3.9 percentage point employment reduction, equivalent to a 6% decrease relative to the
baseline employment percentage of direct-hires four quarters after injury. In contrast, the
difference-in-differences event-study estimates (Figure 2) suggested an effect that is twice
as large.19 Given the employment risk associated with workplace injuries in general, this
evidence suggests that temporary and contract workers are disproportionately affected by
workplace injuries even though this effect eventually disappears.


5.4     Sensitivity Analyses

Before examining how workers' compensation benefit payments differ between temporary
and direct-hire workers, we discuss a series of sensitivity analyses chosen to assess various
threats to our identification strategy.20
  18
     Unfortunately, we do not observe hours worked or wages, only quarterly earnings.
  19
     In the event-study model underlying Figure 2, we estimated that the employment gap between temporary
                                                                T
and direct-hire workers was 3.1% four quarters before injury (-   4 = -0.0312) and 10.8% four quarters after
          T
injury (-4 = -0.1084), implying a differences-in-differences effect of -7.7% instead of our best estimate of
-3.9%.
  20
     In the Appendix, we also test whether our choice to use survey weights throughout our analyses is
materially affecting the results. The estimates in Table A2 show that the unweighted results are similar.




                                                    29
5.4.1       Selection into Workers' Compensation

We only observe injured workers who file a workers' compensation claim, and therefore the
interpretation of our results as the effect of injury on employment outcomes requires an
assumption that claiming propensities are similar across groups. Injured workers claiming
workers' compensation benefits are likely different from non-claiming injured workers. This
may present a threat to both the internal and external validity of our study.

            If claiming behavior among temporary workers is systematically more (or less) re-
sponsive to future labor market outcomes than is claiming behavior among direct-hires, then
we might have concerns about internal validity. We note that claiming behavior will only
affect our results if it is systematically different across direct-hires and workers in alternative
work arrangements, and these differences are not adequately controlled for by differences
observed in the medical only sample. In addition, if workers who claim are systematically
different from workers who are injured but do not claim, then it may be difficult to extrap-
olate from our study to characterize the effect of work arrangements on income risk due to
injuries not reported to workers' compensation. While limited external validity for workers
who do not file workers' compensation claims is an inherent limitation of research based on
administrative workers' compensation data, it is important that we consider the threat to
internal validity posed by differential selection into injury across work arrangements.

            To address this threat to internal validity, we replicate our analysis using only trau-
matic injuries, defined as injuries caused by external forces.21 Relative to cumulative injuries
  21
    Specifically, we define traumatic injuries to include those with the following IAIABC cause of injury
codes reported to the WCIS
       · Caught In or Between: machine or machinery (10), object handled (12), collapsing materials (20),
         caught in, under, or between, not otherwise classified (NOC) (13)
       · Striking Against or Stepping On: moving parts of machine (65); object being lifted or handled (66);
         sanding, scraping, cleaning operations (67); stationary object (68); stepping on sharp object (69);
         striking against or stepping on, NOC (70)



                                                      30
and other injury types, there is less scope for reporting differences for traumatic issues so se-
lection should be less of a concern for this sample. Figure 5 reproduces our triple-difference
event-study estimates for the full sample (Panel A) alongside estimates for traumatic in-
juries (Panel B). While noisier due to the smaller sample, the results are very similar to the
main estimates. In fact, we estimate larger magnitudes for this sample. The stability of the
estimates suggests that differential selection is not driving the main results.

5.4.2     Selection into Temporary Work

A primary motivation of our triple-differences analysis is that direct-hires and temporary
workers are possibly different in unobserved ways which predict different employment trends.
To further account for these possible differences, we replicate our triple-differences analysis
while selecting on workers who were both direct-hires and temporary workers at some point
in the two years prior to their injury. These workers are more similar to each other as they
each have recently (as of the time of injury) selected into temporary work. We study the
effect of a workplace injury for this sample based on the type of arrangement at the time of
injury.

          A caveat to this exercise is that many of the benefits of direct-hire work arrange-
ments, such as higher tenure or greater opportunities for advancement, are likely reduced
for this direct-hire population. Thus, we consider this test rather conservative since we
are potentially eliminating much of the effect that we are interested in. To assess balance
across groups in this sample, we examined the average number of quarters before injury that
the four categories of switchers spent in direct-hire employment, temporary employment,
   · Struck or Injured by: fellow worker, patient, or other person (74), falling or flying object (75), hand
     tool or machine in use (76), motor vehicle (77), moving parts of machine (78), object being lifted
     or handled (79), object handled by others (80), struck or injured, NOC (81), animal or insect (85),
     explosion or flare back (86)




                                                   31
or non-employment over the two years preceding the quarter of injury.22 Switchers who
are temporary workers in the quarter of injury have slightly fewer quarters as temporary or
direct-hire workers. Instead, they spend an additional half of one quarter in non-employment.
Pre-injury employment histories across the groups are very similar and are nearly identical
for medical-only and indemnity injuries within each work arrangement.

           We present our estimates for the switcher sample in Figure 6, Panel B. Panel A
repeats our main estimates. As expected, there are smaller employment effects for the
"switchers." However, even for this population, we estimate large and statistically significant
immediate reductions in employment for temporary workers relative to similar direct-hire
workers. In the first quarter after the injury, temporary workers have an employment rate
4.2 percentage points lower than their direct-hire peers. This gap disappears by two years
after the injury. While the relative reductions in employment are smaller for this population,
we take this overall post-injury effect as a conservative lower bound on the true effect and
as support for the broader evidence that temporary workers experience greater employment
reductions than equivalent direct-hires due to workplace injuries. Despite the similarities in
these populations in terms of attachment to their firm (and other factors), we estimate large
employment disparities after workplace injuries.


5.5       Workers' Compensation Benefits and Uncompensated Earn-

          ings Losses

The results presented above indicate that temporary workers face greater earnings losses
after workplace injury than do similar direct-hire workers. This difference in income risk
conditional on injury raises the question of whether workers' compensation benefits reduce or
magnify the gap in outcomes between workers in different work arrangements. In this section,
 22
      See Appendix Table A3 for estimates.




                                              32
we directly examine how adding different categories of workers' compensation benefits to
wage and salary income affects this gap.

         We construct a total income measure by adding workers' compensation benefits
to earnings: the post-injury change in this total income measure captures earnings losses
that remain uncompensated by workers' compensation benefits. We use a triple-difference
specification similar to Equation 3 to test for differences in uncompensated losses between
temporary and direct-hire workers. However, we depart slightly from the framework used
in our main earnings and employment estimates by aggregating the total income measures
described above to a single post-injury time period covering the full three years after injury.
That is, we sum all labor earnings over the first through twelfth quarters after injury and
then add benefit payments to this three-year earnings measure.23 We also sum labor earnings
over the year preceding the quarter of injury (s = -4 to -1), resulting in a data set with
two observations per worker: one capturing annual earnings the year before the injury and
one capturing annual earnings plus benefits in the three years after the injury. We work
with these aggregated income measures due to the lack of information of benefit payment
timing in our data. Although the WCIS provides accurate data on total benefit payments by
type of benefit (e.g., TTD, PPD, settlements), the information on benefit timing extracted
for this study is not sufficiently detailed to allow us to observe the exact timing of benefit
payments at the quarterly frequency.

         As above, we use Poisson regression and an exponential conditional mean specifi-
cation; as a consequence of this specification, we can compare earnings between the one-
year pre-injury period and the three-year post-injury period without annualizing post-injury
earnings--differences in the length of the periods being compared are absorbed by the (mul-
  23
    We do not discount labor earnings because we do not have detailed information on the timing of benefit
payments. Similarly, we do not calculate after-tax income due to a lack of information about family structure,
non-labor earnings, and other variables needed to impute marginal tax rates given labor earnings.



                                                     33
tiplicative) time effects included in the model. Aggregating the data allows us to abstract
from the timing of benefit payments and analyze streams of benefit payments and lump-sum
payments in the same estimation framework.24

         We consider five distinct categories of benefit payments. See Table A1 for summary
statistics on these measures.

   1. Temporary Disability (TD) Benefits (including Temporary Total and Temporary Par-
      tial disability benefits, as well as benefits paid by the employer)

   2. Permanent Disability (PD) Benefits (including Permanent Partial Disability, Perma-
      nent Partial Disfigurement, and Permanent Total Disability Benefits)

   3. Disability Benefit Settlements (including settlement payments specifically labeled as
      Temporary or Permanent Disability Benefits, including employer-paid settlements)

   4. Unspecified Settlements (excluding settlement payments specifically labeled as Medi-
      cal)

   5. Medical Settlements (settlement payments specifically earmarked for future medical
      payments)

         All pre-injury income measures are simply equal to earnings because workers do not
receive benefits before injury. Post-injury income measures are constructed by sequentially
adding each of the five benefit categories above to earnings.

         Ideally, we would be able to compare the differential earnings losses experienced
by temporary workers directly to the total amount of indemnity benefits provided. The
first three benefit categories unambiguously represent indemnity benefits. As such, they
are intended to compensate workers for lost earnings and are not problematic to include
in our income measure. The fourth category of benefits, unspecified settlements, is more
ambiguous since it represents some unknown combination of indemnity and medical benefits.
  24
    This choice was also motivated by a data limitation, which is that we observe the earliest and latest
dates of benefit payment but cannot observe the timing of interruptions or changes in benefit payment rates.
Instead, we focus on the cumulative amount paid to the worker. Because we use data on 2005-2011 injuries
that was collected in 2016, we think right-censoring of benefit payments is likely to affect only a very small
minority of cases.


                                                     34
In addition, claims administrators have the option of using this category of benefits to
report total settlements without providing further detail on how much of the settlement is
attributable to specific benefit categories.25

         The last category, medical settlements, comprises payments meant to discharge the
insurer or employer's statutory obligation to pay for medical care needed over the remainder
of the worker's lifetime. It would be inappropriate to compare medical settlements to earnings
losses since our data do not contain information about current or future medical spending
arising out of the worker's injury: even if medical settlements offset the incremental earnings
losses associated with temporary work, we would need to assume--with no evidence--that
temporary workers have lower future medical spending needs than observably similar direct-
hires with the same injuries in order to conclude that some portion of the medical settlement
represents a windfall that could be used to remedy earnings losses. Given the evidence that
temporary work is associated with worse health along dimensions other than injury risk
(Virtanen et al., 2005), it seems at least as plausible that the opposite would be the case.
While the income measure including medical settlements is not an appropriate measure
of the workers' compensation system's generosity, we include medical settlements in our
estimates in order to provide some indirect evidence on the relative importance of medical
and indemnity benefits in the unspecified benefits category.

         Table 6 presents estimates of the triple-difference model specified above. We report
the interaction of the indicators for temporary workers and indemnity benefits as a test of
pre-existing differences. Our estimate of interest is the differential post-injury effect for this
group (labeled Temporary X Indemnity X Post-Injury ). However, the Indemnity X Post-
Injury interaction provides evidence on the degree to which different categories of benefits
  25
     Although the default is for disability benefits to be paid as a stream of biweekly payments, lump-sum
settlements are commonly used and thus need to be included when considering benefit adequacy. Settlements
can be used to resolve disputes between the worker and the employer, and they can also be issued in the
absence of a dispute when the worker is facing financial hardship or otherwise needs access to liquidity.


                                                   35
diminish uncompensated earnings losses for direct-hire workers. The remaining coefficients
identify pre-injury differences in earnings between workers with indemnity and medical-only
injuries. These estimates will remain constant across models as we add benefits in the post
period.

          The estimates in the first column of Table 6 indicate that direct-hire workers included
in our sample can expect earnings losses of 20.1% over the three years following the injury.
The last row of the first column, meanwhile, indicates that temporary workers with indemnity
injuries can expect an additional 9.1% reduction in labor earnings. Reading across the
last row of the table, we see that temporary disability and permanent disability benefits
are effective in reducing the incremental post-injury income loss experienced by temporary
workers: this incremental income loss falls from 9.1% to 6.3% when temporary benefits
are added and to 4.0% when permanent disability benefits are added. Adding settlement
amounts for disability benefits has a small impact on the gap, reducing it to 3.4%.

          When unspecified settlements are added, the incremental income loss associated with
temporary work disappears, becoming insignificant with a point estimate of 0.59%. While
we caveat that we cannot know with certainty if these unspecified settlement payments
reflect settlements for indemnity benefits or medical payments, we think it is plausible that
these settlements would primarily reflect indemnity benefits, since the final column of Table
6 indicates that adding medical settlements has no impact on our regression estimates for
temporary workers. In fact, the main estimate and its standard error are identical with
and without medical settlements. If the impact of unspecified settlements was driven by
medical settlements, then we might expect to see that temporary workers also received
differentially large medical settlements, which was not the case. We also note that DIR
counts workers with unspecified settlements as indemnity cases in aggregated reports based




                                               36
on WCIS data.26

         Taken together, the estimates in Table 6 suggest that indemnity benefits and settle-
ments provided by the workers' compensation system are sufficient to completely undo the
incremental pre-tax income losses experienced by temporary workers on average. In part, this
pattern may reflect the progressivity of workers' compensation benefits: temporary workers
are a lower-wage group than direct-hires, and so weekly benefits as a percentage of wages
may be higher for temporary workers even after controlling for quartiles of the weekly wage.
In addition to the progressivity of benefits, our findings might also suggest that variation
in workers' compensation benefits is driven by differences in earnings losses, which would
indicate that workers' compensation is effective at insuring workers against their earnings
losses. This might be the case if additional losses for temporary workers are driven by higher
temporary disability duration or more severe permanent disability.

         As we discuss in the Conclusion, these estimates cannot be interpreted as an indica-
tion of benefit adequacy or even a comparison of benefit adequacy between temporary and
direct-hire workers: workers' compensation benefits are tax-exempt, and data limitations
have prevented us from accounting for differences in tax rates between these two groups. In-
deed, direct-hire workers are likely to face higher marginal tax rates than temporary workers,
in which case the income differences documented in Table 6 would overestimate differences
in after-tax wage replacement rates between the two groups.


6      Conclusion
In this paper, we examined the labor market outcomes of temporary and contract workers
after workplace injury. By using a triple-difference identification strategy, we were able to
  26
    Source: Department of Industrial Relations. 2018."Table 12: Subsequent Report of Injury (SROI), with
Indemnity, by Month of Injury, 2000 - 2017." Online Resource. Available at https://www.dir.ca.gov/dwc/
wcis/WCIS_tables/AggregateFROISROIData/AggregateFROISROIData-Archive.html, Accessed May 10,
2019.


                                                  37
identify differences in post-injury labor market outcomes associated with temporary work
while using workers with the same job and work arrangement to control for other differences
in labor market dynamics between temporary and direct-hire workers. We found that tem-
porary and contract workers face more substantial income risk--in terms of larger reductions
in earnings and employment due to injury--than do observably similar direct-hires injured
doing the same job.

        Over the three years after injury, temporary workers earn 9.1 percent less than
they would have if they were observably identical direct-hires injured doing the same job.
This greater income risk faced by temporary workers reflects lower employment in the first
years after injury. Although our event-study estimates indicate that the employment of
injured temporary workers converges fully to their counterfactual level of employment by
three years post-injury, a 9.1 percent difference in earnings over a three-year period represents
a substantial degree of additional income risk associated with temporary work. While it is
well-established that temporary work is associated with greater risk to health and safety
(Benavides et al., 2006; Underhill and Quinlan, 2011) and higher workers' compensation
claiming rates (Park and Butler, 2001; Smith et al., 2010; Zaidman, 2017), this study provides
the first evidence on how differences in work arrangements influence the extent of income
risk workers face conditional on injury.

        We also examined differences between temporary and direct-hire workers in the
extent of uncompensated earnings losses. We found that workers' compensation indemnity
(i.e., cash) benefits--including settlements--were sufficient to offset the increased earnings
risk associated with temporary work. Although temporary workers' uncompensated losses
remained greater than those experienced by direct-hires when only temporary and permanent
disability benefits were included, the addition of settlement payments to our income measure
eliminated the disparity in uncompensated losses.


                                               38
         Our findings may have implications for the broader debate about whether and
how workers in other alternative work arrangements not covered by many social insurance
programs--most notably independent contractors--should be incorporated into existing so-
cial insurance arrangements. A proposal by Harris and Krueger (2015) would create a new
legal classification that they term the independent worker, through which jobs that are cur-
rently filled by independent contractors would gain coverage under selected labor laws and
social insurance arrangements without establishing a direct-hire relationship between the
employer and the employee. Under this proposal, labor intermediaries (including online
labor intermediaries) could elect to offer workers' compensation coverage to independent
workers without assuming the other legal obligations of employers, effectively providing
labor intermediaries with an opportunity to opt into workers' compensation. Other ob-
servers, in contrast, have urged the elimination of exclusions from workers' compensation
coverage requirements--including the exclusion of independent contractors--both in order
to expand access to medical care and cash benefits and in order to strengthen financial incen-
tives for host employers to invest in workplace safety (American Public Health Association,
2017).

         The welfare implications of these policy alternatives--the extension of voluntary
or mandatory workers' compensation to nonstandard workers who are currently excluded
from coverage--turn in large part on whether heterogeneity in risk or preferences between
direct-hire and nonstandard workers would lead nonstandard workers to prefer some dif-
ferent insurance arrangement in lieu of workers' compensation. If so, then mandating the
expansion of workers' compensation coverage to these additional groups of workers might
be less welfare-enhancing than allowing employers the choice to opt in or establish other
forms of accident and disability insurance. While our findings on earnings loss show that
nonstandard workers face systematically greater income risk, our finding that workers' com-
pensation is effective at equalizing uncompensated losses between temporary and direct-hire

                                             39
workers provides suggestive evidence that access to the workers' compensation system is
likely to be valuable for nonstandard workers as they seek to offset the greater earnings risk
they face after workplace injury. We caution that this policy implication is tentative, as
we were not able to estimate wage replacement rates or conduct welfare analysis with the
data on hand. Furthermore, our study did not examine the health and safety implications
of expanding workers' compensation coverage to more nonstandard workers. MacEachen
et al. (2016) clearly documented the potential for perverse incentives to arise from the use of
experience-rating in the context of alternative work arrangements, and policymakers consid-
ering expansion of workers' compensation coverage would need to consider whether changes
in experience-rating are necessary to promote safety.

        Our findings may also be relevant to ongoing debate in California, where a major
2018 state Supreme Court decision in the matter of Dynamex Operations West, Inc. v. Su-
perior Court of Los Angeles (known as the Dynamex decision) shifted the burden of proof
in employee misclassification cases to the employer and established a simplified test for mis-
classification. These changes are likely to require that many current independent contractors
either be reclassified as direct-hire employees or replaced with workers in other nonstandard
work arrangements (such as through temporary or contract firms). Our findings at least
provide some reassurance that the existing workers' compensation system appears capable
of providing compensation to these workers that offsets the greater earnings risk they face in
comparison to direct-hires. This analysis may be relevant to the current legislative debate
over whether to codify the Dynamex decision, especially if, as seems likely, many workers
who are currently misclassified as independent contractors would transition to temporary or
contract worker status rather than becoming direct-hires.

        Our study had some limitations that point to the need for further research. One
such limitation is that we were unable to observe non-labor income or program participation


                                              40
outcomes outside of workers' compensation. Direct measurement of injured workers' take-up
of other social insurance and income support programs such as Unemployment Insurance,
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or California's State Disability Insurance
program is needed to document how the differences in earnings risk estimated here might
translate into uninsured income risk for families and, potentially, spillover costs for state
government. Longer-term earnings and employment outcomes would be of interest in follow-
up research. We also caution that we did not conduct a formal welfare analysis or estimate
wage replacement rates, and many more questions need to be answered to rigorously identify
the best model for providing social insurance to nonstandard workers. Notwithstanding these
limitations, our findings that temporary workers face additional employment and earnings
risk after a workplace injury represent a first step toward addressing these questions in future
work.




                                              41
References
American Public Health Association (2017). The Critical Need to Reform Workers' Com-
 pensation.
Autor, D. H. and S. N. Houseman (2010). Do Temporary-Help Jobs Improve Labor Market
 Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from "Work First". American Economic
 Journal: Applied 2 (3), 96­128.
Autor, D. H., S. N. Houseman, and S. P. Kerr (2016). The Effect of Work First Job Place-
 ments on the Distribution of Earnings: An Instrumental Variable Quantile Regression
 Approach. Journal of Labor Economics 35 (1).
Benavides, F. G., J. Benach, C. Muntaner, G. L. Delclos, N. Catot, and M. Amable (2006).
  Associations between temporary employment and occupational injury: what are the mech-
  anisms? Occup Environ Med 63, 416­421.
Bernhardt, A., R. Batt, S. Houseman, and E. Appelbaum (2016, feb). Domestic Outsourcing
  in the U.S.: A Research Agenda to Assess Trends and Effects on Job Quality. Technical
  report, U.S. Department of Labor, Chief Evaluation Office, Washington, DC.
Boden, L. I., P. K. O'Leary, K. M. Applebaum, and Y. Tripodis (2016). The Impact of
  Non-Fatal Workplace Injuries and Illnesses on Mortality. American journal of industrial
  medicine 59, 1061­1069.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2017). Employer-related Workplace Injuries and Illnesses 2016.
  (202), 2011­2014.
Butler, R. J., H. H. Gardner, and N. L. Kleinman (2013). Workers' Compensation: Occu-
  pational Injury Insurance's Influence on the Workplace. In G. Dionne (Ed.), Handbook of
  Insurance, pp. 449­469. New York, NY: Springer.
Ciani, E. and P. Fisher (2019). Dif-in-dif estimators of multiplicative treatment effects.
  Journal of Econometric Methods 8 (1).
Dworsky, M., S. Rennane, and N. Broten (2018). Wage Loss Monitoring for Injured Workers
 in California's Workers' Compensation System: 2013 Injury Year Findings (First Interim
 Report). Technical report, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.
Dworsky, M., S. A. Seabury, F. W. Neuhauser, U. Kharel, and R. Euller (2016). Benefits
 and Earnings Losses for Permanently Disabled Workers in California: Trends Through the
 Great Recession and Impacts of Recent Reforms. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
Foley, M. (2017). Factors underlying observed injury rate differences between temporary
  workers and permanent peers. American Journal of Industrial Medicine 60 (10), 841­851.
Harris, S. D. and A. B. Krueger (2015). A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-
  First-Century Work: The "Independent Worker".


                                           42
Heinrich, C., P. Mueser, and K. Troske (2005). Welfare to temporary work: implications for
  labor market outcomes. Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (February), 154­173.
Howard, J. (2016). Nonstandard work arrangements and worker health and safety. American
  Journal of Industrial Medicine 10, 1­10.
Jaeger, D. A., T. J. Joyce, and R. Kaestner (2018). A cautionary tale of evaluating identifying
  assumptions: Did reality TV really cause a decline in teenage childbearing? Journal of
  Business & Economic Statistics , 1­10.
Katz, L. F. and A. B. Krueger (2016). The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrange-
 ments in the United States, 1995-2015.
Katz, L. F. and A. B. Krueger (2019). Understanding Trends in Alternative Work Arrange-
 ments in the United States.
Kilcoyne, P. (2004). Occupations in the Temporary Help Services Industry.
Lane, J., K. S. Mikelson, P. Sharkey, and D. Wissoker (2003). Pathways to Work for Low-
  Income Workers: The Effect of Work in the Temporary Help Industry. Journal of Policy
  Analysis and Management 22 (4), 581­598.
Leigh, J. P. (2011). Economic Burden of Occupational Injury and Illness in the United
  States. Milbank Quarterly 89 (4), 728­772.
Leigh, J. P. and J. P. Marcin (2012). Workers' Compensation Benefits and Shifting
  Costs for Occupational Injury and Illness. Journal of Occupational and Environmental
  Medicine 54 (4), 445­450.
MacEachen, E., K. Lippel, R. Saunders, A. Kosny, L. Mansfield, C. Carrasco, and D. Pugliese
 (2016). Workers' Compensation Experience-Rating Rules and the Danger To Work-
 ers' Safety in the Temporary Work Agency Sector. Policy and Practice in Health and
 Safety 10 (1), 77­95.
McLaren, C. F. and M. L. Baldwin (2017). Workers' Compensation: Benefits, Coverage,
 and Costs. Technical report, National Academy of Social Insurance, Washington, DC.
McLaren, C. F., M. L. Baldwin, and L. I. Boden (2018). Workers' Compensation: Benefits,
 Costs, and Coverage (2016 data). Washington, DC: National Academy of Social Insurance.
Meyer, B., W. K. Viscusi, and D. Durbin (1995). Workers' Compensation and Injury Dura-
 tion. American Economic Review 151 (3712), 867­8.
O'Leary, P., L. I. Boden, S. A. Seabury, A. Ozonoff, and E. Scherer (2012). Workplace Injuries
  and the Take-Up of Social Security Disability Benefits. Social Security Bulletin 72 (3), 1­
  17.
Park, Y. and R. J. Butler (2001). The safety costs of contingent work: Evidence from
  Minnesota. Journal of Labor Research XXII (4), 831­849.


                                              43
Quinlan, M. (2015). The effects of non-standard forms of employment on worker health and
 safety. Technical Report 67, International Labour Organization, Geneva.
Reville, R. T. and R. F. Schoeni (2004). The fraction of disability caused at work. Social
  security bulletin 65 (4), 31­37.
Silva, J. S. and S. Tenreyro (2006). The log of gravity. The Review of Economics and
   Statistics 88 (4), 641­658.
Smith, C. K., B. a. Silverstein, D. K. Bonauto, D. Adams, and Z. J. Fan (2010). Temporary
  Workers in Washington State. American journal of industrial medicine 53, 135­145.
Underhill, E. and M. Quinlan (2011). How Precarious Employment Affects Health and Safety
 at Work: The Case of Temporary Agency Workers. Relations Industrielles 66, 397­421.
Virtanen, M., M. Kivim¨
                      aki, M. Joensuu, P. Virtanen, M. Elovainio, and J. Vahtera (2005).
  Temporary Employment and Health: a Review. International Journal of Epidemiology 34,
  610­622.
Workers' Compensation Insurance Rating Bureau of California (2018). California Workers'
 Compensation Uniform Statistical Reporting Plan 1995. Oakland, CA: WCIRB California.
Zaidman, B. (2017). Examining the injuries of temporary help agency workers.




                                           44
Figures

                                                                                                    Figure 1: Employment Trends Relative to Time of Injury
                                                                            100%                                                                                                                                                100%


                                                                             90%                                                                                                                                                 90%


                                                                             80%                                                                                                                                                 80%
 Employment




                                                                                                                                                 Employment
                                                                             70%                                                                                                                                                 70%


                                                                             60%                                                                                                                                                 60%


                                                                             50%                                                                                                                                                 50%


                                                                             40%                                                                                                                                                 40%
                                                                                     -4         0               4                  8       12                                                                                            -4         0              4                  8       12
                                                                                                     Quarter Relative to Injury                                                                                                                         Quarter Relative to Injury
                                                                                                     Lost-Time              Medical-Only                                                                                                                Lost-Time              Medical-Only



                                                                                           A: Temporary/Contract                                                                                                                                    B: Direct-Hire
Notes: Authors' calculations, 2005-2011 WCIS-EDD. N = 1,278,390 injured workers.




                                                                                          Figure 2: Difference-in-Differences Estimates: Indemnity Benefit Sample
 Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)




                                                                                                                                                     Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)




                                                                               0%                                                                                                                                                  0%

                                                                             -2.5%                                                                                                                                               -2.5%

                                                                              -5%                                                                                                                                                 -5%

                                                                             -7.5%                                                                                                                                               -7.5%

                                                                             -10%                                                                                                                                                -10%

                                                                            -12.5%                                                                                                                                              -12.5%

                                                                             -15%                                                                                                                                                -15%

                                                                            -17.5%                                                                                                                                              -17.5%

                                                                             -20%                                                                                                                                                -20%

                                                                            -22.5%                                                                                                                                              -22.5%
                                                                                     -4         0                4                 8       12                                                                                            -4         0               4                 8       12
                                                                                                      Quarter Relative to Injury                                                                                                                         Quarter Relative to Injury


                                                                                          A: Unadjusted Estimates                                                                                                                             B: Adjusted for Covariates
Notes: Point estimates from difference-in-differences event study plotted along with 95% confidence intervals. Interactions based
on class code, calendar time of injury, and time-relative-to-injury included. In panel B, controls (interacted with time-relative-
to-injury) include age-gender interactions, job tenure, type of injury, geographic region, full-time/part-time status (pre-injury),
and quartiles of the administrative workers' compensation weekly wage variable. Confidence intervals adjusted for clustering
by class code. N = 303,240 injured workers.




                                                                                                                                                45
                                                                                           Figure 3: Difference-in-Differences Estimates: Medical Only Sample
 Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)




                                                                                                                                              Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)
                                                                               0%                                                                                                                                           0%

                                                                             -2.5%                                                                                                                                        -2.5%

                                                                              -5%                                                                                                                                          -5%

                                                                             -7.5%                                                                                                                                        -7.5%

                                                                             -10%                                                                                                                                         -10%

                                                                            -12.5%                                                                                                                                       -12.5%

                                                                             -15%                                                                                                                                         -15%

                                                                            -17.5%                                                                                                                                       -17.5%

                                                                             -20%                                                                                                                                         -20%

                                                                            -22.5%                                                                                                                                       -22.5%
                                                                                     -4        0              4                 8   12                                                                                            -4         0              4                 8   12
                                                                                                   Quarter Relative to Injury                                                                                                                    Quarter Relative to Injury


                                                                                          A: Unadjusted Estimates                                                                                                                      B: Adjusted for Covariates
Notes: Point estimates from difference-in-differences event study plotted along with 95% confidence intervals. Interactions based
on class code, calendar time of injury, and time-relative-to-injury included. In panel B, controls (interacted with time-relative-
to-injury) include age-gender interactions, job tenure, type of injury, geographic region, full-time/part-time status (pre-injury),
and quartiles of the administrative workers' compensation weekly wage variable. Confidence intervals adjusted for clustering
by class code. N = 975,150 injured workers.




                                                                                                    Figure 4: Triple Differences Event-Study Estimates
 Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)




                                                                                                                                              Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)




                                                                               5%                                                                                                                                           5%

                                                                             2.5%                                                                                                                                         2.5%

                                                                               0%                                                                                                                                           0%

                                                                             -2.5%                                                                                                                                        -2.5%

                                                                              -5%                                                                                                                                          -5%

                                                                             -7.5%                                                                                                                                        -7.5%

                                                                             -10%                                                                                                                                         -10%

                                                                            -12.5%                                                                                                                                       -12.5%

                                                                             -15%                                                                                                                                         -15%
                                                                                     -4        0              4                 8   12                                                                                            -4         0              4                 8   12
                                                                                                   Quarter Relative to Injury                                                                                                                    Quarter Relative to Injury


                                                                                          A: Unadjusted Estimates                                                                                                                      B: Adjusted for Covariates
Notes: Panel A shows the unadjusted difference in the employment gap between workers receiving indemnity benefits and
medical-only claims as shown in Figure 1, Panel A to the same gap shown in Figure 1, Panel B. In Panel B, we show the
equivalent estimates while adjusting for covariates as in equation (2). Sample includes N = 1,278,390 injured workers. Point
estimates from triple-differences event study plotted along with 95% confidence intervals. Specification includes all two-way
interactions between work arrangements, indemnity benefit vs. medical only sample, and time-relative-to-injury. Interactions
based on class code, work arrangements, calendar time of injury, and time-relative-to-injury also included. Controls (interacted
with time-relative-to-injury) include age-gender interactions, job tenure, type of injury, geographic region, full-time/part-time
status (pre-injury), and quartiles of the administrative workers' compensation weekly wage variable. Confidence intervals
adjusted for clustering by class code.




                                                                                                                                         46
                                                                                                                       Figure 5: Traumatic Injuries
 Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)




                                                                                                                                           Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)
                                                                               5%                                                                                                                                        5%

                                                                             2.5%                                                                                                                                      2.5%

                                                                               0%                                                                                                                                        0%

                                                                             -2.5%                                                                                                                                     -2.5%

                                                                              -5%                                                                                                                                       -5%

                                                                             -7.5%                                                                                                                                     -7.5%

                                                                             -10%                                                                                                                                      -10%

                                                                            -12.5%                                                                                                                                    -12.5%

                                                                             -15%                                                                                                                                      -15%
                                                                                     -4   0              4                 8     12                                                                                            -4       0              4                 8   12
                                                                                              Quarter Relative to Injury                                                                                                                    Quarter Relative to Injury


                                                                                          A: Full Sample                                                                                                                            B: Traumatic Injuries
Notes: Panel A repeats the same results as shown in Figure 4, Panel B. Panel B limits the sample to workers incurring
traumatic injuries. Panel A sample includes N = 1,278,390 injured workers. Panel B sample includes N = 264,702 injured
workers. As in the main results, workers are categorized by their status at time of injury. In both panels, point estimates
from triple-differences event study plotted along with 95% confidence intervals. Specification includes all two-way interactions
between work arrangements, indemnity benefit vs. medical only sample, and time-relative-to-injury. Interactions based on
class code, work arrangements, calendar time of injury, and time-relative-to-injury also included. Controls (interacted with
time-relative-to-injury) include age-gender interactions, job tenure, type of injury, geographic region, full-time/part-time status
(pre-injury), and quartiles of the administrative workers' compensation weekly wage variable. Confidence intervals adjusted for
clustering by class code.




                                                                                              Figure 6: Triple Differences Estimates for "Switchers"
 Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)




                                                                                                                                           Incremental impact of injury on employment for temp vs. direct-hire (pp)




                                                                               5%                                                                                                                                        5%

                                                                             2.5%                                                                                                                                      2.5%

                                                                               0%                                                                                                                                        0%

                                                                             -2.5%                                                                                                                                     -2.5%

                                                                              -5%                                                                                                                                       -5%

                                                                             -7.5%                                                                                                                                     -7.5%

                                                                             -10%                                                                                                                                      -10%

                                                                            -12.5%                                                                                                                                    -12.5%

                                                                             -15%                                                                                                                                      -15%
                                                                                     -4   0              4                 8     12                                                                                            -4       0              4                 8   12
                                                                                              Quarter Relative to Injury                                                                                                                    Quarter Relative to Injury


                                                                                          A: Full Sample                                                                                                                                B: Switchers
Notes: Panel A repeats the same results as shown in Figure 4, Panel B. Panel B limits the sample to workers who worked both
as direct-hires and as temporary/contract workers in the year before injury (N=96,630). As in the main results, workers are
categorized by their status at time of injury. In both panels, point estimates from triple-differences event study plotted along
with 95% confidence intervals. Specification includes all two-way interactions between work arrangements, indemnity benefit vs.
medical only sample, and time-relative-to-injury. Interactions based on class code, work arrangements, calendar time of injury,
and time-relative-to-injury also included. Controls (interacted with time-relative-to-injury) include age-gender interactions, job
tenure, type of injury, geographic region, full-time/part-time status (pre-injury), and quartiles of the administrative workers'
compensation weekly wage variable. Confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by class code.



                                                                                                                                      47
Tables

               Table 1: Temporary Work Shares by Occupation in California
                                                       Number        Share of
                                                          of        Temporary      Cumulative
 Title                                  SOC Code       Workers     Employment        Share
 Laborers and Freight, Stock, and        53-7062        89,130         23.3           23.3
 Material Movers, Hand

 Packers and Packagers, Hand              53-7064        24,850           6.5         29.8

 Assemblers and Fabricators, All          51-2098        14,960           3.9         33.7
 Other, Including Team Assemblers

 Production Workers, All Other            51-9199        14,150           3.7         37.4

 Customer Service Representatives         43-4051        12,250           3.2         40.6

 Packaging and Filling Machine            51-9111        11,090           2.9         43.5
 Operators and Tenders

 Office Clerks, General                   43-9061        10,530           2.8         46.2

 Secretaries and Administrative           43-6014        9,810            2.6         48.8
 Assistants, Except Legal, Medical,
 and Executive

 Personal Care Aides                      39-9021        8,180            2.1         50.9

 Industrial Truck and Tractor             53-7051        7,500            2.0         52.9
 Operators
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2018. "May 2017 OES Estimates." Available at
https://www.bls.gov/oes/2017/may/oes_ca.htm as of April 17, 2019.




                                                 48
                  Table 2: Temporary Work Shares among Injured Workers
                                                                                      Share Involving
                                              Total          Temporary/PEO           Temporary/PEO
 Class Code                               Injury Count        Injury Count               Workers
 Warehouses - General Merchandise             27,476              7,513                    27.3%
 Fruit - Dried Fruit Packing                   1,216               275                     22.6%
 Carpentry - Not Otherwise                     5,556              1,128                    20.3%
 Classified - Low Wage
 Garbage, Ashes or Refuse Dump                  2,722                 397                    14.6%
 Operations
 Fruit - Citrus Fruit Packing                   1,668                 236                    14.1%
 Stores - Clothing, Dry Goods -                 3,472                 488                    14.1%
 Wholesale
 Warehouses - Self Storage                      1,496                 207                    13.8%
 Medical Instrument Manufacturing               2,367                 308                    13.0%
 - Electronic
 Printed Circuit Board Assembling              1,059                 122                     11.5%
 Instrument Manufacturing -                    14,169                1629                    11.5%
 Electronic
Source: Authors' calculations, 2005-2011 WCIS. Table lists top 10 California class codes by proportion of
injuries occurring among temporary workers, defined as those with a payroll employer in NAICS industries
56132 or 56133.




                                                   49
Table 3: Summary Statistics: Characteristics of Temporary and Direct-Hire Workers with
Indemnity Claims
                                               Direct-Hire       Temporary
                      Job Characteristics
                      Weekly wage                  619.95            477.24
                      Full year tenure             67.10%            25.60%
                      Full time                    78.54%            67.29%
                      Demographics
                      Female                       45.85%            38.44%
                      Age                           41.43             38.96
                      Cause of Injury
                      Caught in                    2.77%             5.19%
                      Rubbed by                     0.61%            1.12%
                      Striking                      3.26%            4.93%
                      Struck by                     9.28%            12.19%
                      Strain                       43.29%            41.71%
                      Fall                         19.84%            18.86%
                      Cut                           4.89%             4.26%
                      Crash                         2.88%             1.95%
                      Burn                          1.84%            1.40%
                      Miscellaneous                11.35%            8.39%
                      Nature of Injury
                      Specific injury              88.25%            89.51%
                      Cumulative injury            8.02%             4.91%
                      Multiple injury               3.09%             4.98%
                      Other injury                 0.64%             0.60%
                      Sample Size                  290,007           13,233
Source: Authors' calculations, 2005-2011 WCIS, Indemnity injuries only. Weekly wage is nominal weekly
wage variable reported on workers' compensation claim for purposes of calculating benefits. Temporary
workers defined as those with a payroll employer in NAICS industries 56132 or 56133.




                                                  50
Table 4: Summary Statistics: Labor Market Outcomes for Temporary and Direct-Hire Work-
ers with Indemnity Claims
                                                       Direct-Hire                  Temporary
                                                 Value      % of baseline      Value       % of baseline
 Pre-injury Earnings/Employment
 Earnings in Year Before Injury                $35,911.61      100.00%       $18,792.10      100.00%
 Employed 1 Year (4Q) Before Injury?            86.46%         100.00%        65.43%         100.00%
 Post-Injury Earnings
 1st Year (4Q) Post-Injury Earnings            $27,280.26       75.97%       $13,699.02       72.90%
 2nd Year (8Q) Post-Injury Earnings            $25,876.61       72.06%       $13,427.88       71.45%
 3rd Year (12Q) Post-Injury Earnings           $24,809.93       69.09%       $13,523.35       71.96%
 Post-Injury Employment
 1st Year (4Q) Post-Injury Employment           69.31%          80.17%         49.56%         75.74%
 2nd Year (8Q) Post-Injury Employment           63.65%          73.62%         47.18%         72.10%
 3rd Year (12Q) Post-Injury Employment          60.61%          70.11%         46.34%         70.82%
Source: Authors' calculations, 2005-2011 WCIS-EDD, Indemnity injuries only. N = 290,007 for direct-hire
workers. N = 13,233 for temporary workers. Temporary workers defined as those with a payroll employer
in NAICS industries 56132 or 56133. Earnings adjusted to real 2014$ using the CPI-U.




                                                  51
Table 5: Effects of Temporary Worker Status on Post-Injury Labor Market Outcomes: Triple-
Difference Regression Estimates
                       Time Post-Injury Employment Earnings
                               Year 1 (4Q)           -0.0388***       -0.115***
                                                      (0.00682)        (0.0192)

                               Year 2 (8Q)             -0.00815       -0.0822***
                                                      (0.00734)        (0.0195)

                              Year 3 (12Q)             0.00890        -0.0519**
                                                      (0.00576)        (0.0192)
                           Year 1 = Year 2
                          Wald Test Statistic             28.93          2.20
                               p-value                      0           0.1380
                           Year 1 = Year 3
                          Wald Test Statistic             46.51          8.33
                               p-value                      0           0.0039
                           Year 2 = Year 3
                          Wald Test Statistic            8.98            1.89
                               p-value                  0.0040          0.1691
                                     N                5,113,560       5,113,560

Notes: ***Significance .1%, ** Significance 1%, * Significance 5%. Employment effects estimated using
OLS. Earnings effects estimated using fixed-effects (conditional) Poisson regression. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering by class code (62 clusters). 524 observations (131 workers) were
dropped from the Poisson regressions because they belonged to fixed-effects cells (4-way interactions
between class code, quarter of injury, temporary worker status, and calendar time) that had all zero
outcomes or contained only a single observation, and thus did not contribute to the pseudo-likelihood
function. Wald test statistic for employment is distributed as F1,61 . Test statistic for earnings outcomes is
distributed as 21 . Specification includes all two-way interactions between work arrangements, indemnity
benefit vs. medical only sample, and time-relative-to-injury. Model includes fixed effects for interactions of
class code, work arrangements, calendar time of injury, and time-relative-to-injury. Additional controls
(interacted with time-relative-to-injury) include age-gender interactions, job tenure, type of injury,
geographic region, full-time/part-time status (pre-injury), and quartiles of the administrative workers'
compensation weekly wage variable.




                                                     52
Table 6: Uncompensated Earnings Losses Over Three Years Post-Injury: Triple-Difference
Estimates
                                             Forms of Income Included in Outcome Measure
       Earnings                         Y              Y                  Y            Y            Y              Y
       TD Benefits                                     Y                  Y            Y            Y              Y
       PD Benefits                                                        Y            Y            Y              Y
       Indemnity Settlements                                                           Y            Y              Y
       Unspecified Settlements                                                                      Y              Y
       Medical Settlements                                                                                         Y


       Indemnity                    -0.0707***      -0.0707***        -0.0707***   -0.0707***   -0.0707***    -0.0707***
                                     (0.0019)        (0.0019)          (0.0019)     (0.0019)     (0.0019)      (0.0019)

       Indemnity X Post-Injury      -0.209***       -0.125***         -0.0821***   -0.0709***   -0.0582***    -0.0440***
                                     (0.0040)        (0.0034)          (0.0033)     (0.0032)     (0.0033)      (0.0033)

       Temporary X Indemnity         -0.00443        -0.00443          -0.00443     -0.00443     -0.00443       -0.00443
                                     (0.0087)        (0.0087)          (0.0087)     (0.0087)     (0.0087)       (0.0087)

       Temporary X Indemnity       -0.0907***      -0.0625***         -0.0404**    -0.0340*       0.0059        0.0059
       X Post-Injury                 (0.0159)        (0.0145)          (0.0140)     (0.0140)     (0.0138)       (0.0138)
Notes: ***Significance .1%, ** Significance 1%, * Significance 5%. N = 1,278,390 injured workers. Poisson regression
estimates. Outcomes refer to the total earnings and benefits received in the three years post-injury ("Post-Injury") or the one
year pre-injury. Specification includes all two-way interactions between work arrangements, indemnity benefit vs. medical
only sample, and a post-injury indicator. Interactions based on class code, work arrangements, calendar time of injury, and
post-injury. Controls (interacted with both pre and post indicators) include age-gender interactions, job tenure, type of injury,
geographic region, full-time/part-time status (pre-injury), and quartiles of the administrative workers' compensation weekly
wage variable. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering by class code. We note that estimates in the the first
and third rows are mechanically identical because the addition of benefits has no impact on pre-injury income.




                                                                 53
A      Appendix: Supplementary Tables and Figures
Table A1 presents summary statistics on the benefit payment measures that we use to an-
alyze uncompensated earnings losses. The sample is limited to injured workers who receive
indemnity benefits, which we define as receipt of any benefit payments other than medical
benefits. The first panel reports the average total benefit payment when we sequentially add
different categories of benefits to our measure of total benefit payments. The second panel
reports the percentage of workers with indemnity injury receiving each benefit type. Tempo-
rary/contract workers are about three times as likely as direct-hires to receive an unspecified
settlement payment. Otherwise, patterns of benefit receipt are broadly similar between the
two groups.

Table A1: Mean Benefit Payments and Incidence by Benefit Type and Work Arrangement
      Cumulative Benefit Amounts ($)            Direct-Hire           Temporary/Contract
      Temporary Disability Benefits                    7,077.19             4,995.61
      + Permanent Disability Benefits                 10,915.52              8,166.09
      + Disability Benefit Settlements                11,909.21              9,037.82
      + Unspecified Settlements                       13,127.84             11,803.31
      + Medical Settlements                           14,442.03             12,585.15
      Percentage Receiving Benefits
      %   with   TTD benefits                          87.99%                83.02%
      %   with   PPD benefits                          37.39%                34.70%
      %   with   a TTD or PPD settlement               8.33%                 7.97%
      %   with   an unspecified settlement              6.70%                20.16%
      %   with   a medical settlement                  8.09%                 5.34%
      Cumulative Percentage Receiving Benefits
      %   with   TTD benefits                          87.99%                83.02%
      %   with   PPD benefits                          96.49%                91.32%
      %   with   a TTD or PPD settlement               98.44%                93.46%
      %   with   an unspecified settlement             99.99%                99.99%
      %   with   a medical settlement                 100.00%               100.00%
      Number of Observations                          290,007                13,233


          Table A2 presents additional triple-difference regression estimates to assess the sen-
sitivity of our main results to selection into injury or to the use of sampling weights. Column
1 reproduces our main employment estimates from Column 1 of Table 5. Column 2 shows re-
sults for traumatic injuries only, as described in Section 5. The coefficients are less precisely
estimated, but the point estimates are close to estimates from the full sample. Estimates
for the earnings models, reported in Columns 5-6, also show that results for the traumatic
injuries sample are very similar to results for the full sample. Finally, Columns 3-4 show
that unweighted estimates are also very close to our weighted estimates.

                                               54
          Table A2: Sensitivity Analyses: Triple-Difference Regression Estimates
                             Employment                  Employment                 Earnings
                                                         (unweighted)
 Time Post-Injury            All      Traumatic          All       Traumatic      All       Traumatic
 Year 1 (4Q)             -0.0388***    -0.0292*       -0.0388***    -0.0293*   -0.115***     -0.09**
 (se)                     (0.00682)   (0.01570)        (0.00676)   (0.01590)    (0.0192)    (0.04160)

 Year 2 (8Q)              -0.00815*    -0.00989        -0.0083*     -0.00946   -0.0822***   -0.0947**
 (se)                     (0.00734)   (0.01070)       (0.00745)    (0.01100)    (0.0195)    (0.04250)

 Year 3 (12Q)               0.0089      0.0152         0.00906      0.0144     -0.0519**     -0.0495
 (se)                     (0.00576)   (0.00961)       (0.00576)    (0.00983)    (0.0192)    (0.04230)
 Year 1 = Year 2
 Wald Test Statistic        28.93        3.47           28.72        3.55        2.20           0.01
 p-value                      0         0.0673            0         0.0641      0.1380         0.9155
 Year 1 = Year 3
 Wald Test Statistic        46.51        4.09           47.11        3.76        8.33           0.85
 p-value                      0         0.0476            0         0.0571      0.0039         0.3572
 Year 2 = Year 3
 Wald Test Statistic         8.98        2.67           9.19         2.33        1.89           1.02
 p-value                    0.004       0.1075         0.0022       0.1322      0.1691         0.3134

 N (Injured Workers)      1,278,390    264,702        1,278,390     264,702    1,278,390     264,702
 N (Observations)         5,113,560   1,058,808       5,113,560    1,058,808   5,113,560    1,058,808
Notes: ***Significance .1%, ** Significance 1%, * Significance 5% Employment effects estimated
using OLS. Earnings effects estimated using fixed-effects (conditional) Poisson regression.
Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering by class code (62 clusters). Model includes
fixed effects for interactions of class code, work arrangements, calendar time of injury, and
time-relative-to-injury. Additional controls (interacted with time-relative-to-injury) include
age-gender interactions, job tenure, type of injury, geographic region, full-time/part-time status
(pre-injury), and quartiles of the administrative workers' compensation weekly wage variable.
Specification includes all two-way interactions between work arrangements, indemnity benefit vs.
medical only sample, and time-relative-to-injury. Observations dropped from Poisson regressions
reflect fixed-effects cells (4-way interactions between class code, quarter of injury, temporary
worker status, and calendar time) that had all zero outcomes or contained only a single
observation, and thus did not contribute to the pseudo-likelihood function. Test statistic for
employment is distributed as F1,61 . Test statistic for earnings outcomes is distributed as 2 1.




                                                 55
                 Table A3: Composition of Switcher Sample Before Injury
                  Type of             Quarters      Quarters        Quarters
                  Worker               as Temp as Direct Hire Not Employed
      Direct-hire in QOI, medical-only       2.22          4.34              1.44
        Temp in QOI, medical-only            2.06          3.98              1.96
       Direct-hire in QOI, indemnity         2.23          4.24              1.53
        Temp in QOI, medical-only            2.14          3.81              2.05
Notes: QOI = quarter of injury. N=96,630 injured workers.

          Table A3 describes pre-injury employment patterns for the sample of injured work-
ers who switched work arrangements (from temporary to direct-hire or vice versa) in the two
years prior to injury. Specifically, the table shows the average number of quarters before in-
jury that the four categories of switchers spent in direct-hire, temporary, or non-employment.
As described in the text, switchers who are temporary workers in the quarter of injury have
slightly fewer quarters as temporary or direct-hire workers. Instead, they spend an additional
half of one quarter in non-employment.
         Table A4 presents Poisson regression coefficients for control variables included in our
main triple-difference regression model for earnings. Control variables are fully interacted
with time relative to injury. These time-varying coefficients are indicated in this table by
the column header. Because control variables are fully interacted with time relative to
injury, post-injury coefficients represent contemporaneous differences in earnings relative to
the excluded group, not changes relative to the pre-injury period. The conditional Poisson
estimator controls for four-way interactions of class code, work arrangements, calendar time
of injury, and time-relative-to-injury, which are not reported.
         The coefficients in Table A4 indicate plausible cross-sectional patterns of earnings,
such as a gender gap between men and women and an inverse-U shape over the life cycle.
Regional differences in earnings between urban and rural regions and between the Bay Area
and other cities are also apparent. Cause of Injury and Nature of Injury codes are defined
relative to very severe types of injuries (burn/scald and cumulative trauma), so the higher
post-injury coefficients for the included categories are a reflection of more severe earnings
losses in the excluded group, as reported in Dworsky et al. (2018). A similar phenomenon
explains the positive coefficients on the included job tenure categories. A U-shaped rela-
tionship between pre-injury wages and earnings losses is also consistent with Dworsky et al.
(2018).




                                              56
                Table A4: Coefficients on Control Variables, Triple-
                Difference Poisson Regression Models

                           Pre-Injury Year                     Post-Injury Years
                            Year -1 (-4Q)        Year 1 (4Q)     Year 2 (8Q)   Year 3 (12Q)
Age (Excluded: Age 15-24)
25-34                         0.425***            0.286***         0.259***         0.228***
                              (0.00455)           (0.00450)       (0.00494)        (0.00509)
35-44                         0.531***            0.355***         0.319***         0.278***
                              (0.00617)           (0.00584)       (0.00612)        (0.00631)
45-54                         0.557***            0.352***         0.301***         0.241***
                              (0.00706)           (0.00652)       (0.00682)        (0.00706)
55-64                         0.536***            0.254***         0.131***         -0.00132
                              (0.00747)           (0.00685)       (0.00738)        (0.00785)
65-70                         0.422***             0.00243        -0.219***        -0.442***
                               (0.0103)            (0.0119)        (0.0141)         (0.0176)
Age-Female Interactions
Female*25-34                  -0.148***           -0.146***       -0.162***         -0.176***
                              (0.00395)           (0.00443)       (0.00493)         (0.00519)
Female*35-44                  -0.155***           -0.150***       -0.152***         -0.154***
                              (0.00484)           (0.00550)       (0.00595)         (0.00630)
Female*45-54                  -0.139***           -0.132***       -0.131***         -0.136***
                              (0.00607)           (0.00709)       (0.00762)         (0.00818)
Female*55-64                 -0.0979***          -0.0677***      -0.0523***        -0.0478***
                              (0.00729)           (0.00783)       (0.00895)         (0.00955)
Female*65-70                 -0.0745***           -0.0473**       -0.0512**        -0.0761***
                               (0.0116)            (0.0147)        (0.0175)          (0.0215)
Region of State (Excluded: Bay Area)
Central Coast                -0.0825***           -0.118***       -0.121***        -0.125***
                              (0.00478)           (0.00564)       (0.00577)        (0.00603)
Central Valley                -0.167***           -0.210***       -0.212***        -0.208***
                              (0.00498)           (0.00603)       (0.00632)        (0.00655)
Eastern Sierra Foothills      -0.118***           -0.162***       -0.177***        -0.187***
                              (0.00618)           (0.00733)       (0.00861)        (0.00891)
Inland Empire                -0.0901***           -0.150***       -0.161***        -0.165***
                              (0.00370)           (0.00409)       (0.00424)        (0.00433)
Los Angeles                   -0.103***           -0.148***       -0.152***        -0.153***
                              (0.00353)           (0.00403)       (0.00413)        (0.00422)
N. Sacramento Valley          -0.201***           -0.254***       -0.257***        -0.265***


                                            57
                           (0.00780)          (0.00913)    (0.00995)    (0.00998)
North State-Shasta         -0.246***          -0.303***    -0.323***    -0.338***
                           (0.00803)          (0.00916)     (0.0101)     (0.0101)
Sacramento Valley          -0.147***          -0.179***    -0.190***    -0.196***
                           (0.00517)          (0.00587)    (0.00660)    (0.00677)
San Diego                  -0.115***          -0.136***    -0.144***    -0.144***
                           (0.00452)          (0.00513)    (0.00536)    (0.00549)
Cause of Injury (Excluded: Burn/Scald)
Caught In                  0.0335***          0.0466***    0.0434***    0.0522***
                           (0.00609)           (0.00642)    (0.00660)    (0.00685)
Crash                       0.121***           0.0937***    0.0875***    0.0931***
                           (0.00899)            (0.0117)     (0.0120)     (0.0121)
Cut                        0.0358***           0.0571***    0.0541***    0.0575***
                           (0.00575)           (0.00598)    (0.00635)    (0.00640)
Fall                       0.0344***           -0.000654     -0.00763     -0.00632
                           (0.00528)           (0.00587)    (0.00591)    (0.00613)
Miscellaneous              0.0435***          -0.0745***   -0.0741***   -0.0661***
                           (0.00502)           (0.00649)    (0.00658)    (0.00666)
Rubbed by                    0.0126           -0.0506***   -0.0408***    -0.0361**
                           (0.00939)            (0.0111)     (0.0123)     (0.0140)
Strain                     0.0277***          -0.0293***   -0.0303***   -0.0253***
                           (0.00504)           (0.00556)    (0.00559)    (0.00570)
Striking                    0.00981             -0.00383     -0.00778     -0.00491
                           (0.00555)           (0.00572)    (0.00606)    (0.00634)
Struck by                  0.0193***             0.00447    0.000485       0.00680
                           (0.00586)           (0.00585)    (0.00612)    (0.00643)
Nature of Injury (Excluded: Cumulative Trauma)
Infectious                 0.0951***           0.344***     0.336***     0.328***
                            (0.0222)           (0.0197)     (0.0208)     (0.0184)
Multiple                    -0.00852          0.0541***    0.0341***    0.0318***
                           (0.00543)          (0.00837)    (0.00934)    (0.00922)
Other Exposure               0.00451          0.167***      0.142***     0.144***
                           (0.00895)           (0.0133)     (0.0147)     (0.0140)
Respiratory                  0.0130            0.161***     0.145***     0.128***
                            (0.0110)           (0.0144)     (0.0179)     (0.0172)
Specific                    -0.00762           0.150***    0.137***      0.130***
                           (0.00441)          (0.00768)    (0.00801)    (0.00725)
Pre-Injury Weekly Wage Quartile (Excluded: First Quartile)
Second Quartile            -0.268***          -0.263***    -0.263***    -0.257***
                           (0.00525)          (0.00539)    (0.00534)    (0.00571)


                                         58
  Third Quartile                 -0.238***         -0.255***     -0.258***      -0.250***
                                 (0.00860)         (0.00960)     (0.00981)       (0.0102)
  Fourth Quartile                 0.260***          0.265***      0.273***      0.283***
                                 (0.00570)         (0.00607)     (0.00623)      (0.00646)
  Full-Time/Part-Time (Excluded: Part-Time)
  Full-Time                      0.175***          0.196***      0.175***       0.152***
                                 (0.00718)         (0.00730)     (0.00727)      (0.00685)
  Job Tenure in Quarters Before Injury (Excluded: 0 Quarters)
  1                              0.0901***         0.142***      0.134***       0.125***
                                 (0.00981)         (0.00655)     (0.00674)      (0.00644)
  2                              0.0990***         0.213***      0.205***       0.203***
                                  (0.0107)         (0.00648)     (0.00676)      (0.00681)
  3                                0.0182          0.261***      0.253***       0.248***
                                  (0.0120)         (0.00689)     (0.00686)      (0.00694)
  4+                             0.801***          0.460***      0.462***       0.456***
                                 (0.00985)         (0.00680)     (0.00678)      (0.00693)

***Significance .1%, ** Significance 1%, * Significance 5%
Table reports fixed-effects (conditional) Poisson regression coefficients for control variables
from earnings model reported in Table 5 of paper. In addition to variables reported in
table and triple-difference design variables reported in Table 5, model includes fixed effects
for interactions of class code, work arrangements, calendar time of injury, and
time-relative-to-injury. Specification includes all two-way interactions between work
arrangements, indemnity benefit vs. medical only sample, and time-relative-to-injury.
Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering by class code (62 clusters).




                                              59
B    Appendix: List of Class Codes in Analysis Sample
0016:ORCHARDS - CITRUS AND DECIDUOUS     5474:PAINTING OR DECORATING - LOW
FRUITS                                   WAGE
0042:LANDSCAPE GARDENING                 5552:ROOFING - LOW WAGE

0050:FARM MACHINERY OPERATION            6504:FOOD PRODUCTS MFG OR PROCESSING

2003:BAKERIES AND CRACKER MFG            7198:PARCEL DELIVERY COMPANIES

2107:FRUIT - FRESH FRUIT PACKING         7219:TRUCKING FIRMS

2108:FRUIT - CITRUS FRUIT PACKING        7382:BUS OR LIMOUSINE OPERATIONS

2109:FRUIT - DRIED FRUIT PACKING         7610:RADIO TELEVISION BROADCASTING
                                         STATION
2111:FRUIT OR VEGETABLE PRESERVING
                                         8008:STORES - CLOTHING AND DRY GOODS -
2142:WINERIES                            RETAIL

2501:CLOTHING MFG                        8017:STORES - RETAIL

2812:CABINET MFG - WOOD                  8018:STORES - WHOLESALE

3060:DOOR OR WINDOW MFG - METAL OR       8031:STORES - MEAT, FISH OR POULTRY -
PLASTIC                                  RETAIL

3179:ELECTRICAL APPARATUS MFG            8032:STORES - CLOTHING, DRY GOODS -
                                         WHOLESALE
3507:MACHINERY OR EQUIPMENT MFG
                                         8046:STORES - AUTOMOBILE ACCESSORIES
3572:MEDICAL INSTRUMENT MFG -
ELECTRONIC                               8062:STORES - COMPUTERS

3577:PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARD ASSEMBLING    8232:LUMBERYARDS - COMMERCIAL
                                         8290:WAREHOUSES - SELF STORAGE
3632:MACHINE SHOPS - NOC
                                         8291:WAREHOUSES - COLD STORAGE
3681:INSTRUMENT MFG - ELECTRONIC
                                         8292:WAREHOUSES - GENERAL
4299:PRINTING - ALL OTHER EMPLOYEES
                                         MERCHANDISE
4354:PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARD MFG           8742:SALESPERSONS - OUTSIDE
4478: PLASTIC GOODS MANUFACTURING        8808:BANKS
5183:PLUMBING - LOW WAGE                 8810:CLERICAL OFFICE EMPLOYEES
5190:ELECTRICAL WIRING - LOW WAGE        8827:HOMEMAKER SERVICES
5201:CONCRETE WORK - SIDEWALKS - LOW     8829:NURSING HOMES
WAGE
                                         8834:PHYSICIANS
5213:CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION
                                         8859:COMPUTER PROGRAMMING OR
5348:TILE, STONE, MOSAIC OR TERRAZZO     SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
WORK
                                         9008:JANITORIAL SERVICES - BY
5403:CARPENTRY - NOC - LOW WAGE          CONTRACTOR

                                        60
9009:BUILDING OPERATION - COMMERCIAL    9070:RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY -
                                        ELDERLY
9011:APARTMENT OR CONDOMINIUM
COMPLEX OPERATION - ALL OTHER           9079:RESTAURANTS OR TAVERNS
EMPLOYEES
                                        9403:GARBAGE, ASHES OR REFUSE
9015:BUILDING OPERATION                 COLLECTING
9043:HOSPITALS
                                        9424:GARBAGE, ASHES OR REFUSE DUMP
9050:HOTELS                             OPERATIONS




                                       61
