                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                      NO HOUSEHOLD LEFT BEHIND:
        AFGHANISTAN TARGETING THE ULTRA POOR IMPACT EVALUATION

                                        Guadalupe Bedoya
                                          Aidan Coville
                                       Johannes Haushofer
                                      Mohammad Isaqzadeh
                                        Jeremy P. Shapiro

                                       Working Paper 25981
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25981


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019

The authors gratefully acknowledge the following people and organizations that supported the
study. Aminata Ndiaye, Ahmed Rostom, Naila Ahmed and Guillemette Jaffrin led the World
Bank-funded Access to Finance project which delivered the intervention. MISFA staff, especially
Bahram Barzin and Khalil Baheer and their team including Matin Ezidyar, Shafkat Shahriyar Bin
Reza and Hashmat Mohmand implemented the program. Maria Camila Ayala, Thomas Escande,
Gëzime Christian, Garima Sharma, Seungmin Lee, Shivang Mehta, Catalina Salas and Rebecca
de Guttry provided excellent research assistance throughout the project. Nabila Assaf, Shubha
Chakravarty, Simeon Djankov, Arianna Legovini, Katharine McKee, Ana Goicoechea, Nathanael
Goldberg and Aminata Ndiaye provided valuable comments. Funding was provided by the DIME
Impact Evaluation to Development Impact (i2i) fund, Knowledge for Change, and UK-DFID
protracted forced displacement trust funds, the World Bank Afghanistan Country Management
Unit and the Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do
not necessarily represent the view of the World Bank, its executive directors, or the countries they
represent. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Guadalupe Bedoya, Aidan Coville, Johannes Haushofer, Mohammad Isaqzadeh, and
Jeremy P. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
No Household Left Behind: Afghanistan Targeting the Ultra Poor Impact Evaluation
Guadalupe Bedoya, Aidan Coville, Johannes Haushofer, Mohammad Isaqzadeh, and Jeremy
P. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 25981
June 2019
JEL No. J21,J22,O12,O13
                                           ABSTRACT
The share of people living in extreme poverty fell from 36 percent in 1990 to 10 percent in 2015
but has continued to increase in many fragile and conflict-affected areas where half of the
extreme poor are expected to reside by 2030. These areas are also where the least evidence exists
on how to tackle poverty. This paper investigates whether the Targeting the Ultra Poor program
can lift households out of poverty in a fragile context: Afghanistan. In 80 villages in Balkh
province, 1,219 of the poorest households were randomly assigned to a treatment or control
group. Women in treatment households received a one-off "big-push" package, including a
transfer of livestock assets, cash consumption stipend, skills training, and coaching. One year
after the program ended--two years after assets were transferred--significant and large impacts
are found across all the primary pre-specified outcomes: consumption, assets, psychological well-
being, total time spent working, financial inclusion, and women's empowerment. Per capita
consumption increases by 30 percent (USD 24 purchasing power parity, USD 7 nominal per
month) with respect to the control group, and the share of households below the national poverty
line decreases from 82 percent in the control group to 62 percent in the treatment group. Using
modest assumptions about consumption impacts, the intervention has an estimated internal rate of
return of 26 percent, excluding non-monetized improvements in psychological well-being,
women's empowerment, and children's health and education. These findings suggest that "big-
push" interventions can dramatically reduce poverty in fragile and conflict-affected regions.

Guadalupe Bedoya                                     Mohammad Isaqzadeh
Development Impact Evaluation, DIME                  Princeton University
The World Bank                                       001 Fisher Hall
1818 H Street N.W.                                   Princeton, NJ 08544-1012
Washington, DC 20433                                 mri2@princeton.edu
gbedoya@worldbank.org
                                                     Jeremy P. Shapiro
Aidan Coville                                        Busara Center for Behavioral Economics
Development Impact Evaluation, DIME                  Daykio Plaza
The World Bank                                       Nairobi, Kenya
1818 H Street N.W.                                   jeremy.shapiro@busaracenter.org
Washington, DC 20433
acoville@worldbank.org

Johannes Haushofer
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
427 Peretsman-Scully Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540
and Busara Center for Behavioral Economics
Nairobi, Kenya
and also NBER
haushofer@princeton.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2665/history/
    1. INTRODUCTION
One in ten people worldwide lives in extreme poverty. Despite significant achievements in
economic growth, the benefits have been distributed unevenly across countries, with poverty
becoming more rooted in countries affected by conflict, violence, and weak institutions. The
share of the global poor living in fragile and conflict-affected countries increased from 14%
in 2008 to 23% in 2015 and is expected to increase to 50% by 2030 (World Bank, 2018). In
Afghanistan, the share of people living below the national poverty line increased from 38%
in 2011 to 55% in 2016 (Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey, ALCS, 2016). Identifying policies
that reduce the growing gap in fragile and conflict-affected areas is therefore critical for
reducing poverty.1
The poor face multiple constraints that reinforce their socioeconomic status. Low levels of
human capital endowments and limited access to productive inputs constrain their self-
employment and wage labor opportunities. They are frequently exposed to uninsured risks,
both man-made and natural, that are particularly acute in fragile and conflict settings
(Dercon, 2008). Persistent poverty and conflict also place a cognitive load on individuals that
impairs decision-making and may expose households to further economic duress (Mani et al.,
2013; Haushofer & Fehr, 2014; Mullainathan and Shafir, 2013). The ultra-poor in Afghanistan
face many of these constraints simultaneously. In the target group for this study,2 five in six
households have an illiterate household head. Four in five households live below the Afghan
National Poverty Line of USD 30 (nominal) per person per month (USD 112 PPP). 3 Just 1.5%
of households save anything, while two-thirds of households are in debt. Indicators for
women paint an even starker picture: less than 4% of primary women in the household can
read and write, two in three of these women are depressed, and just over half of eligible girls
attend school.
These multiple constraints may give rise to poverty traps, i.e., stable equilibria from which it
is difficult to escape unless multiple constraints are relieved simultaneously. For example,
human capabilities (e.g., skills) and nonhuman capabilities (e.g., capital) could be
complements, and if both are below what is needed for a non-poor equilibrium, cash or other
forms of nonhuman capital alone may not reduce poverty. In such cases, multi-dimensional
interventions would be needed to reduce persistent poverty (Rosenstein-Rodan, 1943;
Murphy et al., 1989; Azarriadis and Stachurski, 2005; Barrett et al, 2019; Buera, Kaboski and

1   World Bank Fragility and Conflict and Violence Overview. Accessed on April 29, 2019 from
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/fragilityconflictviolence/overview.
2 Statistics are derived from the 2016 baseline survey.
3 Throughout the document, monetary amounts are reported in nominal and purchasing power parity (PPP)-adjusted USD

terms. The latter is set at 2018 prices using the Afghanistan CPI and PPP conversion factor from the IMF, unless otherwise
stated. Figures in current USD are converted at the exchange rate for the year the data were collected with the IMF exchange
rates for the corresponding year: 2016 (for baseline data), 2017 (for implementation), and 2018 (for follow-up data). The
exchange rates used are: 1 USD = 67.87 AFN (2016), 1 USD = 68.03 AFN (2017), and 1 USD = 72.08 AFN (2018). All tables
report PPP-adjusted amounts only.

                                                             2
Shin, 2019). Although the theoretical conditions that generate poverty traps or trap-like
outcomes are well studied, rigorous tests of the predictions of poverty trap models have been
constrained by the lack of appropriate data and exogenous variation.
This study contributes to a growing body of evidence aiming to understand how multi-faceted
interventions can help reduce persistent poverty. We test whether a "big-push" intervention
called the "Targeting the Ultra Poor" (TUP) program can reduce poverty in one of the most
difficult settings in the world, Afghanistan, when most recipients are women. By providing a
time-limited package that combines a large investment in a productive asset, access to
savings accounts, temporary cash support, skills training, coaching, and other
complementary services related to education and health, the TUP aims to lift ultra-poor
households out of poverty. We assess the impact of the TUP program implemented in Balkh
province in Afghanistan. In our experiment, 1,219 of the poorest households across 80
villages were randomly assigned through a public lottery to either a treatment or a control
group. Women in treatment households received the one-off package including a transfer of
livestock ­ typically cows, and occasionally sheep and goats worth approximately USD 1,312
PPP (USD 357 nominal), a consumption stipend of USD 54 PPP (USD 15 nominal) delivered in
12 monthly installments, skills training, access to savings accounts and savings
encouragement, facilitation of access to health care services, and coaching through biweekly
visits for one year. Control households did not receive any of the program components. We
study the impact of the program on consumption, food security, assets, finance, time spent
working, income and revenues, mental health, women's empowerment, child health, and
education. We measure these outcomes one year after the end of all program activities, and
two years after the asset transfer.
We find the TUP program causes significant and meaningful improvements in the well-being
of ultra-poor households in the study villages across multiple dimensions. One year after the
end of the program, labor choices of ultra-poor women have expanded, and the well-being
of recipient households and their members has improved. Figure 1 presents a visual summary
of the results in standard deviations (SDs) that allow for comparisons across different
outcomes. Per capita monthly consumption increases by 30% or USD 24 PPP (USD 7 nominal)
with respect to the control group, resulting in significant improvements in an index of food
security (0.49 SD). Psychological well-being improves for both the primary man and primary
woman (0.26 SD and 0.58 SD, respectively). The share of households below the national
poverty line decreases by 20 percentage points from 82% in the control group. 4 Household
savings increase by 2,195% (USD 106 PPP; USD 31 nominal), and indebtedness decreases by
53% (USD 733 PPP; USD 211 nominal). Impacts are driven by an increase in income from
livestock, due to the asset transfer, and a concomitant increase in women's labor
participation by 22 percentage points. The intervention increases time in income-generating
activities for both the primary woman and man: The total time spent working of the primary

4   This figure is estimated with a methodology consistent with the national poverty line estimate.

                                                               3
woman increases by 55%, driven predominantly by more time on livestock-related self-
employment activities.
Figure 1. Summary TUP Impacts Across Main Outcome Groups




Notes. The figure summarizes all primary and secondary treatment effects. Effect sizes are presented in standard
deviations. Details on the outcomes included in the indices are reported in Table A1 of the Online Appendix.


                                                       4
Time devoted to productive activities by the primary man increases by 14%, driven exclusively
by livestock activities. Women's empowerment improves, with an index of 6 indicator groups
increasing by 0.38 SD. The program also improves child health and education outcomes: the
under-five diarrhea rate decreases by 8 percentage points from 51%, and school enrollment
increases by 6 percentage points. We estimate that the benefits of the program are likely to
exceed the cost: A calibration exercise suggests a benefit-cost ratio of 2.3 and an internal rate
of return of 26%, which is large compared to existing TUP studies.
Our study makes three main contributions.
First, we find positive and significant impacts of the TUP program in a fragile and conflict
setting. Existing evidence on similar TUP programs comes largely from stable contexts. 5 In
addition, the impacts reported in the Afghanistan TUP are the largest of any of the TUP pilot
programs evaluated so far. For example, the increase in consumption of 30% is larger than
the 18%-21% increase in Ethiopia, India and Bangladesh three to four years after the asset
transfer (Banerjee et al, 2015; Bandiera et al, 2017). These results point to the potential of
this multi-faceted intervention to reduce poverty even in extremely challenging settings.
Second, the intervention was successful in improving women's labor participation in a
context where gender gaps in access to assets and inputs, and discrimination in paid
employment, are the norm. The results suggest that the program gives previously under-
employed women economic opportunities in a context with important constraints to
women's labor participation. In addition, our study demonstrates that transfers to women
can have large effects, in contrast to some evidence suggesting limited impacts on women's
business outcomes from cash transfers (de Mel et al., 2008). These results, together with the
improvements in women's empowerment, point to the TUP as a program that can reduce
gender gaps as well as achieve its overall objective of reducing extreme poverty particularly
in fragile and conflict-affected areas.
Third, these results add to a small but growing literature showing that addressing multiple
constraints simultaneously can catalyze productive investments and reduce persistent
poverty in a cost-effective way. The impacts on income and consumption observed here
support the potential of multi-faceted interventions to generate long-term reductions in
poverty (Banerjee et al., 2015; Bandiera et al., 2017; Blattman et al., 2014; Blattman et al.,
2016) and, to a more limited extent, improvements in women's empowerment (Bandiera et
al., forthcoming). However, evidence from extremely fragile settings such as Afghanistan
remains scarce. Our results are consistent with the limited evidence on interventions aiming
to generate impacts in poor and fragile states, which suggests that injections of capital can
stimulate self-employment and raise long-term earning potential, often when implemented

5 The results from a TUP program in the Republic of Yemen are forthcoming and will add to the evidence of the program in
fragile and conflict-affected settings.

                                                           5
together with complementary interventions (Blattman and Ralston, 2015). In contrast, it is
unclear that interventions targeting one mechanism can produce similar impacts on poverty.
For TUP programs, Banerjee et al. (2018) study whether providing only a transfer of a
productive asset or access to savings are each sufficient on their own to replicate the
generated impact of the multi-faceted TUP program in Ghana. None of the interventions
were able to replicate these results.
In more stable contexts, cash transfer programs have been successful in reducing poverty
and increasing investments in education and health (Fiszbein and Schady, 2009; Macours and
Vakis, 2019; Araujo, Bosch, Schady 2019; Baird et al., 2011, 2013; Haushofer & Shapiro, 2016).
However, existing evidence suggests they may only have a modest ability to increase incomes
of the recipients and their standard of living after the cash transfer stops (Ikegami, Carter,
Barrett, Janzen, 2019; Araujo, Bosch, and Schady, 2019). Similarly, conditional cash transfer
programs can be an effective tool to increase investments in education and health while
reducing current poverty, but evidence is mixed on whether their impacts persist (Fiszbein
and Schady, 2009; Macours and Vakis, 2019; Araujo, Bosch, Schady 2019). They seem unlikely
to move recipients from one equilibrium to another one (Kraay and McKenzie, 2014).
Relatedly, microfinance interventions have not produced permanent increases in
consumption or income that can support long-term reductions in poverty (Buera, Kaboski,
Shim, 2019; Banerjee et al., 2014). Taken as a whole, the existing evidence is consistent with
our findings that a big-push approach may be appropriate to generate meaningful changes
for ultra-poor households in conflict settings.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the economic constraints facing ultra-
poor households in our sample. Section 3 describes the TUP program. Section 4 lays out the
Design and Methods. Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 presents a cost-benefit analysis
of the program, and Section 7 describes the study limitations. Section 8 concludes.


   2. SOCIOECONOMIC CONDITIONS OF THE ULTRA POOR
We study ultra-poor households in four districts of Afghanistan's Balkh province. To identify
these households, the poorest villages in the province were initially chosen through a
qualitative assessment by the program implementer, a government-owned entity. After this
selection, a Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) was conducted, including a community
poverty wealth ranking and physical verification of the program's eligibility criteria, resulting
in 1,219 ultra-poor households in 80 study villages (details of this process are reported in
Section 4). In addition to the main TUP sample, we selected approximately 20 households
from each study village, randomly drawn from the PRA population census list (excluding TUP-
eligible households), to provide a representative benchmark for the TUP sample. Baseline
and follow-up data were collected from 1,680 households using this approach, which we

                                               6
refer to as the non-ultra-poor (non-UP) sample. For simplicity, we use the abbreviation UP to
refer to the ultra-poor for the remainder of the paper.

Poverty and Socioeconomic Conditions of UP and non-UP Households at Baseline
Overall, the PRA was successful in identifying the poorest households: 80% of the households
identified as UP are below the 2016 national poverty line of USD 112 PPP per person per
month (USD 30 nominal), compared to 57% in the non-UP sample, and 55% at the national
level for the same year (ALCS, 2016). As Panel A in Table 1 shows, 20% of UP households are
women headed, compared to 5% in the non-UP sample and 0.3% in Afghanistan.6 UP
households are worse-off than non-UP households across all dimensions analyzed: Illiteracy
is exceptionally high for both groups but much higher for UP primary women (96%) than non-
UP (90%), while the national average is 80% for adult women. Illiteracy rates for primary men
are also high at 84% and 73% for UP and non-UP households, respectively ­ much higher than
the national average of 51% for adult men.7 School enrollment is 53% for girls and 59% for
boys aged 6-19 in UP households, compared to 54% and 64%, respectively, in non-UP
households. Supply constraints may contribute to this: As Table 2 shows, around half of the
villages have a primary school (56%) or a secondary school (48%).
UP households own significantly fewer assets than non-UP households and low levels of
financial inclusion and high indebtedness are the norm: Having any savings in both groups is
almost non-existent (2%), while UP households are more likely to be indebted (68%) than
non-UP households (52%). Most of the debt for UP households is for consumption smoothing
and health shocks (89%), rather than investment (4%), and comes from informal sources such
as family and friends or grocery stores (88%). Supply-side constraints may partially explain
the low coverage of formal institutions, with only 5% of villages reporting the presence of a
microfinance institution, and none reporting the presence of a bank (Table 2).
UP households also report consistently lower levels of psychological well-being than non-UP
households. UP primary women report lower life satisfaction than women in non-UP
households (5.0 vs. 6.7 points in a 1-10 scale, where 1 indicates very unsatisfied and 10
indicates very satisfied). Using standard cutoffs for depression on the Center for
Epidemiological Studies Depression (CES-D) scale, 69% of women in UP households and 52%
of women in non-UP households report suffering major depression. For reference, UP women
would rank last on life satisfaction in the list of 60 countries for which data are available in
the 2016 World Values Survey. Non-UP women would rank 39th in the same list.8 UP primary
men also report high levels of depression, but much lower than women in the same

6 In this section, all figures for Afghanistan come from the ALCS 2016 and global indicators come from the World Bank Open

Data Indicators, unless otherwise stated.
7 For reference, 17.3% of adult women and 10.2% of adult men worldwide are illiterate. Afghanistan and world figures are

estimated for adults 15 years and over for 2016.
8 Comparison is done with the life satisfaction rating for all women in the sample of 60 countries.


                                                            7
households: 58% of primary men or 11 percentage points less than UP women would be
classified as depressed (not shown).
These results confirm that UP levels of consumption, human capital, asset ownership and
psychological well-being are significantly lower than other households in their community
and among the lowest in the world, indicating that the UP experience multidimensional
poverty in both a relative and an absolute sense.

Labor Markets for UP and non-UP Households
Afghanistan has one of the world's lowest employment-to-population ratios at 41, and 21%
of the working population are considered underemployed (working less time than they are
willing to). Women's labor force participation is low at 27%, and women's unemployment
extremely high at 41%. Therefore, the context is one with limited labor opportunities,
particularly for women.
Using baseline data on labor participation and labor activities directly from the primary
woman in UP and non-UP households and primary man in UP households we find that
engagement in income-generating activities is similar to the national average in our study
villages:9 31% of UP primary women in the control group (UP women) and 25% of non-UP
primary women engage in income-generating activities (Panel B in Table 1). These activities
include self-employment such as livestock rearing, work in own agricultural and non-
agricultural businesses, as well as paid jobs in agriculture, maid services, formal employment,
and other activities. These figures hide high levels of underemployment, with women
working few full-time days in a given month, and also significant differences in activities
across socioeconomic groups. Figure 2 describes the main labor activities in these villages, by
showing the share of hours UP women and men devote to them. This figure reveals that UP
women devote a higher proportion of their time to "other paid jobs" than non-UP women
and substantially less of their working time to own livestock rearing, and other household
businesses (23%) than non-UP primary women (58%). The relative time allocation for UP men
resembles that of UP women; however, UP primary men are more than twice as likely to be
engaged in income-generating activities compared to UP women (69% vs. 31%), and
conditional on working, primary men work almost five times more hours than primary
women, accounting for 14 vs. 3 full-time-day equivalents (not shown). 10




9 For non-UP households these data were only collected at follow-up and reported by the primary woman. We use data on
control UP households (excluding treated UP households) and non-UP at follow-up to describe the labor market
characteristics and analyze differences across socioeconomic conditions in absence of the intervention (UP control vs. non-
UP) as well as across gender (UP men vs. UP women in the control group). Across each productive activity inside and outside
the household, we asked for the number days worked, hours per day worked, and corresponding earnings.
10 A full-time-day equivalent is defined as 8 hours of work


                                                            8
Figure 2. Share of Hours per Activity, by Socioeconomic Status and Gender



       Non-UP
                                 36%                    22%             8%     7%          26%
       Women




     UP Women         17%         6%    19%        2%                          57%




       UP Men    9%         7%         31%                 7%                        46%


                                           Own Livestock Rearing
                                           Own Agriculture or Other Business
                                           Paid Labor: Agriculture
                                           Formal/Salaried Employment
                                           Paid Labor: Other
Notes. The figure compares the share of time spent on different income-earning activities by gender (primary UP
women vs. primary UP men) and across socioeconomic status (primary UP women vs. primary non-UP women).
Results are derived using non-UP and UP control group survey data at follow-up in 2018. Other paid labor includes
maid services, non-agricultural activities outside of the household, and other paid work.


For women, the highest earnings per hour are in formal/salaried work at USD 2.39 PPP per
hour (USD 0.65 nominal), followed by own livestock rearing (USD 1.14 PPP; USD 0.31
nominal), agricultural paid labor (USD 0.98 PPP; USD 0.26 nominal), and other labor (USD
0.78 PPP; USD 0.21 nominal) (Figure 3).11 Since UP women spend the largest share of time
working in the lowest paid activity (other paid jobs), this implies a much lower return on their
time spent in income-generating activities than non-UP women. In addition, formal
employment is accessible to only few women due to low education levels.
Finally, Figure 3 also reveals important differential returns by gender across activities within
UP households. Primary men earn more per hour in all activities outside the household: For
other paid labor ­ the activity with the highest share of time spent working ­ the gender gap
is the largest, where women receive USD 0.38 for every USD 1 men receive for returns to
their work in this activity. For agricultural activities outside the household, women earn USD
0.53 per every USD 1 men receive, and USD 0.83 per every USD 1 men receive for
formal/salaried employment. Why do UP households, and women in general, not allocate

11Results reflect hourly earnings for the main activity groups over all individuals with non-missing earnings and positive
hours in these activities. For livestock rearing we compute hourly earnings dividing household total earnings (revenue
minus input costs) by the hours worked for all adult members in the household for the last four weeks. We did not collect
as detailed data for agricultural businesses, with more seasonal revenues and costs.

                                                                9
their time (or more time) to the activities with the highest earnings? One reason may be
limited access to inputs and assets (e.g., high-return livestock) and lower human capital
endowments (i.e., salaried/formal employment) among UP women. For instance, more non-
UP than UP households own cows (28% vs. 9%) and fewer own chickens (26% vs. 40%). Non-
UP households also hold a larger number of animals per type (not shown). The TUP program
aims to relax these constraints.


Figure 3. Earnings per Hour for Main Income-generating Activities, by Gender (USD PPP)
                                                      Men            Women


                                                                                     2.03
                  Paid Labor: Other
                                                       0.78


       Formal/Salaried Employment                                                                    2.89
                                                                                             2.39


             Paid Labor: Agr iculture                                          1.85
                                                              0.98


         Own Livestock Rearing (HH)                              1.14


                                        -    0.50      1.00           1.50    2.00          2.50    3.00    3.50

                                                                      USD PPP per hour

Notes. This figure is derived using non-UP and UP control group survey data at follow-up in 2018. It presents earnings
per hour in different activities by gender. Other paid labor includes maid services, non-agricultural activities outside
of the household, and other paid work. All monetary amounts are PPP-adjusted USD terms, set at 2018 prices using
the Afghanistan CPI and PPP conversion factor from the IMF, unless otherwise stated.



    3. THE TUP PROGRAM
The TUP program combines the transfer of a productive asset with structured training,
mentoring, a basic cash stipend, and other complementary services for a defined period. The
original TUP program was designed and implemented by BRAC in Bangladesh. The program
targets UP women who can manage an enterprise but have no productive assets in the
household and are not connected to a microfinance institution. The aim is to help them move
out of extreme poverty and ultimately be able to engage in formal financial opportunities.
The Afghanistan TUP program we study here was implemented under the World Bank-
supported "Access to Finance" program. The program covered six provinces in Afghanistan
between 2015 and 2018, supporting 7,500 households. The impact evaluation focuses on
Balkh province, where 1,500 households were supported under the program. The

                                                          10
intervention was implemented by the "Microfinance Investment Support Facility for
Afghanistan" (MISFA), which is an independent apex organization, owned by the
government, which supports a number of partners in implementing social development
activities, including microfinance and TUP programs.12 In the study villages, the
implementation was conducted by "Coordination for Humanitarian Assistance" (CHA), a local
NGO, following a standard process. To identify UP households, the program included village-
and household-level selection processes. Program staff first qualitatively identified the
poorest villages in the province subject to having availability of veterinary services, financial
institutions and social services, and being secure and accessible. Once the villages were
selected, a Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) was conducted to identify poor households.
First, households were gathered in a community meeting place. A representative from the
implementing NGO, together with a member of the Community Development Council (village
leadership committee) led a community wealth ranking exercise that assigned all households
in the village to the categories "well-off", "better-off", "poor", and "ultra-poor". The exercise
was rescheduled if fewer than 70% of households were present. Disputes were facilitated
during the meeting. The final "ultra-poor" list was verified by the NGO through a short survey,
and this was followed by a final verification by MISFA of the eligible households submitted by
the NGO. The final selection of TUP recipients was based on meeting at least three of the
following six criteria, checked during the verification:
     1. Household is financially dependent on women's domestic work or begging;
     2. Household owns less than 20 decimals (800 square meters) of land or is living in a
        cave;
     3. Targeted woman is younger than 50 years of age;
     4. There are no active adult men income earners in the household;
     5. Children of school age are working for pay; and
     6. Household does not own any productive assets, based on a pre-defined list used by
        MISFA.
Once identified, the UP households received the following program components:
     1. Transfer of a productive asset in the form of livestock (e.g., cows, goats);
     2. A monthly cash transfer/stipend (USD 54 PPP or USD 15 nominal per month for 12
        months);
     3. Basic training on livestock rearing and entrepreneurship;
     4. A "health subsidy" which includes the provision of a basic hygiene kit and
        reimbursement of up to USD 81 PPP or USD 22 nominal for medical expenses or latrine
        improvements;
     5. Fortnightly "mentoring visits" by social organizers, and veterinary services to:
           a. Evaluate the asset and related outputs and recommend follow-up actions.
                Depending on the evaluation of the asset, additional support in the form of

12 MISFA is established as a limited liability non-profit company whose sole shareholder is the Ministry of Finance of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

                                                           11
             food supplements or an asset replacement were options for the program
             participants; and
          b. Promote activities encouraging improved behavior across a range of
             dimensions (health, education, women's empowerment, financial inclusion,
             and social cohesion/community support) by providing advice and linking
             households directly to education, health, and financial institutions where
             appropriate. This included helping households to apply for national ID (Tazkira)
             cards if they did not yet have one.
The program applied a sequenced approach. The recipient received support for their
livelihood selection, which included an intensive and repeated consultation between MISFA,
the partner field staff, and the UP women, so that participants could make an informed choice
among different enterprise options. The livestock asset was worth USD 1,136 ­ 1,488 PPP
(USD 309 ­ 405 nominal) at time of delivery and was replaced if it became sick or died. The
consumption stipend aimed to support the household with basic food needs, initially to
replace the potential forgone income or productive time that the TUP recipient spent
learning about and initiating their business rather than attending to their usual duties. Once
the household began work on their enterprise, they received follow-up visits on a biweekly
basis from program staff to provide guidance on both business and social issues. After 12
months of continued support, households were assessed on a set of performance indicators
and formally "graduated," after which no further support was provided through the program.
While the program is similar to the standard TUP program model, a few important differences
exist (a cross-country comparison of intervention components is reported in Table A2 of the
Online Appendix):
   1. Coaching support lasts for 12 months instead of 18 ­ 24 months.
   2. A health subsidy is included that does not exist in other programs.
   3. The focus of asset provision is on cows rather than smaller livestock assets like goats,
      pigs and chickens.
   4. Asset values transferred are larger than other programs where data exist.


The program variations were decided by MISFA based on earlier pilots conducted in Bamyan
Province, where the program attributes were finetuned to address local constraints.


   4. DESIGN AND METHODS
Experimental Design and Sample
We use a household-level randomized experimental design to estimate the causal effect of
the intervention on socioeconomic outcomes of UP households. The evaluation sample
comes from 80 villages in four districts of Balkh province (Dehdadi, Dawlatabad, Nahr-e Shahi
and Khulm). The participatory wealth ranking was conducted in all study villages of Balkh
                                             12
province to identify the eligible population. This exercise started with a wealth ranking in 100
villages performed by CHA in partnership with village leaders, yielding a population of 26,957
households that were split into four community-defined categories: well-off (6%), better-off
(16%), poor (34%), and ultra-poor (44%). This was followed by a verification survey,
administered by CHA, to measure the six qualifying criteria for being eligible for the TUP
program listed above. This removed 85% of the households identified as UP from the wealth
ranking exercise. MISFA then completed a final verification exercise, removing 28% of this
group whose initial eligibility was overturned due to reporting inconsistencies. This resulted
in an eligible group of 1,235 households, or slightly under 5% of the population in our study
area.
A baseline survey was conducted among all eligible households from February to April 2016,
before a public lottery to identify TUP participants took place in May 2016. The randomization
was stratified by PRA group by holding separate lotteries for each. Most villages (51) had one
PRA group, while larger villages were split into multiple PRA groups which were typically
defined by the feeder area of a masjid (mosque). PRA groups with one TUP-eligible household
were removed from the study due to the infeasibility of a lottery in these cases, effectively
dropping 16 study households from 16 PRA groups. This resulted in 133 PRA groups and
subsequent lotteries across our study sample. Then 1,219 UP households in 80 villages were
randomly assigned into one treatment group (491 households) and one control group (728
households). Starting in May 2016, the treatment group received the full TUP package as
described above, and the control group did not receive any of the components. The program
lasted for 12 months from the time of asset transfer. A follow-up survey was conducted from
July to October 2018, approximately 1 year after program completion and 2 years after the
asset transfer. In this study, we present estimates of the impact of the program on UP
households, comparing the treatment and control groups at the first follow-up. Figure 4
provides a graphical representation of how the final study sample was generated. 13




13 To avoid the potential for data mining generating spurious relationships, we registered the trial in the American
Economic Association Randomized Controlled Trial registry and prepared a pre-analysis plan, pre-specifying all primary
and secondary outcomes and measurement approaches: https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2665. All de-
identified data will be made available on the World Bank's Microdata Catalog and coding files used to generate the results
in this report will be available on GitHub. The study also has the Institutional Review Board (IRB) clearance from Princeton
University and the Ministry of Public Health in Afghanistan.

                                                            13
Figure 4. Breakdown of the Study Sample
                                          4 out of 15 districts selected
                                                in Balkh Province

                                           100 villages and 200 PRAs
                                           selected in study districts


                                         26,957 households included in
                                             wealth ranking exercise


  Ultra-poor:            Poor:                                                    Better-off:         Well-off:
 11,859 (44%)         9,121 (34%)                                                4,394 (16%)         1,583 (6%)

 Eligible after
  PMT: 1,953

 Eligible after
     MISFA
 verification:
     1,235

                       Included in
                     lottery: 1,219
Not included in
                    households in
 lottery: 16*
                    80 villages and
                        133 PRAs

                      Control: 728            Treatment: 491

                       Surveyed in               Surveyed in
                     follow-up: 689            follow-up: 458
                          (95%)                     (93%)


Notes. The figure depicts the selection process that led to the final sample sizes and response rates. 16 households
were not included in the lottery and assigned to treatment (*) because there was only 1 household eligible for the
program in the PRA.




                                                        14
UP household survey: A comprehensive assessment at baseline (spring 2016) and a follow-
up survey (summer 2018) were conducted to measure primary and secondary outcomes of
interest for participating households in the treatment and control groups. This instrument
was divided into two parts: Lady of the Household (LHH; approximately 2 hours) or primary
women, and the Man Head of the Household (MHHH; approximately 45 mins). The woman
in the household with the most knowledge and decision power completed the LHH survey.
When she was not also the head of the household, the MHHH survey was administered to
the man head. Where no lady of the household existed, the men household heads completed
the LHH survey modules. They are referred in the analysis as primary woman and primary
man, respectively.
Saliva collection/Cortisol tests: Saliva samples were collected to measure cortisol levels, a
neurobiological marker of stress, at follow-up, using SaliCap tubes. A single saliva sample was
collected at the end of each survey from both the primary woman and the primary man (if
there was one). All samples were kept at 4°C for no longer than necessary before freezing
them at or below -20°C. The samples were then shipped to Dresden Lab Services (Germany)
where they were assayed for cortisol using a standard chemiluminescent immunoassay.
Village and market surveys: Additionally, two shorter instruments were used: One for village
leaders to record basic village-level data such as infrastructure, violence, and other village
shocks, and the other at the district market level to collect data on food prices for calculating
consumption expenditures from quantities. Field supervisors visited the largest market in
each of the four districts and collected sales prices for all food items found in the household
consumption survey. These instruments were administered in parallel with the household
surveys.
Primary Outcome Measures
We generate primary outcome measures as follows:
   1. Consumption: Total value of food for the last 7 days, and non-food expenditures in
      the past month, where non-food expenditures includes personal and household
      items, education and medical expenses, household repairs, social expenses (e.g.
      weddings, funerals and other ceremonies), and temptation goods. Non-food item
      values are estimated by household respondents. Food values use the district market
      price from the market survey where it exists, or the median market price from the
      surveys conducted in the remaining districts otherwise.
   2. Assets: An index generated using principal component analysis of number and type of
      productive and household assets (excluding land/property), a proxy for wealth
      following Filmer & Pritchett (2001).
   3. Financial inclusion index: A standardized index combining the following variables: (i)
      primary woman knows different places to save; (ii) anyone in the household has a
      formal savings account; (iii) household members can access formal credit if needed;


                                               15
        (iv) household has saved in last 4 weeks; (v) household savings in last 4 weeks; (vi)
        household total savings.
     4. Psychological well-being index: A psychological well-being index is computed
        separately for women and men as the standardized weighted average of scores on the
        Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CES-D) 7-point scale (Radloff 1977), the
        World Values Survey (WVS) questions on happiness and life satisfaction, Cohen's 4-
        item stress scale (Cohen, Kamarck, and Mermelstein 1983), and the log of cortisol
        levels obtained through saliva samples adjusted for confounders. 14 We adapted some
        questions in these indicators to the social, cultural and religious norms in the country.
        For this we used a combination of extensive piloting, and topic and local expertise
        from research members with expertise in the area and in Afghanistan.
     5. Women's empowerment index: We consider two indices. The first is a standardized
        index combining indicator variables for whether the women's decision was taken into
        consideration and/or followed on household finances (credit and savings) and
        expenditure decisions (food, household repairs, clothing, land, property and other
        high-value expenditures). This set is consistent with other studies and was pre-
        specified in our pre-analysis plan (PAP). The second is a standardized index with
        additional indicators on voice and agency. This broader index was not pre-specified,
        but was constructed to follow internationally agreed standards from the United
        Nations and Klugman et al (2014). This second set includes the original indicator plus
        five other dimensions: (i) women's participation in decisions on children's
        investments; (ii) women's participation in decisions related to their own fertility, time
        use, and mobility to work outside home and open a business, as well as effective
        access to inputs and resources including ownership of a mobile phone and having
        savings, loans or financial assets in their name and separate from others; (iii) women's
        participation in income-generating activities (participation in paid income-generating
        activities and being the owner or manager of a self-employment enterprise); (iv)
        aspirations for daughters (educational attainment and marriage age, and school
        enrollment for school-age girls); and (v) political involvement and social capital,
        including whether the primary woman has a Tazkira (ID) card; is a member of a
        political party; attended village meetings; and approached village leaders about a
        village issue. This last indicator set is usually included as a separate index in other
        studies and was originally a separate outcome in our PAP; however, based on the
        framework and internationally agreed indicator on empowerment we adopted, we
        include them as part of the broader women's empowerment index.


14We take the residuals of an OLS regression of the log-transformed cortisol levels on dummies for having ingested food,
tea, nicotine through either smoking a cigarette or tobacco or through chewing tobacco or using naswar, or medications in
the two hours preceding the interview, for having performed vigorous physical activity on the day of the interview, and for
the time elapsed since waking, rounded to the next full hour.

                                                            16
   5. Time spent working: Total time spent working in the past 7 days in all occupations
      (agriculture, livestock, household chores and other paid and unpaid work), separately
      for the primary man and woman of the household.

Design Integrity
Baseline Balance
We test for baseline balance using the same empirical specification used for the outcome
analysis, which compares baseline treatment and control households, controlling for
randomization stratification (133 PRA dummy variables) to increase precision. Table A3 of
the Online Appendix presents these comparisons. We find no statistically significant or
economically meaningful differences across groups for all main outcome indicators at
baseline. Across 23 variables that could influence our primary outcomes of interest, we
observe statistically significant differences for land ownership and engagement in livestock
activities at the 5% level. Treatment households are 2 percentage points less likely to engage
in livestock production (control: 5%) and are significantly more likely to own land and/or
dwellings based on a principal component score aggregating these assets. While the
differential livestock activity at baseline may result in an underestimate of treatment effects,
the significantly higher land ownership could overestimate effect sizes if this is an important
capital input for generating value from the program. To assess whether these imbalances
influence any of the main results, we include these variables as covariates in a robustness
regression for main outcomes, presented in the Online Appendix. Results with and without
these covariates do not differ in sign or significance.
Compliance
We track monitoring data collected by CHA/MISFA on all TUP recipients throughout
implementation and include an extensive compliance module in the follow-up survey of all
treatment and control households. Table A4 of the Online Appendix summarizes the
treatment compliance results, as reported in the survey. We find that the program was
successful in delivering its components according to randomized assignment. At follow-up,
97% of treatment households report being aware of the TUP program, compared to 51% in
the control group. Among the aware households, the majority indicate having received any
of the program inputs in the treatment group (99.5%), compared to only 3% in the control
group. Respondents reported receiving livestock assets in 96% of treatment and 1.5% of
control households. All other intervention components had similar levels of compliance.
Independent monitoring data from CHA/MISFA report similar levels of compliance, with 98%
of treatment households represented on their official record of households receiving
support, compared to 0.1% of control households. The data thus suggest high compliance
with randomization assignment and successful delivery of the program components. This is
notable given the challenging implementation context.

                                              17
Attrition
The lottery assigned 491 households to treatment and 728 households to control. The follow-
up survey was successfully completed among 458 treatment households (93%) and 689
control households (95%). The difference in attrition rates across treatment and control
groups is not statistically significant. 15

Data analysis
Pre-analysis Plan
To present a comprehensive overview of impacts on a large set of variables while balancing
this with the threat of false positives, we registered the trial and published a PAP before
analysis began.16 The results presented in this report follow the variable construction and
econometric specifications defined in the PAP, with a few exceptions. First, we include an
index generated through principal component analysis of number and type of assets, rather
than value of assets, since we did not collect asset values at follow-up due to a questionnaire
design oversight. Second, we present both the pre-specified measure of women's
empowerment (aligned with other studies) along with a measure that incorporates a broader
set of empowerment dimensions to highlight the differences in results. Third, conditional
average treatment effects compare bottom, middle, and top thirds of the distribution for
each respective outcome of interest, rather than median splits, to better understand the
distribution. Beyond these deviations, all other analysis follows the PAP.
Econometric Specification
Since treatment compliance with randomization was not perfect, we use the intention-to-
treat (ITT) estimator ­ simply, the difference between average outcomes across treatment
and control groups at follow-up. The basic specification is:

                                        =  +  + =1  +  (1)


Here,  is the outcome of interest for household i at follow-up,  is a dummy variable equal
to 1 if household i is assigned to receive treatment and 0 otherwise.  is the estimate of the
average effect of the TUP intervention at follow-up. Since randomization is stratified by
community, we follow Bruhn & McKenzie (2008) and include  , which is a dummy variable
equal to one if household i comes from community/PRA group j (of a total of 133 PRA groups).
For household-level variables, standard errors are not clustered. Where data on multiple
individuals within the same household are collected (e.g., school enrollment), standard errors
are clustered at the household level.



15 We define response rates based on households with a complete LHH survey. We experienced an 88% response rate for
the MHHH survey, however all main outcomes can still be estimated without this survey.
16 https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2665


                                                        18
Quantile and Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
We estimate quantile treatment effects using the following specification:

                                    () = 1 (| = 1) -  (| = 0) (2)

where  (| = 1) is the -th quantile of potential outcomes  under treatment. This
specification assumes full compliance with the random assignment to estimate the
treatment-on-the-treated effects. Given the nearly universal program compliance measured
for the TUP, this approximation is justifiable to simplify analysis without risk of bias.
To measure differential impacts by baseline characteristics, we estimate Conditional Average
Treatment Effects (CATE) with parametric specifications, due to the sample size and common
support requirements of non-parametric specifications for subgroup analyses. At the risk of
misspecification, these assumptions increase power and allow for identification of effects
without full common support. The specification we use for these estimates is:
                                                
                        =  +  + 2      2
                                =1   + =1     + =1  +  (3)

Here,  is a binary indicator for each of the baseline variables listed below, defined based
on their empirical distribution: 1 (2 ) identifies the middle (top) third of the baseline
distribution in our analysis. The parameters of interests are then  for the CATE on the
bottom third,  + 1 for the CATE on the middle third, and  + 2 for the CATE on the top
third of the baseline distribution. We measure CATEs using consumption, assets PCA, the
psychological well-being index, and psychological traits associated with an "entrepreneurial
personality".17
Multiple Hypothesis Testing
The analysis covers multiple outcomes, which increases the likelihood of generating false
positives. In addition to using a PAP to guide analysis and computing index variables as
described above, all confidence intervals for our primary outcomes (including quantile and
conditional average treatment effects) also control for the family-wise error rate at the 95-
percent level using the step-down bootstrap algorithm of Romano and Wolf (2010). We
present the adjusted p-values {in braces}. For all other outcomes, we report naïve p-values
[in brackets].


     5. RESULTS
We find large and statistically significant effects across all primary pre-specified outcomes.
The primary goal of the TUP program ­ increasing consumption ­ is achieved after one year
of the conclusion of the program: per-capita consumption in the treatment group increases
by 30% relative to the control group, an index of food security increases by 0.49 SD, while

17We use six main psychological traits collected: Impulsiveness, tenacity, polychronicity (multitasking), locus of control,
achievement, and power motivation, following Mel et al. (2009).

                                                            19
indices for livestock assets and household assets increase by 1.06 SD and 0.36 SD,
respectively. These impacts are achieved through a 55% increase in total time spent working
of the primary woman, driven predominantly by more time on livestock-related self-
employment activities. Livestock-related household revenues and savings increase, and
household indebtedness decreases.
We also observe improvements across multiple well-being indicators for individual members
of the recipient households, including psychological well-being, child health and education
and women's empowerment. An index of psychological well-being increases by 0.58 SD and
0.26 SD for the primary woman and man in the household, respectively. Child health,
measured by diarrhea in the oldest child under five, improves: The rate of diarrhea in children
under five in the past two weeks falls by 16%. School enrollment of school-age boys and girls
increases by 4.6 and 7.2 percentage points, respectively. An index of women's empowerment
including indicators for agency, economic opportunities, aspirations for daughters and
political involvement increases by 0.38 SD. Figure 1 presents a visual summary of these
impacts in standard deviations.
These results are consistent with the underlying theory, and international evidence, that the
TUP program helps UP households overcome multiple constraints simultaneously and
provides a "big push" to improve their well-being and possibly put them on a path out of
extreme poverty. It is worth emphasizing that although these impacts are large, due to the
low baseline outcomes of the UP households in Afghanistan, they are modest in absolute
terms. For instance, the increase in consumption is equivalent to USD 24 PPP (USD 7 nominal)
per capita per month, and the increase in time spent working for the primary woman is 2.3
additional full-time equivalent days a month compared to 4.2 full-time days women spend in
working a month in the control group.
In the next sections we discuss the variable-by-variable results for each outcome group,
illustrating which variables drive the results within each group and thus suggesting potential
mechanisms. We elaborate further on what these results mean in economic terms.

Results by Outcome Group
Consumption
Table 3 presents the impact on monthly per capita consumption and poverty. Monthly per
capita consumption increases by USD 24 PPP (USD 7 nominal, FWER-corrected p-value <
0.0005) or 30% of the control group mean of USD 81 PPP (USD 22 nominal). This increase is
explained almost entirely by an increase in food consumption. Total monthly per capita food
expenditure increases by USD 21 PPP (USD 6 nominal, p-value < 0.0005), which represents an
increase of 40% relative to USD 53 PPP (USD 14 nominal) in the control group (not shown).
Non-food expenditure increases are small at USD 3 PPP (USD 1 nominal, p-value 0.274) and


                                              20
not statistically significant (not shown). The impact on consumption leads to a reduction in
the share of households below the national poverty line by 20 percentage points from 82%
in the control group (p-value < 0.0005).
Food Security
In line with increases in consumption, we find large impacts on a food security index, with an
increase of 0.49 standard deviations (p-value < 0.0005). As Table 3 shows, we find significant
improvements across all measures considered. The likelihood that all household members
are regularly eating at least two meals a day increases by 11 percentage points (15%, p-value
< 0.0005). The number of households where no adult skips or cuts the size of their meals
increases by 23 percentage points (53%, p-value < 0.0005). Similarly, we find 20 percentage
points fewer households where children skip or cut the size of their meals (33%, p-value <
0.0005). Although we do not directly measure food diversity and calorie-based measures of
food security in this study, specific food consumption items indicate that higher-nutrient
foods like dairy, nuts, vegetables and meat increase relatively more than staple foods,
suggesting that both the quantity and quality of food intake may be increasing (not shown).
Finance
Financial inclusion improves relatively more than any other outcome measured, with an index
of financial inclusion (savings behavior, account holdings, and access to credit if needed)
increasing by 2.38 SD (FWER-corrected p-value < 0.0005) compared to the control group. This
is partly explained by a low level of financial inclusion among control households, and is
consistent with the structural focus of the program on supporting financial engagement, from
helping open bank accounts to promoting savings behavior. Table 5 presents the impacts
across all financial inclusion measures. Savings-related behavior shows the largest relative
change. While almost no control households have access to a formal bank account (1%), this
increases by 28 percentage points (p-value < 0.0005) among TUP recipients. Similarly, the
likelihood that a household saved anything in the last four weeks increases by 26 percentage
points (p-value < 0.0005) from a control group level of 2%, and savings over this time
increased by USD 70 PPP (USD 19 nominal, p-value < 0.0005) in the treatment group from
USD 4 PPP (USD 1 nominal) among control households. Overall savings increases by USD 106
PPP (USD 31 nominal, p-value < 0.0005) from USD 5 PPP (USD 1 nominal).
Treatment households are 12 percentage points (p-value < 0.0005) more likely to say that
they can access formal credit if needed, compared to 2% of control households. Despite this,
the likelihood that a household has an outstanding loan is 14 percentage points lower in the
treatment group (-24%, p-value < 0.0005) (Table A5 of the Online Appendix), and the total
amount of outstanding loans almost halves (-USD 733 PPP or -USD 199 nominal, p-value
0.001). The reduction in borrowing is driven by a reduction in consumption-based loans,
which decreases by 15 percentage points (-29%, p-value < 0.0005) (Table A5). To better


                                             21
understand the source and use of loans, we explore conditional outcomes among the set of
households that have an existing loan, although given the differential selection across
treatment and control, these findings should be interpreted cautiously (not shown). Among
control households that have an existing loan, loans are predominantly used for
health/emergencies (58%) or food and essential items (64%). Treatment household loans are
21 percentage points (p-value < 0.0005) less likely to be for health or other emergencies.
There is limited evidence of a change in loan source across groups; however, the various
indicators measured are consistent with a slight increase in the reliance on formal versus
informal loan sources among treatment households. Nonetheless, informal sources remain
by far the most common source of lending across both groups.
Assets
We study the program's impact on the accumulation of durable and productive assets,
focusing on livestock. For durable assets, we use an index estimated through principal
component analysis (PCA) to generate a proxy wealth index (Filmer & Pritchett, 2001). As
Table 3 shows, we find an increase in the index of durable assets by 0.36 SD (FWER-corrected
p-value < 0.0005). The value of livestock assets increases by USD 839 PPP (USD 227 nominal,
FWER-corrected p-value < 0.0005), which represents an increase of 315% with respect to USD
267 PPP (USD 72 nominal) in the control group. A higher proportion of UP households in the
treatment group hold any livestock compared to UP households in the control group (88% vs.
57%; Table A6 in the Online Appendix). In addition, more treatment households hold higher-
return assets, starting with cows (58% vs. 9%), followed by sheep (32% vs. 15%), goats (17%
vs. 8%), and chickens (38% vs. 40%) (not shown). While large and significant, the impact on
livestock assets value is lower than the original value of the livestock transfer, suggesting that
households may be reducing their asset base over time. This is consistent with findings by
Banerjee et al. (2015), who show a similar phenomenon across six countries initially, although
with no further decline three years after the asset transfer. This result may also be explained
by measurement errors in estimating the value of households' asset holdings, and could also
mask heterogeneous impacts, where a portion of the households consume part of the assets
while others accumulate over time.
Time Use and Labor supply
One of the main channels through which the intervention is intended to work is an increase
in labor supply through self-employment activities. As Table 4 shows, the total time spent
working by the primary woman increases by 2.3 full-time-day equivalents per month (FWER-
corrected p-value < 0.0005). This reflects a 55% increase relative to the control mean of 4.2
full-time-day equivalents per month. This increase is driven by increases in time spent
working by 2.7 days (p-value < 0.0005) in livestock self-employment, 0.4 days (p-value 0.046)
in maid services, and 0.3 days (p-value 0.025) in other non-agricultural self-employment
businesses. In contrast, time spent working in other paid work decreases by 1 day (p-value

                                               22
0.002). This also implies that livestock rearing has become an important part of the time
spent in income-generating activities for UP women, replacing other time spent working in
lower-return activities, increasing their total time in productive activities inside and outside
the household.
Overall, women's labor participation ­ measured as market work, self-employment, or job
searching in the previous two weeks ­ increases by 22 percentage points (p-value < 0.0005)
from 35% in the control group (Table 4). These results suggest that the program gives
previously under-employed women economic opportunities in a context where women's
labor participation is extremely low. This increase in labor supply does not seem to come at
the expense of an excessive workload overall, as the time spent in all productive activities,
including household chores, accounts for 12 full-time-day equivalents in a month in the
control group. Therefore, the additional 2.3 days devoted to livestock self-employment
activities leave primary women in the household with 14.3 days spent in market and non-
market activities inside and outside the household.
The right panel in Table 4 shows that total time spent working by primary men increases by
1.6 full-time-day equivalents per month (FWER-corrected p-value 0.119), or 14% from 11.6
days in the control group, with time spent working in livestock self-employment activities
increasing by 1.8 days (p-value < 0.0005). This is an important result, given that primary men
seem to be under-employed (in terms of time use). Their total labor participation does not
increase, but their time devoted to productive activities does. Overall, these results suggest
that the program improved income-generating activities where both the primary woman and
the primary man contribute.
Income and Revenues from Productive Activities
Total monthly household income and revenues from productive activities increases by USD
69 PPP (USD 19 nominal, p-value 0.007) from USD 307 PPP in the control group (Table 5). This
increase is mostly driven by an increase of 281% in revenues from livestock activities (p-value
< 0.0005). Other changes are smaller and not statistically significant: revenues from
agriculture decrease by 35% (p-value 0.346), and revenues from non-agricultural businesses
and paid labor income for all adults increase by 5% (p-value 0.684) and 8% (p-value 0.389),
respectively.
Increases in revenues from livestock come mostly from an increase in livestock sales of USD
32 PPP (USD 9 nominal, p-value 0.002) compared to the control group, followed by increases
in the value of milk produced by USD 23 PPP (USD 6 nominal, p-value < 0.0005), and yogurt
by USD 7 PPP (USD 2 nominal, p-value < 0.0005) (Table A6 in the Online Appendix). Since
these figures reflect the revenues during the four weeks preceding the follow-up survey, our
measures of income and revenues may miss long-term cycles and important smoothing
dynamics of consumption. However, these results indicate that livestock sales are an

                                              23
important source of income. To what extent reproduction of the livestock vs. decrease in the
value of the assets due to liquidation for consumption occurs is an important question to
assess the sustainability of these impacts in the longer term.
Psychological Well-Being
Table 6 shows the impact of the program on the psychological well-being of the primary
woman and man. The treatment effects on both indices are statistically significant and large,
both in absolute terms and compared to other programs. The index increases by 0.58 SD
(FWER-corrected p-value < 0.0005) for the primary woman and 0.26 SD (FWER-corrected p-
value 0.010) for the primary man. An important difference with other studies stems from the
use of a more comprehensive set of tools to measure psychological well-being. We use an
index including six measures: five subjective indicators and one objective measure. The
subjective measures include self-reported life satisfaction (WVS), self-esteem, depression
(CES-D), self-reported happiness (WVS), and stress (Cohen). The objective measure is salivary
cortisol. Other studies of TUP programs typically measure well-being through a smaller set of
indicators. Table 6 shows the breakdown of the individual indicators; the results are
consistent with the overall index. For primary women all indicators of psychological well-
being improved: All subjective measures improved and were statistically significant, while the
objective measure of salivary cortisol showed a decrease (improved), but the change was not
statistically significant. For primary men, all indicators improved, although cortisol and self-
esteem were not statistically significant.
Women's Empowerment
We present two sets of impacts on women's empowerment, as described in Section 4. Our
first index of women's empowerment, focused on household finances and expenditures,
increases by 0.09 SD (p-value 0.140), which is not statistically significant, in line with results
in other countries, which have largely failed to find treatment effects in this dimension across
all countries studied (Table 7).18 One possible reason for this lack of measured impact is that
this measure may be limited in scope. Our second index of women's empowerment, including
additional dimensions, increases significantly by 0.38 SD (FWER-corrected p-value < 0.0005)
compared to the control group, indicating large impacts when other dimensions of women's
empowerment are considered. These results are driven by increases in three dimensions: (i)
an increase of 0.34 SD (p-value < 0.0005) in the index measuring women's participation in
decisions about their own body and time, including fertility and mobility (time use, finding a
job outside, opening a business), and effective access to inputs and resources including
ownership of a mobile phone and having savings or loans; (ii) an increase of 0.29 SD (p-value
< 0.0005) in the index on participation in income-generating activities, including paid income-
generating activities and being the owner or manager of a self-employment enterprise; and

18Banerjee et al. (2015) find impacts on women's empowerment in their 2-year endline but it is mostly driven by one
country (Pakistan) and in the 3-year endline, estimates are not statistically significant for each country.

                                                        24
(iii) a 0.33 SD increase (p-value < 0.0005) in the index on political involvement and social
capital, which includes having an ID, attending community meetings, and reaching out to a
community leader. The two additional indices reported smaller positive increases, both
statistically insignificant: The index on children's investment decisions (education, health,
marriage) increases by 0.08 SD (p-value 0.157) and the index on social norms ­ measured
through aspirations for daughters in education and enrollment ­ decreases by 0.01 (SD p-
value 0.906).
Two things are apparent from these results. First, they are mainly driven by changes in
indicators related to economic opportunities and access to inputs, which is expected given
the focus of the intervention. However, while participating in income-generating activities
and having a financial account in their own name are impacted positively, and are highly
linked to components of the TUP intervention, interestingly, outcomes not targeted, such as
ownership of a mobile phone, having a paid job, and owning or managing a self-employment
entrepreneurial activity by the primary woman are also affected. These latter indicators are
directly linked to increased women's empowerment in the literature (World Bank, 2011;
World Bank, 2018). Second, the dimensions less affected are those on which the control
group is already doing well. In particular, women in the control group report high
participation in household finances and expenditures, children's investment decisions (70 -
80%), and have high aspirations for daughters: they report wanting high levels of education
for them (14 years), largely think that education will help them get a better job or make them
wiser (95%), and want them to marry when they are adults (76%). Therefore, these indicators,
as reported by primary women, seem to have less room for improvement (we did not ask
these questions of the primary man). Conversely, the variables with larger impacts are those
in which women report lower levels of participation or access. For instance, only 30% of
primary women in the control group report having a mobile phone, 15% report having a
financial account or assets in their name, 31% report participating in any paid job, and 6%
report owning or managing an entrepreneurial activity (Tables A7-A9 of the Online
Appendix).
Child Health and Education
The program has the potential to affect child health and education both directly and
indirectly. First, the program helped link households to healthcare facilities and schools, and
provided a health stipend and hygiene kit with the objective of improving health and
education outcomes directly. Second, improved labor opportunities and income for adult
household members may reduce the opportunity cost of children's school attendance, and
thus increase educational outcomes indirectly. Table 8 presents health and education results.
Control group levels of child health and education are extremely low. The oldest child under
five is reported to experience diarrhea 51% of the time over the last two weeks. School
enrollment is 53% for girls and 56% for boys. Relative to these low control group values, we

                                              25
find a reduction of 8 percentage points (16%, p-value 0.044) in caregiver-reported diarrhea
rates for the oldest child under five. Overall school enrollment increases by 6 percentage
points (p-value 0.007), and absenteeism decreases by 5 percentage points (p-value 0.002)
(not shown). When separated by gender, we observe a 7-percentage point increase (13%, p-
value 0.013) in school enrollment for boys and a 5-percentage point increase (9%, p-value
0.093) for girls. Of those who are enrolled, TUP-household boys have 6 percentage points
(38%, p-value 0.001) fewer days missed at school, whereas the impact on girls' absenteeism
is small and not statistically significant. These results are in line with existing evidence in
South Asia illustrating that, because of the future potential earnings for boys, their
opportunity cost for not attending school is higher than for girls, making it likely that boys are
given the opportunity to access schools before girls (Drèze & Kingdon, 2001).

Quantile and Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

The TUP impacts are likely to be heterogeneous for multiple reasons: (i) theory predicts that
impacts will vary depending on how close households are to the unstable equilibrium of a
poverty trap (if such a trap exists); (ii) individual variation in participant characteristics which
affect their choices, including intertemporal rates of substitution leading to differences in
short-term consumption vs. investment decisions; and (iii) variation in ability to raise
livestock or entrepreneurial ability, or other unobservable characteristics.
Figure 5 presents quantile impact estimates for consumption, value of livestock, and indices
of asset ownership and psychological well-being. We observe larger treatment effects at the
top end of the distribution for most outcomes, except for psychological well-being. However,
the confidence intervals overlap for most quantiles analyzed. Only for the value of livestock
do we find statistically significant differences between the first and top quantile.
Figures A2 to A4 of the Online Appendix present heterogeneous treatment effects measured
by the impacts by quartiles of baseline consumption, asset ownership, psychological well-
being and entrepreneurial personality traits.19 We find little evidence of differential impact
along these dimensions on consumption, value of livestock holdings, and asset ownership.
These findings are in line with existing evidence suggesting little evidence of heterogeneity
by baseline characteristics (Banerjee et al., 2015).




19We use questions developed by industrial psychologists to measure different facets of the entrepreneurial personality
(de Mel et al. 2008, de Mel et al. 2009). We identify 6 main psychological traits: Impulsiveness, tenacity, polychronicity
(multitasking), locus of control, achievement, and power motivation, which have enough variation in our sample and test
for heterogeneity on these traits. The specific traits were not pre-specified. Rather, we proposed conducting heterogenous
analysis by "entrepreneurial spirit" in the PAP which is a combination of these traits.

                                                           26
Figure 5. Quantile Treatment Effects on Consumption, Livestock Value, Assets and
Psychological Well-being




Notes: Quantile treatment Effects estimates of the outcomes at follow-up. Bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals
(2000 replications). The confidence intervals control for the family-wise error rates (probability of at least one false
rejection across tests), following Romano and Wolf (2010), using codes from Bedoya et al. (2017).

Robustness Checks
We perform three types of robustness checks. First, we winsorize continuous variables to test
whether results are driven by outliers. Second, we remove all regression covariates (133 PRA
stratification dummy variables) to assess whether possible unanticipated stratification
imbalances influence results. Third, we control for baseline imbalances to see if they explain
differences between treatment and control at follow-up.
We winsorize the top 5% of the distribution for consumption, livestock revenue, and value of
outstanding loans, and find that effect sizes decrease slightly in magnitude, but retain the
same sign and significance, and continue to be large. Results are presented in Table A11 of
the Online Appendix. Per capita monthly consumption impacts decrease from USD 24 PPP
(30% increase, p-value < 0.0005) to USD 20 PPP (26% increase, p-value < 0.0005), and monthly
livestock revenue decreases from USD 63 PPP (p-value < 0.0005) to USD 56 PPP (p-value <
0.0005). The gap between treatment and control indebtedness decreases from USD 733 PPP



                                                          27
to USD 276 PPP (p-value 0.002), with average control household indebtedness decreasing
from USD 1,382 PPP to USD 874 PPP.
Table A12 of the Online Appendix presents the impacts on all primary outcomes when
removing stratification dummies, and Table A13 presents the same measures when including
baseline imbalance covariates. The changes in the point estimates for primary outcomes are
small, and standard errors increase slightly when removing stratification dummies. Since the
p-values associated with the main specification already indicated highly significant results,
the reduction in precision does not change any of the results. Adding baseline covariates does
not change the main results either.
The results from robustness checks suggest that findings from the primary specification are
highly stable, supporting the validity of the results.


     6. COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS
While the program shows large economic and social impacts, the per capita cost of the
program is significant, both when compared to other interventions aimed at improving the
lives of the poor, and when directly comparing against other TUP programs around the world.
Therefore, a critical question is whether the benefits exceed the costs.
Table 9 presents the program costs, economic benefits, and estimated returns from the
program using a similar framework and assumptions as in Banerjee et al. (2015). To estimate
the cost-benefit ratio we use a 5% social discount rate, in line with World Bank/IMF guidance
(IMF, 2010). Reported total program costs are shown in line 4: AFN 114,541 (USD 6,198 PPP
or USD 1,688 nominal) per recipient. Since poverty reduction is the primary goal of the
program, we use consumption gains as the primary welfare measure.20,21 We assume that the
(unmeasured) consumption impacts one year after the program start are equal to those
observed in year two (lines 6 and 7). Line 8 shows the present value of all future consumption
benefits assuming they continue for 10 years after the asset transfer. This information allows
us to calculate three measures: (i) the cost-benefit ratio under the above assumptions; (ii)
the number of years the program impacts need to be sustained for the intervention to
generate a return higher than the 5% social discount rate; and (iii) the internal rate of return,
calculated as the discount rate needed to make the present value of costs equal the present
value of benefits.



20 Banerjee et al. (2015) also include assets in their welfare measure. We do not follow this approach because consumption
already includes revenue and rents from productive assets; and because a consumption measure that excludes flow utility
from non-productive assets is more conservative.
21 We use the 95% winsorized consumption values to provide a conservative estimate.


                                                           28
The benefit-to-cost ratio (line 10) is calculated by dividing the net present value of future
returns (line 9) by total program costs (line 5) and is estimated to be 2.3 ­ i.e. every dollar
spent on the program generates 2.3 dollars in household consumption benefits. Equivalently,
we estimate the internal rate of return under the same assumptions to be 26% ­ i.e. the
program generates a return on investment of 26% per annum in the form of consumption
increases. At a minimum, impacts on consumption would need to continue for four years
from the start of the program to break even. Seven-year evaluations of similar programs in
other settings document consistent or increasing consumption impacts over time, suggesting
that these figures may be realistic. However, given the sell-down of the productive asset
observed as a source of current consumption, whether these assumptions hold for this
setting remains an empirical question. We test the sensitivity of the results by estimating the
internal rate of return if we used winsorized consumption measures (21%), and if the
consumption impacts continue for only 5 years after transfer (14%) or in perpetuity (29%). In
all cases the return is significantly larger than the social discount rate of 5%.
These numbers exclude any non-monetary social returns generated through, for instance,
improved psychological well-being, increased human capital from higher school enrollment,
and increased women's empowerment. They also do not take into account the opportunity
cost in welfare of the increase in hours worked. In summary, the average benefits potentially
exceed the costs of the program, given that the cost is time-limited and the benefits are likely
to continue to accrue into the future. While this assessment should be interpreted with
caution given the multiple assumptions required to generate these estimates, the results
suggest that the program may generate significant social and economic returns.


   7. STUDY LIMITATIONS
Limitations of the study include potential spillovers to other households and equilibrium
impacts and implementation issues that may limit scalability and external validity. We discuss
these issues in turn.
Because randomization occurred within villages, both equilibrium effects created by the
intervention and within-village spillovers of treatment on UP non-recipient households must
be small for the results reported in the previous sections to provide an unbiased estimate of
the treatment effects. The study design, limited by financial and logistical constraints, does
not allow us to separate these effects from the main treatment effect to empirically validate
this assumption. There is, however, some evidence indicating that this assumption may be
reasonable. First, Banerjee et al. (2015) and Bandiera et al. (2017) find that neither spillovers
nor general equilibrium effects within villages substantially affect their outcomes, suggesting
that such effects may not be an important issue at this scale. Second and more importantly,
the share of village households directly impacted by the treatment is small (2%), even
                                               29
compared to the previously cited studies. Even if impacts are large in relative terms for
recipient households, they are small in absolute monetary terms at USD 7 (nominal) or USD
24 PPP per capita consumption per month. The overall change in daily consumption or in the
number of productive assets at the village level is consequently likely to be too small to create
spillovers or general equilibrium effects.
Second, our study cannot answer the question of whether the quality of the program could
be maintained in a scale-up, and whether a scale-up of equal quality would achieve similar
results. The quality of the implementation of the program, as shown by high take-up rates
and the consistently positive assessment given by the monitoring teams, might be hard to
replicate and sustain at scale, particularly in a context like Afghanistan.


   8. CONCLUSION
We report the results from an impact evaluation of the TUP program in Balkh province in
Afghanistan. The study contributes to a growing body of evidence suggesting that TUP
programs improve the lives of UP households, but it differs from previous TUP evaluations in
that it takes place in a fragile and conflict-affected area, which is likely to be one of the most
difficult settings to implement the program. In addition, the targeted recipients are women
who are among the most vulnerable populations worldwide and in this setting in particular.
The main goal of the program ­ increasing consumption and reducing poverty ­ is achieved.
We find that the program significantly increases consumption, revenues, and assets two
years after the asset transfer and one year after the program concluded, demonstrating the
potential of TUP programs to improve the well-being of UP households in this setting. The
results of this study also point to the TUP as a potentially gender-smart development policy,
which achieves its overall objective of reducing extreme poverty, while contributing to
reducing relevant gender gaps in the process.
The impacts reported in this study are the largest of any TUP program evaluated to date and
compare favorably to the best-performing programs in Ethiopia, India, and Bangladesh
(Banerjee et al. 2015, Bandiera et al. 2017). We present conservative estimates that suggest
that the program is cost-effective, assuming that, as other programs have suggested, the
gains persist over time. With a benefit-cost ratio of 2.3, the internal rate of return of the
program is 26%, above the internal rate of return reported for India (24%) and Bangladesh
(22%), and well above the social discount rate of 5%.

Given the poor track record of interventions in addressing poverty in fragile settings and the
relative importance of this target group for reducing global poverty, it is important to reflect
on what may explain the project's success. The multi-faceted nature of the program,


                                               30
designed to simultaneously address multiple constraints faced by UP households in
Afghanistan, and the relative size of the transfer and success of the program implementation,
provide possible explanations for the large effects found.
Households targeted by the TUP program ­ especially those in conflict settings like
Afghanistan with strong gender norms and depressed levels of women's human and physical
capital ­ are particularly likely to face multiple co-dependent constraints. TUP programs
combining asset transfers with skills training and "coaching" could therefore reduce
persistent poverty (Barrett et al, 2019, Ghatak, 2015). Our results are consistent with the
predictions of an integrative model of poverty traps. However, we cannot disentangle the
extent and precise mechanisms in which, for instance, the training, coaching, and other
elements of the intervention are building capabilities and psychological assets, and their
complementarity to nonhuman capital.
The large impacts on psychological well-being and women's empowerment suggest that
psychological constraints may play a role in our setting, consistent with recent claims that
poverty may perpetuate itself through mechanisms such as depression (de Quidt and
Haushofer, 2019), cognitive function (Dean, Schilbach, and Scholfield, 2019), aspirations
(Macours and Vakis, 2019; Bernard et al., 2014), and more generally scarcity-driven
behavioral mechanisms (Banerjee and Mullainthan, 2010; Mullainathan et al., 2016;
Mullainathan and Shafir, 2013; Mani et al., 2013; Shah et al., 2012; Ghatak, 2015; Haushofer
& Fehr, 2014).
The Afghanistan TUP program was successful in delivering virtually all the components of the
TUP package to the target households. While it is unclear whether this feat could be
replicated at a larger scale, it provides evidence of what is possible in a conflict setting, and
provides further justification for the relatively large effects. The transfer-to-consumption
ratio in Afghanistan was also the largest investment relative to other similar programs. The
results are consistent with the existing evidence where country programs with larger
consumption-to-transfer ratios have typically generated larger effects.
Our results thus provide useful evidence on the short-term impact of TUP programs in fragile
and conflict-affected settings and support the potential of "big-push" time-limited large
investments that combine capital and human capital interventions to contribute to reducing
poverty in a cost-effective way.


REFERENCES
Araujo, Maria Caridad, Mariano Bosch, and Norbert Schady. "Can Cash Transfers Help
Households Escape an Inter-Generational Poverty Trap?" The Economics of Poverty Traps, by
Carter, and Chavas Barrett (2019). 357 - 382.

                                               31
Azariadis, Costas, and John Stachurski. "Poverty Traps." Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol.
I, chap. 05 (2005). https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:grochp:1-05
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler. "Cash or condition? Evidence from a cash
transfer experiment". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, no. 4 (2011): 1709-1753.
Bandiera, Oriana, Robin Burgess, Narayan Das, Selim Gulesci, Imran Rasul, Munshi Sulaiman.
"Labor Markets and Poverty in Village Economies." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132,
Issue 2 (2017). 811­870. doi:10.1093/qje/qjx003.
Bandiera, Oriana, Niklas Buehren, Robin Burgess, Markus Goldstein, Selim Gulesci, Imran
Rasul and Munshi Sulaiman. "Women's Empowerment in Action: Evidence from a
Randomized Control Trial in Africa." American Economic Journal. Forthcoming.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. "The Miracle of
Microfinance? : Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation". American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 7, no. 1 (2014). 22-53.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William
Parienté, Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. "A Multifaceted Program
Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six Countries." Science 348, no.
6236 (2015): 1260799.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, Christopher Udry, and Hannah Trachtman.
"Unpacking a Multi-Faceted Program to Build Sustainable Income for the Very Poor." Working
Paper (2018).
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Sendhil Mullainathan. "The Shape of Temptation: Implications for the
Economic Lives of the Poor." NBER Working Paper, No. 15973 (2010).
Barrett, Christopher B., Michael R. Carter, and Jean-Paul Chavas. "The Economics of Poverty
Traps." National Bureau of Economic Research, (2019).
Barrett, Christopher B., Michael R. Carter, Munenobu Ikegami, and Sarah A. Janzen. "Poverty
Traps and the Social Protection Paradox. "The Economics of Poverty Traps, ch. 6 (2019). 223
­ 256.
Bedoya, Guadalupe, Luca Bittarello, Jonathan Davis, Nikolas, Mittag. "Distributional impact
analysis: toolkit and illustrations of impacts beyond the average treatment effect." Policy
Research Working Paper; no. WPS 8139 (2017). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
Bernard, Tanguy, Stefan Dercon, Kate Orkin, Alemayehu Taffesse. "The future in mind:
Aspirations and forward-looking behaviour in rural Ethiopia". Centre for Economic Policy
Research, (2014). CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP10224.
Blattman, Chris, Sebastian Martinez, and Nathan Fiala. "Generating Skilled Self-employment
in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda." Quaterly Journal of
Economics 129, Issue 2 (2014). 697-752. doi:10.1093/qje/qjt057

                                            32
Blattman, Christopher, and Laura Ralston. "Generating employment in poor and fragile
states: Evidence from labor market and entrepreneurship programs." (2015). Available at
SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2622220.
Blattman, Christopher, Eric P. Green, Julian Jamison, M. Christian Lehmann, and Jeannie
Annan. 2016. "The Returns to Microenterprise Support among the Ultrapoor: A Field
Experiment in Postwar Uganda." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8, no. 2
(2016). 35­64. doi:10.1257/app.20150023.
Buera, Francisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. "Taking Stock of the Evidence on
Micro-Financial Interventions." The Economics of Poverty Traps, by Barrett, Carter, and
Chavas, ch. 5 (2019). 189 ­ 221.
Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie. "In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in
Development Field Experiments ". American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1, no. 4
(2008). 200-232.
Cohen, Sheldon, Tom Kamarck, and Robin Mermelstein. "A global measure of perceived
stress." Journal of health and social behavior, (1983). 385-396.
de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. "Who Are the Microenterprise
Owners? Evidence from Sri Lanka on Tokman v. de Soto". IZA Discussion Paper Series, IZA DP
No. 3511 (May 2008).
de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. "Are Women More Credit
Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender and Microenterprise Returns". American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1, no.3 (July 2009). 1­32.
de Quidt, Jonathan, and Johannes Haushofer. "Depression for Economists." The Economics of
Poverty Traps, by Michael R. Carter, and Jean-Paul Chavas Christopher B. Barrett, ch.3 (2019).
127 ­ 152.
Dean, Emma Boswell, Frank Schilbach, and Heather Schofield. "Poverty and Cognitive
Function." The Economics of Poverty Traps, ch. 2 (2019). 57 - 118.
Dercon, Stefan. "Fate and fear: Risk and its consequences in Africa." Journal of African
Economies 17, no. suppl_2 (2008): ii97-ii127.
Dreze, Jean, and Geeta Gandhi Kingdon. "School participation in rural India." Review of
Development Economics 5, no. 1 (2001). 1-24.
Filmer, Deon, and Lant H. Pritchett. "Estimating wealth effects without expenditure data --or
tears: an application to educational enrollments in states of India." Demography 38, no. 1
(2001). 115-132. doi:10.2307/3088292
Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady. "Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and
Future Poverty." World Bank Policy Research Report, World Bank (2009).


                                             33
Ghatak, Maitreesh. "Theories of Poverty Traps and Anti-Poverty Policies." The World Bank
Economic Review, (2015). 1­29.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Ernst Fehr. "On the psychology of poverty." Science 344, no. 6186
(2014). 862-867.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. "The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional Cash
Transfers to the Poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 131, Volume 4 (2016). 1973-2042. doi:10.1093/qje/qjw025
IMF, IDA. "Staff Guidance Note on the Application of the Joint Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability
Framework for Low-Income Countries." Washington DC: FMI (2010).
International Financial Statistics (IFS). "Country Tables, Afghanistan, Islamic Republic of,
Exchange Rates, Official Rates." International Monetary Fund, Washington DC (2019).
Accessed April 22, 2019. http://data.imf.org/regular.aspx?key=61545850.
Klugman, Jeni, Lucia Hanmer, Sarah Twigg, Jennifer McCleary-Sills, Tazeen Hasan, and Julieth
Andrea Santamaria Bonilla. "Voice and agency: empowering women and girls for shared
prosperity: Main report (English)." World Bank Group, (2014). Washington, DC.
Kraay, Aart, and David McKenzie. "Do Poverty Traps Exist? Assessing the Evidence." Journal
of Economic Perspectives 28, no. 3 (2014). 127-148. doi:10.1257/jep.28.3.127.
Macours, Karen, and Renos Vakis. "Sustaining Impacts When Transfers End: Women Leaders,
Aspirations, and Investments in Children." The Economics of Poverty Traps, by Michael R.
Carter, and Jean-Paul Chavas Christopher B. Barrett, ch.9 (2019). 325 ­ 355.
Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao. "Poverty impedes
cognitive function." Science 341, no. 6149 (2013). 976-980.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Shafir Eldar. "Scarcity: Why Having Too Little Means so Much."
(2013). New York: Times Books, Henry Holt and Company.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Frank Shilbach, and Heather Schofield. "The Psychological Lives of the
Poor." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceeding 106, no.5 (2016). 435­440.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. "Industrialization and the big
push." Journal of political economy 97, no. 5 (1989). 1003-1026.
Organization, Central Statistics. "Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey 2016-17". ISBN:978-
9936-8050-7-1, Kabul, CSO.: Central Statistics Organization, (2018).
Radloff, Lenore Sawyer. "The CES-D Scale: A Self-report Depression Scale for Research in the
General Population." Applied Psychological Measurement 1, no. 3 (1977). 385-401. doi:
10.1177/014662167700100306
Romano, Joseph P., and Michael Wolf. "Balanced Control of Generalized Error Rates." The
Annals of Statistics 38, no. 1 (2010). 598-633.

                                             34
Rosenstein-Rodan, P. N. "Problems of Industrialisation of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe."
The Economic Journal 53, no. 210/211 (1943). 202-211. doi:10.2307/2226317.
Shah, Anuj K, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir. "Some consequences of having too
little". Science 338, Issue 6107 (2012). 682-685. doi:10.1126/science.1222426
World Bank. "World Development Report 2012: gender equality and development: Main
report (English)". World Development Report, (2011), Washington DC: World Bank.
World Bank Group. "Women, Business and the Law 2018." Washington, DC: World Bank,
(2018). © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29498
License: CC BY 3.0 IGO."
World Bank Group. "Piecing Together the Poverty Puzzle." Poverty and Share Prosperity 2018.
Washington, DC: World Bank, (2018). ©
The World Bank. "World Development Indicators." Washington, D.C.: The World Bank,
(2019). https://data.worldbank.org/country/afghanistan.
World Bank. "Open Data Indicators." World Bank website, (2019).
https://data.worldbank.org.




                                            35
                              Table 1: Household Socioeconomic Conditions

                                                                                   Ultra-poor                Non-UP
                                                                Mean       SD   Mean        SD
                                                                 (1)       (2)   (3)        (4)
Panel A: Household Characteristics, Assets and Psychological Well-being at Baseline
Household Characteristics
    Primary Woman Is Household Head                             0.204 0.403     0.048     0.213
    Primary Woman Is Illiterate                                 0.963 0.188     0.897     0.304
    Primary Man Is Illiterate                                   0.844 0.363     0.730     0.444
    School-age Girls are Enrolled at School                     0.530 0.436     0.537     0.431
    School-age Boys are Enrolled at School                      0.587 0.426     0.638     0.406
Consumption and Assets
    Consumption Per Capita (USD), Month                          87.7     78.2  133.9     134.0
    Consumption Per Capita Poverty-Line Consistent (USD), Month  89.7     71.5  124.4      84.3
    Household Is Below the Poverty Line                         0.801 0.399     0.566     0.496
    Household Saves                                             0.015 0.123     0.015     0.120
    Households Has Any Outstanding Loans                        0.678 0.467     0.519     0.500
    Household Owns Land                                         0.626 0.484     0.779     0.415
    Household Owns a Mobile Phone                               0.719 0.450     0.852     0.355
Psychological Well-being
    Primary Woman Life Satisfaction Rating (1-10)               5.012 2.993     6.684     2.725
    Primary Woman Is Depressed (7-CESD  8)                      0.693 0.462     0.520     0.500
Number of Sampled Households                                         1,173            1,680
Panel B: Economic Activities for UP Controls and Non-UP at Follow-up
    Primary Woman Participates in Income-generating Activities  0.306 0.461     0.248     0.432
    Household Owns Any Livestock                                0.573 0.495     0.567     0.496
    Household Owns Cows                                         0.094 0.292     0.282     0.450
    Household Owns Goats                                        0.079 0.270     0.075     0.264
    Household Owns Chickens                                     0.395 0.489     0.258     0.438
    Household Has an Agricultural Business                      0.177 0.382     0.272     0.445
    Household Has Other Non-agricultural Business               0.322 0.468     0.428     0.495
Number of Sampled Households                                          689             1,348
 Notes. Panel A is constructed using baseline data and panel B using follow-up data for control ultra-poor households
 and non-UP households. School-age is 6 to 19 years old. Sampling weights based on the total population for each village
 is used to estimate the non-UP statistics. Our consumption estimate includes food (purchased, produced and received as
 a gift), personal and household items, education, health, household repairs, social expenses (weddings, funeral, religious
 expenses, and other ceremonies), and temptation goods and legal expenses. The Afghanistan national poverty line
 estimate excludes legal, health and social expenses, and household construction and repairs, and includes expenses in
 consumer durables and housing vs. our estimate. We report both for comparability with national poverty estimates.
 The poverty line threshold is AFN 2,064 (USD 30 and USD 112 PPP) per capita per month from the Afghanistan
 Living Conditions Survey (ALCS). The psychological well-being measures includes the Center for Epidemiologic Studies
 Depression (CES-D) 7-point scale (Radloff 1977) and the World Values Survey (WVS) questions on life satisfaction.
 All monetary amounts are PPP-adjusted USD terms, set at 2018 prices using the Afghanistan CPI and PPP conversion
 factor from the IMF.




                                                         36
                           Table 2: Baseline Village Characteristics

                                                                           Mean         SD          N
                                                                            (1)         (2)        (3)
Services Available in the Village
    Primary School                                         0.562     0.499   80
    Secondary School                                       0.475     0.503   80
    Health Facility                                        0.163     0.371   80
    Veterinary                                             0.113     0.318   80
    Commercial Bank                                        0.000     0.000   80
    Microfinance Institution                               0.050     0.219   80
 Distance to Nearest Institution or Service Provider If None in Village (Minutes)
    Primary School                                        25.276    20.197   38
    Secondary School                                      26.386    19.421   44
    Health Facility                                       23.910    20.356   67
    Veterinary                                            29.464    16.382   69
    Commercial Bank                                       49.304    34.088   79
    Microfinance Institution                              33.446    24.689   74
Access to Electricity
    Days With Electricity from the Grid, Last Week         4.300     2.944   80
Conflict/Violence, Last 12 Months
    Experienced Conflict, Instability, or Violence Event   0.062     0.244   80
 Notes. Information is reported by the local leader and/or CDC officials in the baseline village survey.
 Distance in minutes is estimated as time spent in minutes to reach destination using typical mean
 of transport. In more than 95% of cases, the chosen typical mean of transport is walking.




                                                   37
                      Table 3: Impact on Consumption, Food Security and Assets

                                                                            Treatment Effect
                                                          Control                % Control SD
                                                                       Level                                N
                                                           Mean                    Mean Control
                                                            (1)          (2)        (3)    (4)             (5)

Consumption
   Consumption per Capita (USD), Month                     80.835 24.027***         30%        0.412      1147
                                                          (58.378) (4.224)
                                                                   {0.000}***
     Household Is Below National Poverty Line               0.819 -0.199***        -24%       -0.517      1147
                                                           (0.386)   (0.027)
                                                                     [0.000]
Food Security
   Food Security Index                                      0.000     0.491***                 0.491      1147
                                                           (1.000)     (0.053)
                                                                        0.000
          Everyone in the Household Regularly               0.760     0.114***      15%        0.268      1145
          Eats at Least Two Meals a Day                    (0.427)     (0.022)
                                                                        0.000
          No Adult Skips or Cuts the Size of                0.441     0.234***      53%        0.470      1134
          Meals                                            (0.497)     (0.029)
                                                                        0.000
          No Child Skips or Cuts the Size of Meals          0.594     0.197***      33%        0.401      1137
                                                           (0.492)     (0.026)
                                                                        0.000
Assets
    Value of Livestock (USD)                              266.655 839.076***        315%       1.063      1111
                                                         (789.237) (58.650)
                                                                  {0.000}***
     HH Asset Ownership Index (PCA)                       -0.000 0.357***                      0.357      1147
                                                          (1.000)   (0.061)
                                                                  {0.000}***
Notes. This table reports OLS estimates of treatment effects. All regressions include 133 randomization PRA
controls. Outcomes are listed on the left, and described in detail in Table A1 of the Online Appendix. For each
outcome variable we report the coefficients of interest and their robust standard errors in parentheses. For the
primary outcomes, we report the FWER-corrected p-values in braces. For all other outcomes, we report the,
"na¨
   ive" p-value in brackets. (***) (**) (*) denotes significance at (1%) (5%) (10%) level. Column (1) reports the
mean (standard deviation) of each outcome for the control group at follow-up. Columns (2), (3) and (4) report
the treatment estimates in levels (2), as percentages of the control mean (3), and as standard deviations of the
control group (4) for non-indexed variables. Column (5) reports the total sample for each treatment estimate. Our
consumption estimate includes food (purchased, produced and received as a gift), personal and household items,
education, health, household repairs, social expenses (weddings, funeral, religious expenses, and other ceremonies),
and temptation goods and legal expenses. The poverty line threshold is AFN 2,064 (USD 0.41 and USD 111.67
PPP) per capita per month from the Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey (ALCS). The asset ownership index is
constructed using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on the number of assets owned. All monetary amounts are
PPP-adjusted USD terms, set at 2018 prices using the Afghanistan CPI and PPP conversion factor from the IMF.




                                                        38
                Table 4: Impact on Labor Supply and Time Use, Primary Woman and Man, Last 4 Weeks

                                                       Primary Woman                                              Primary Man
                                                         Treatment Effect                                         Treatment Effect
                                       Control                % Control     SD                   Control              % Control    SD
                                                    Level                              N                     Level                        N
                                        Mean                    Mean      Control                 Mean                  Mean     Control
                                         (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)   (10)
Labor Participation                     0.345     0.221***        64%        0.465    1140        0.853      0.030        3%        0.084     776
                                       (0.476)     (0.029)                                       (0.355)    (0.025)
                                                   [0.000]                                                  [0.232]
Time Spent Working, Full-time Days

Total                                   4.180     2.294***        55%        0.269    1137       11.620      1.622        14%       0.124     770
                                       (8.535)     (0.538)                                      (13.066)    (1.008)
                                                 {0.000}***                                                 {0.119}
HH Livestock                            0.695     2.703***       389%        1.131    1137        1.015    1.800***      177%       0.412     774
                                       (2.390)     (0.261)                                       (4.365)    (0.420)
                                                   [0.000]                                                  [0.000]
HH Agriculture                          0.080       0.165        205%        0.145    1140        0.598      0.216        36%       0.061     776
                                       (1.137)     (0.102)                                       (3.552)    (0.295)
                                                   [0.106]                                                  [0.464]
Own Non-Agriculture Business            0.124     0.305**        245%        0.244    1140        0.248      0.325       131%       0.145     776
                                       (1.250)     (0.136)                                       (2.239)    (0.243)
                                                   [0.025]                                                  [0.181]
Agriculture Outside the HH              0.837      -0.297        -35%       -0.071 1140           3.472     -0.114       -3%       -0.014     774
                                       (4.163)     (0.214)                                       (8.267)    (0.618)
                                                   [0.166]                                                  [0.854]
Maid Services                           0.386     0.429**        111%        0.189    1140        0.349      0.324        93%       0.137     776
                                       (2.265)     (0.215)                                       (2.370)    (0.272)
                                                   [0.046]                                                  [0.234]
Non-Agriculture Outside the HH          0.053       0.072        135%        0.095    1140        1.844     -0.276       -15%      -0.046     776
                                       (0.760)     (0.099)                                       (5.977)    (0.457)
                                                   [0.468]                                                  [0.546]
Salaried or Formal Employment           0.086      -0.055        -64%       -0.039 1140           0.839     -0.177       -21%      -0.039     776
                                       (1.413)     (0.063)                                       (4.544)    (0.352)
                                                   [0.381]                                                  [0.616]
Other Paid Work                         1.925    -0.979***       -51%       -0.148 1140           3.180     -0.514       -16%      -0.063     774
                                       (6.593)     (0.322)                                       (8.207)    (0.617)
                                                   [0.002]                                                  [0.406]
Notes. This table reports OLS estimates of treatment effects. All regressions include 133 randomization PRA controls. Outcomes are listed on
the left, and described in detail in Table A1 of the Online Appendix. For each outcome variable we report the coefficients of interest and their
robust standard errors in parentheses. For the primary outcomes, we report the FWER-corrected p-values in braces. For all other outcomes, we
report the, "na¨ive" p-value in brackets. (***) (**) (*) denotes significance at (1%) (5%) (10%) level. Column (1) (resp. (6)) reports the mean
(standard deviation) of each outcome for the primary woman (resp. primary man) of the control group at follow-up. Columns (2), (3) and (4)
(resp. (7), (8) and (9)) report the treatment estimates on primary woman (resp. primary man) in levels (2) (resp. (7)), as percentages of the
control mean (3) (resp. (8)), and standard deviations of the control group (4) (resp. (9)). Column (5) (resp. (10)) reports the total primary
woman (resp. primary man) sample for each treatment estimate. Total is the sum of the 8 activities below. All time use estimates represent
full-time-day equivalent, defined as 8 hours of work. Labor participation is a dummy defined as whether the adult household member (aged 15
and above) has been performing one of the previous activities or has been searching for work outside home in the past two weeks.
   Table 5: Impact on Financial Inclusion and Income and Revenues from Productive Activities

                                                                                                  Treatment Effect
                                                                          Control                      % Control     SD
                                                                                             Level                                      N
                                                                           Mean                          Mean      Control
                                                                            (1)               (2)         (3)        (4)               (5)
Finance
    Financial Inclusion Index                              2.378***       -0.000                                            2.378     1147
                                                             (0.183)      (1.000)
                                                          {0.000}***
         Primary Woman Knows Different           0.161     0.292***                                           181%          0.742     1053
         Places to Save                         (0.393)      (0.029)
                                                             [0.000]
         Anyone in the HH Has Formal Savings     0.013     0.280***                                          2137%          2.462     1143
         Account                                (0.114)      (0.021)
                                                             [0.000]
         HH Members Can Access Formal Credit     0.021     0.122***                                           588%          0.854     1130
         if Needed                              (0.143)      (0.017)
                                                             [0.000]
         HH Has Saved in the Last 4 Weeks        0.023     0.262***                                          1121%          1.732     1142
                                                (0.151)      (0.022)
                                                             [0.000]
         HH Savings (USD), Last 4 Weeks          4.253     70.161***                                         1650%          1.408     1138
                                               (49.820)     (12.822)
                                                             [0.000]
         HH Total Savings (USD)                  4.832    106.066***                                         2195%          2.091     1140
                                               (50.725)     (10.488)
                                                             [0.000]
    HH Total Outstanding Cash Loans (USD)     1, 381.798 -733.100***                                          -53%        -0.138 1118
                                             (5, 302.327) (217.144)
                                                             [0.001]
Income and Revenues from Productive Activities, Last 4 Weeks
    Total Household Income and Revenues        307.282    68.801***                                            22%          0.177     1145
    (USD)                                     (389.758)     (25.426)
                                                             [0.007]
    Livestock Revenue (USD)                     22.528    63.253***                                           281%          0.595     1093
                                              (106.317)     (11.341)
                                                             [0.000]
    Agriculture Revenue (USD)                   21.953       -7.641                                           -35%        -0.043 1113
                                              (178.035)      (8.113)
                                                             [0.346]
    Non-agricultural Business Revenue (USD)     90.011        4.695                                            5%           0.027     1113
                                              (176.402)     (11.531)
                                                             [0.684]
    Paid Labor Income, All Adults (USD)        183.847       14.207                                            8%           0.056     1102
                                              (253.571)     (16.494)
                                                             [0.389]
Notes. This table reports OLS estimates of treatment effects. All regressions include 133 randomization PRA controls. Outcomes are listed
on the left, and described in detail in Table A1 of the Online Appendix. For each outcome variable we report the coefficients of interest
and their robust standard errors in parentheses. For the primary outcomes, we report the FWER-corrected p-values in braces. For all other
outcomes, we report the, "na¨  ive" p-value in brackets. (***) (**) (*) denotes significance at (1%) (5%) (10%) level. Column (1) reports the
mean (standard deviation) of each outcome for the control group at follow-up. Columns (2), (3) and (4) report the treatment estimates in
levels (2), as percentages of the control mean (3), and as standard deviations of the control group (4) for non-indexed variables. Column (5)
reports the total sample for each treatment estimate. Total household income is the sum of the income coming from livestock, agriculture,
non-agricultural businesses and paid labor. Revenue from livestock includes selling of livestock and production of animal products. Revenue
from agriculture refers to revenue from crop production. Paid labor income is for all adult members in the household. All monetary amounts
are PPP-adjusted USD terms, set at 2018 prices using the Afghanistan CPI and PPP conversion factor from the IMF.




                                                                     40
                               Table 6: Impact on Psychological Well-being
                                                      Primary Woman                             Primary Man
                                           Control Treatment Effect                   Control Treatment Effect
                                                                            N                                   N
                                            Mean        Level                          Mean        Level
                                             (1)         (2)               (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)

Psychological Well-being

     Psychological Well-being In-           -0.000        0.575***        1147        -0.000        0.255***         694
     dex                                    (1.000)        (0.059)                    (1.000)        (0.082)
                                                         {0.000}***                                {0.010}***
     Log Cortisol (with Controls)            0.019         -0.034         1002        -0.018          0.076          581
                                            (0.967)        (0.063)                    (0.885)        (0.084)
                                                           [0.582]                                   [0.367]
     Life Satisfaction (WVS) Index          -0.000        0.435***        1147        -0.000         0.176**         694
                                            (1.000)        (0.057)                    (1.000)        (0.078)
                                                           [0.000]                                   [0.024]
     Happiness (WVS) Index                  -0.000        0.606***        1147         0.000        0.249***         694
                                            (1.000)        (0.055)                    (1.000)        (0.074)
                                                           [0.000]                                   [0.001]
     Depression (CESD)          Index        0.000        0.504***        1140         0.000         0.198**         685
     (Negatively Coded)                     (1.000)        (0.059)                    (1.000)        (0.078)
                                                           [0.000]                                   [0.012]
     Self-esteem (Rosenberg) Index           0.000        0.234***        1146         0.000         -0.032          693
                                            (1.000)        (0.057)                    (1.000)        (0.081)
                                                           [0.000]                                   [0.691]
     Stress (Cohen) Index (Nega-             0.000        0.554***        1138        -0.000        0.225***         681
     tively Coded)                          (1.000)        (0.061)                    (1.000)        (0.084)
                                                           [0.000]                                   [0.008]
Life Orientation and Trust

     Trust (WVS) Index                       0.000          0.057         1147         0.000          0.093          694
                                            (1.000)        (0.061)                    (1.000)        (0.076)
                                                           [0.350]                                   [0.221]
     Life Orientation Test (LOT-R)           0.000        0.508***        1144         0.000         0.171**         687
     Index                                  (1.000)        (0.058)                    (1.000)        (0.080)
                                                           [0.000]                                   [0.034]
Notes. This table reports OLS estimates of treatment effects. All regressions include 133 randomization PRA controls.
Outcomes are listed on the left, and described in detail in Table A1 of the Online Appendix. For each outcome variable
we report the coefficients of interest and their robust standard errors in parentheses. For the primary outcomes, we
report the FWER-corrected p-values in braces. For all other outcomes, we report the, "na¨     ive" p-value in brackets.
(***) (**) (*) denotes significance at (1%) (5%) (10%) level. Column (1) (resp. (4)) reports the mean (standard
deviation) of each outcome for the primary woman (resp. primary man) of the control group at follow-up. Column
(2) (resp. (5)) report the treatment estimates on primary woman (resp. primary man) in levels. Column (3) (resp.
(6)) reports the total primary woman (resp. primary man) sample for each treatment estimate. The psychological
well-being measure includes the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CES-D) 7-point scale (Radloff 1977),
questions on happiness and life satisfaction from the World Values Survey (WVS), Cohen's 4-item stress scale, and
log cortisol levels obtained through saliva samples adjusted for confounders.




                                                         41
                                Table 7: Impact on Women's Empowerment

                                                                                   Treatment Effect
                                                                        Control                   SD
                                                                                     Level                     N
                                                                         Mean                   Control
                                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)

Women's Empowerment Index (6 Dimensions)                                -0.000     0.384***   0.384          1147
                                                                        (1.000)     (0.062)
                                                                                  {0.000}***
HH Expenditures Decisions Index (1 Dimension)                           -0.000       0.086    0.086          1147
                                                                        (1.000)     (0.058)
                                                                                    [0.140]
Children's Investments Decisions Index                                  -0.000       0.080    0.080          1147
                                                                        (1.000)     (0.056)
                                                                                    [0.157]
Fertility and Mobility Decisions & Access to Inputs Index                0.000     0.344***   0.344          1147
                                                                        (1.000)     (0.062)
                                                                                    [0.000]
Participation in Income-generating Activities Index                     -0.000     0.292***   0.292          1147
                                                                        (1.000)     (0.062)
                                                                                    [0.000]
Aspirations for Daughters Index                                         -0.000      -0.008   -0.008           900
                                                                        (1.000)     (0.064)
                                                                                    [0.906]
Political Involvement and Social Capital Index                           0.000     0.330***   0.330          1147
                                                                        (1.000)     (0.062)
                                                                                    [0.000]
Notes. This table reports OLS estimates of treatment effects. All regressions include 133 randomization PRA
controls. Outcomes are listed on the left, and described in detail in Table A1 of the Online Appendix. For each
outcome variable we report the coefficients of interest and their robust standard errors in parentheses. For the
primary outcomes, we report the FWER-corrected p-values in braces. For all other outcomes, we report the,
"na¨ive" p-value in brackets. (***) (**) (*) denotes significance at (1%) (5%) (10%) level. Column (1) reports the
mean (standard deviation) of each outcome for the control group at follow-up. Columns (2), (3) and (4) report
the treatment estimates in levels (2), and as percentages of the control mean (3). Column (4) reports the total
sample for each treatment estimate. The women's empowerment index includes the following indices: household
finances and expenditures decisions, children's investment decision, fertility and mobility decisions/access to inputs,
participation in income-generating activities, aspirations for daughters, and political involvement and social capital.
The sample is restricted to households with school-age girls for the aspirations for daughters index.




                                                          42
                                Table 8: Impact on Education and Health

                                                                                Treatment Effect
                                                            Control                 % Control   SD
                                                                         Level                              N
                                                             Mean                     Mean    Control
                                                              (1)         (2)          (3)      (4)        (5)

School Enrollment
    Girls                                                     0.529      0.046*        9%          0.093   1600
                                                             (0.499)    (0.028)
                                                                        [0.093]
     Boys                                                     0.561     0.072**        13%         0.144   1555
                                                             (0.496)    (0.029)
                                                                        [0.013]
School Absenteeism: % Missed Days, last 4 weeks
   Girls                                       0.135                 -0.021           -16%     -0.094      873
                                              (0.223)                (0.017)
                                                                     [0.227]
     Boys                                                     0.160 -0.061***         -38%     -0.247      917
                                                             (0.246) (0.018)
                                                                     [0.001]
Health
    Diarrhea Rate in Oldest Under-5 Child, Last 2             0.507 -0.080**          -16%     -0.161      706
    weeks                                                    (0.501) (0.040)
                                                                     [0.044]
     Under-5 Child Has Vaccination Card, At Least             0.607   0.039            6%          0.080   699
     One (Physically Checked)                                (0.489) (0.037)
                                                                     [0.293]
Notes. This table reports OLS estimates of treatment effects. All regressions include 133 randomization PRA
controls. Outcomes are listed on the left, and described in detail in Table A1 of the Online Appendix. For each
outcome variable we report the coefficients of interest and their robust standard errors in parentheses. For the
primary outcomes, we report the FWER-corrected p-values in braces. For all other outcomes, we report the,
"na¨
   ive" p-value in brackets. (***) (**) (*) denotes significance at (1%) (5%) (10%) level. Column (1) reports the
mean (standard deviation) of each outcome for the control group at follow-up. Columns (2), (3) and (4) report
the treatment estimates in levels (2), as percentages of the control mean (3), and as standard deviations of the
control group (4) for non-indexed variables. Column (5) reports the total sample for each treatment estimate.
Schooling outcomes include school-age children (i.e. children from 6 to 18 years old). The sample is restricted to
households with school-age children for the school enrollment and absenteeism outcomes and to households with
under-5 children for the health outcomes. Unit of observation is child for the schooling outcomes.




                                                       43
                                      Table 9: Cost Benefit Analysis

                                                                     AFN            Current USD           USD PPP
Costs
(1) Direct Transfer Costs                                            56,820              837                3,075
    Asset Cost                                                       41,596              613                2,251
    Food Stipend                                                     12,363              182                 669
    Health Voucher                                                   2,861                42                 155
(2) Total Supervision Costs                                          47,004              693                2,544
    Salaries of Implementing Organization Staff                      27,509              405                1,489
    Materials                                                        3,742                55                 203
    Training                                                         2,998                44                 162
    Travel Costs                                                      470                  7                  25
    Other Supervision Expenses                                      12,285               181                 665
(3) Total Direct Costs                                              103,824             1,530               5,618
    Start-up expenses                                                 294                  4                  16
    Indirect Costs                                                   10,424              154                 564
(4) Total Costs, calculated as if all incurred immediately at       114,541             1,688               6,198
    beginning of Year 0
(5) Total Costs, Inflated to Year 2 at 5% annual dis-               126,282             1,861               6,469
    count rate

Benefits
(6) Year 1 Nondurable Annual Consumption                            34,556               509                 1,770
(7) Year 2 Nondurable Annual Consumption                            34,556               509                 1,770
(8) Year 3 - 10 nondurable consumption discounted to year           223,342             3,291               11,442
    2 at 5% annual discount rate
(9) Total Benefits (6) + (7) + (8)                                  292,454             4,309              14,982

Returns to Investment
(10) Total Benefits / Total Costs Ratio: (9)/(5)                      2.32
(11) Break Even Point                                               4 years after program start
(12) Internal Rate of Return                                          26%
Internal Rate of Return Sensitivity
     Using 95% Winsorized Consumption Impacts                         21%
     Assuming Impacts Persist for 5 Years After Transfer              14%
     Assuming Impacts Persist in Perpetuity After Transfer            29%
Notes. 95% Winsorized consumption estimates used in benefits calculation. Social discount rate of 5% applied as
per World Bank guidance note (World Bank, 2013). Cost estimates provided by MISFA. The exchange rates used
is the IMF 1 USD = 67.87 AFN (2016). All monetary amounts PPP-adjusted USD terms are set at 2018 prices
using the Afghanistan CPI and PPP conversion factor from the IMF.




                                                      44
