                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE HEALTH IMPACTS OF HOSPITAL DELIVERY PRACTICES

                                             David Card
                                          Alessandra Fenizia
                                             David Silver

                                        Working Paper 25986
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25986


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2019, Revised November 2020




We thank Pablo Muñoz and Alice Wu for exceptional research assistance, Pat Kline, Marit Rehavi,
and Chris Walters for many detailed comments, Diane Alexander and Matt Notowidigdo for serving
as discussants, Ciaran Phibbs for generous assistance with NICU classifications, and seminar participants
at UC Berkeley, UC Merced, UCLA, UCSB, Princeton, GWU, NBER Summer Institute (Children),
ASHEcon, and HERO for helpful comments and suggestions. We are also extremely grateful to Laura
Giuliano for conversations that led to this project. Our use of the data in this project is covered under
UC Berkeley Federal wide Assurance #00006252. Silver gratefully acknowledges funding from the
National Institute on Aging, Grant Number T32-AG000186. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by David Card, Alessandra Fenizia, and David Silver. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Health Impacts of Hospital Delivery Practices
David Card, Alessandra Fenizia, and David Silver
NBER Working Paper No. 25986
June 2019, Revised November 2020
JEL No. D22,I11,I18,J13

                                           ABSTRACT

Treatment practices vary widely across hospitals, often with little connection to the medical needs
of patients. We assess impacts of these differences in childbirth, where there is broad interest in
reducing cesarean deliveries. Using a distance-based design and data from half a million births,
we find that infants delivered at hospitals with higher c-section rates are born in better shape, are
less likely to be readmitted to the hospital, are exhibit suggestive evidence of improved survival.
These benefits are driven by the avoidance of prolonged labors that pose serious risks to infant
health. In contrast, we document that these infants are substantially more likely to return to the
emergency department for respiratory-related problems in the year after birth, providing some of
the first design-based evidence consistent with a large observational literature linking cesarean
delivery to chronic reductions in respiratory health.


David Card                                        David Silver
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880                             Princeton University
University of California, Berkeley                124 Julis Romo Rabinowitz
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                          and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu                            david.silver@princeton.edu

Alessandra Fenizia
Department of Economics
2115 G Street NW
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
afenizia@econ.berkeley.edu
          Clinical practices governing the use of intensive treatments differ greatly across hospitals.1
Whether and how these differences translate into health outcomes is a key policy concern (e.g. Baicker
et al. 2012). The traditional view is that supplier-induced treatments have little benefit for patients (e.g.
Fisher et al. 2003), in part because they reflect wasteful management practices (Bloom et al. 2015). A
recent influential study by Doyle et al. (2015), however, points to significant health benefits for older
patients of being routed to a high-cost hospital.
          In the context of childbirth, the focus of our study, cesarean delivery rates vary tremendously
across hospitals in the US, from 19 to 48% overall, and from 8 to 32% for women with low-risk
pregnancies (Kozhimannil et al. 2014). Hospital-level differences of this magnitude have generated
substantial public concern (Shah, 2017), given that cesarean deliveries tend to cost more than vaginal
births (Podulka et al. 2011; Sakala et al. 2013), that a c-section usually precludes future vaginal births,
and that cesarean deliveries are correlated with worse health outcomes of infants and mothers.2
          In light of the available evidence and steeply rising shares of cesarean delivery across the globe
(Boerma et al. 2018), numerous medical, governmental, and international organizations have issued
guidelines intended to reduce cesarean delivery rates.3 Many of these guidelines steer first-time
mothers with no clinical indications for c-section (a group we term "low-risk first births" or LRFBs)
away from hospitals with high cesarean rates.4
          Judging by the correlational evidence, such policies have the potential to save resources and
improve health. There are at least two good reasons, however, to view this evidence with caution.
First, the eventual mode of delivery for LRFBs is often the result of complications arising during labor,
raising concerns of reverse causality.5 Second, hospital practices that lead to lower c-section rates ­
specifically difference in willingness to wait for labor to run its course -- have the potential to affect
all LRFBs. The prolonged labors required to achieve higher rates of successful vaginal delivery may
deprive fetuses of oxygen and subject the mother to additional stress, even for births ultimately

1 See Romley et al. (2011) and Doyle et al. (2015) for analyses of hospital-specific spending and outcomes, Rysavy (2015) for a study of
variation in treatment of pre-term infants, and Barnato et al. (2005) for an analysis of hospital-specific variation in the context of racial
disparities in treatment of AMI. Skinner (2012) provides a review of the related literature on regional variation in intensity of care or
spending; related contributions include Finkelstein et al. (2016) and Cutler et al. (2019).
2 Recent surveys include Hyde et al. (2012), Clark and Silver (2011), Gregory et al. (2012) and Goer et al. (2012). Online Appendix A
presents an abbreviated summary of recent studies on health risks associated with c-section.
3 Organizations issuing these guidelines include the World Health Organization (WHO 1985, 2018), the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG 2014), the US Department of Health and Human Services (Spong et al. 2012), the Joint
Commission (2016), the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE 2011).
4 For example, administrators of the state health insurance exchange under the Affordable Care Act in California have threatened to
exclude hospitals with high c-section rates among LRFBs from the exchange plan networks (Dembosky 2018).
5 For example, continuous cardiotocography (CTG) to monitor the fetal heart rate is nearly universal, as is monitoring of uterine

contraction patterns during labor. Non-reassuring signs in these monitoring technologies are a leading reason for c-sections among
LRFBs, despite a high rate of false positives (Morris 2013).


                                                                     1
delivered by c-section.6 Nevertheless, the benefits of vaginal birth, including the avoidance of major
surgery, the potential for improved respiratory and immune system development of the infant,
reduced risks for future deliveries, and maternal preferences, could outweigh these downside risks.
Understanding these factors is critical for assessing the costs and benefits of alternative hospital
delivery practices among the LRFB population. Yet, credible evidence in this domain is lacking.
          We attempt to fill this gap by assessing some of the main health impacts of delivery at higher
versus lower c-section hospitals.7 The potential sorting of patients across hospitals is a key empirical
challenge. Our research design uses the fact that mothers tend to deliver at the nearest hospital (e.g.,
Phibbs et al. 1993; Currie and MacLeod 2017). Building on McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse (1994),
we classify hospitals into two groups based on their risk-adjusted average cesarean rate for LRFBs and
use the relative distance from a mother's home zip code to the nearest high c-section (H) hospital
versus the nearest low c-section (L) hospital as an instrumental variable for delivery at an H hospital.
          We implement this design using a large California data set that combines hospital discharge
records for mothers and newborns, birth certificate information, inpatient and outpatient records for
infants in the year after birth, and parallel records for mothers in the year before birth. These data
provide infant health measures for a large sample of LRFBs, as well as detailed information on
maternal characteristics and predetermined risk factors.
          Two primary concerns arise in this design. The first is that patients who live nearer to high-
or low-intensity hospitals ­ or indeed to any hospital ­ may differ in terms of their underlying health
(Hadley and Cunningham 2004). To address this concern, we extend the existing literature in two main
ways. First, we control directly for the fraction of government-insured mothers in a mother's home
zip code (a good proxy for local income) and include Hospital Service Area (HSA) fixed effects to
ensure that distance comparisons come only from mothers who live in similar neighborhoods within
an HSA. We also hold constant a mothers' access to care by controlling for the distance to any hospital.
Second, we show that, conditional on the above-mentioned controls and other hospital characteristics
(discussed below), relative distance to a high c-section hospital is uncorrelated with a long list of


6 Indeed, among LRFBs, the tradeoff between longer labor and earlier cesarean delivery is contentious. See for example the
commentary by Cohen et al. (2018), criticizing the new guidelines for labor management published by ACOG.
7 Two prospective RCTs of "active management of labor" interventions to reduce c-section rates (López-Zeno et al. 1992; Frigoletto
et al. 1995) reached different conclusions about whether such programs had an effect on c-section rates. More recently, Gimovsky and
Berghella (2016) implemented a small (N=78) RCT to extend labor for women with a prolonged second stage, which substantially
reduced c-section rates. These studies were under-powered for studying subsequent health effects on mothers and infants. Although
our design is relatively powerful for assessing infant health outcomes, it is underpowered for assessing many important but rare maternal
outcomes, such as maternal death or infertility. We therefore focus on infant outcomes, though we present some analysis of maternal
outcomes such as perineal lacerations.


                                                                   2
maternal and newborn characteristics that strongly predict infant health, including education, race,
insurance status, prenatal care, maternal smoking, and infant birth weight. We also document the
insensitivity of all our key results to including any, all, or none of these additional factors in our models.
        The second concern is the possibility of "correlated beneficial care" (McClellan et al. 1994):
i.e., differences in other hospital characteristics and practices that do not determine delivery mode
but are correlated with H/L status, and independently affect health outcomes. We address this
concern in three ways. First, we include controls for a set of key hospital characteristics thought to
independently influence quality and health outcomes: the volume of deliveries, the presence of
different levels of NICU's, ownership of the hospital, and measures of the breastfeeding initiation
rate. Second, we propose a simple falsification test examining breech presentation pregnancies,
which in recent years are nearly always delivered by c-section. If H hospitals differ from L hospitals
in ways that impact health outcomes independent of delivery mode, we expect those effects to
manifest in the breech population, for whom delivery mode is not a function of their delivery
hospital. We do not find evidence that this is the case.
        Third, to control for unobservable factors that affect specific health outcomes, we classify
hospitals based on each of our 4 main infant health outcomes and augment our models with
additional endogenous control variables specifying whether the delivery hospital has high or low
average values of that outcome. As with H/L status, we develop a set of instrumental variables
based on relative distance to high- versus low-outcome hospitals in each domain. Importantly, we
find that controlling for these additional channels has almost no effect on the estimated impacts of
hospital delivery practices. We conclude that our estimates are unlikely to be confounded by
differences in hospital practices that do not determine the delivery mode.
        We begin our empirical analysis by documenting the first-stage relationship between the
relative distance to H versus L hospitals, the probability of delivery at a high c-section (H) hospital,
and the probability of cesarean delivery. We show that relative distance is strongly correlated with the
choice of an H hospital and with the likelihood of cesarean delivery. The higher rate of cesarean
deliveries among mothers who are closer to H hospitals is largely offset by reductions in vaginal births
occurring a day or more after the mother's admission to the hospital, as would be expected if
physicians at these hospitals are referring mothers for c-section earlier in the labor process.
        We find that hospital compliers, who shift their deliveries from low to high c-section hospitals
based on relative distance, have lower education than other mothers and are more likely to be covered
by government insurance. Mothers who deliver by c-section when shifted to a high c-section hospital


                                                      3
­ hospital and procedure compliers ­ have even lower average education and are even more likely to be
covered by government insurance, suggesting that practice style differences have larger impacts on
relatively disadvantaged patients.8
          Turning to an examination of impacts at birth, our IV estimates show that delivery at an H
hospital is associated with a sizable reduction in the probability of a low (<7) 5-minute Apgar score ­
an outcome that is highly correlated with the risk of hospital readmission and death (Iliodometri et al.
2014). This result appears to be driven by a reduction in vaginal deliveries after prolonged labor. We
also find that the average length of hospital stays for newborns at H hospitals is similar to that at L
hospitals, despite their higher rate of cesarean delivery, suggesting that improvements in health for
some babies offset the negative impacts of cesarean delivery on others. For mothers, we find that
delivery at H hospitals leads to a substantial reduction in the rates of perineal lacerations and other
traumas. It also leads to a shorter average time between admission and birth but a longer average time
from birth to discharge, with little net impact on overall length of stay, similar to the result for infants.
          Among our main infant health outcomes, we find that infants of complying mothers delivered
at H hospitals have a higher probability of an ED visit in the year after birth. Consistent with
observational studies documenting adverse respiratory development after c-section (Hyde et al. 2012),
the majority of these additional visits are attributable to respiratory-related diagnoses. Offsetting the
impact on ED use, however, we find a lower probability of readmission to hospital, concentrated in
the neonatal period (first 28 days).
          We also examine the effects of delivery practices on infant deaths. We find consistent
indications that infant mortality rates are, if anything, lower at H hospitals, though the gap is
insignificant in our richest specifications (p0.10). Taken together with our findings on Apgar scores
and neonatal readmissions, we believe the evidence points toward a small but meaningful risk of
adverse events after prolonged labor that is partially mitigated by delivery practices at H hospitals.
          As in other settings, the generalizability of our findings depends on whether the treatment
effects associated with delivery at a high c-section hospital vary across infants. Using correlated
random coefficient (CRC) models (Garen 1984; Heckman and Vytlacil 1998) that allow for
heterogeneity with respect to characteristics of the infant and the local share of cesarean deliveries, as
well as the unobserved component of mother's preferences for hospitals, we find that the estimated


8 In California over our sample period the MediCal system paid the same amount to hospitals for vaginal and cesarean delivery, so this

finding is not driven by financial incentives to perform more cesareans on government-insured patients. See Alexander (2015) for a
discussion of delivery mode choice and financial incentives under Medicaid in a national sample of births.


                                                                  4
average treatment effects in our CRC models are very close to the local average treatment effects from simpler
IV models. We see a mixed pattern of "Roy-style" sorting with respect to different infant outcomes.
        Finally, we consider multi-channel models that include controls for whether the delivery
hospital has high or low average values of each of 4 main infant health outcomes, treating the choice
of type of hospital in each domain as endogenous. As noted, we find that adding these additional
controls has almost no effect on the magnitude of the estimated impacts of hospital delivery practices.
        Taken as a whole, our evidence suggests that delivery practices at high c-section hospitals have
benefits as well as costs for infant health outcomes, and that policies steering women toward low c-
section hospitals could increase the risk of rare but serious adverse outcomes for infants. Additionally,
our estimates suggest that prolonged labor poses a risk to infant health, and that policies aimed at
increasing the wait times until surgical intervention should take account of both the costs and benefits
of longer labors. Since our research design manipulates hospital choice rather than delivery mode
directly, however, and since we lack information on longer run health outcomes for infants or mothers,
we cannot provide a comprehensive welfare analysis of cesarean delivery.
        We contribute to three strands of research. First is an important literature estimating the
effects of hospital practices on patient health. We build directly on the work of McClellan, McNeil,
and Newhouse (1994), Cutler (2007), and Chandra and Staiger (2007), who use distance-based designs
to study treatment of heart attacks. In recent work, Doyle et al. (2015) leverage quasi-random
assignment of ambulance companies to study the health outcomes of elderly Medicare patients with
non-deferrable conditions routed to high-cost hospitals. Our paper extends this literature in two key
ways. First, we study a domain ­ childbirth ­ where we know far less about the causal impacts of
hospital practices than we do for the elderly, and where ambulance-based designs are infeasible.
Second, and relatedly, we extend the classic distance-based design of McClellan et al. (1994) by
developing an econometric framework that clarifies the identification strategy, and by showing how
to evaluate its validity. Relative to prior work using distance-based designs, we focus on local variation
in relative distance to hospitals (within Hospital Service Areas) and we directly address the problem
of correlated beneficial care. We believe our empirical strategy offers a viable approach for evaluating
the impacts of hospital practices in this and other non-emergency care settings.
        We also contribute to an emerging literature on the relationship between management and
productivity in healthcare (e.g. Bloom et al. 2015). Our results suggest that the management of the
timing of interventions (in our case, the timing of intrapartum c-sections) is an important factor in




                                                      5
their effectiveness: earlier interventions improve some outcomes (including readmission rates) in what
would have become difficult labors, at the cost of additional c-sections and higher ED use by infants.
           Finally, we contribute to a growing economics literature on the consequences of treatment
choices at delivery. Jensen and Wüst (2013) show that breech births benefit from c-section delivery.
Jachetta (2014) uses malpractice premiums to instrument for area-level c-section rates and finds that
cesarean delivery leads to higher incidence of asthma. Halla et al. (2020) document a fertility effect of
cesarean delivery for Austrian mothers. Costa-Ramón et al. (2018) use arrival time at the hospital as
an exogenous determinant of c-section rates and find that cesarean delivery leads to lower Apgar
scores. Mühlrad (2019) studies a sharp policy change in Sweden that led to a large increase in c-section
rates for breech presentation births and finds improvements in infant health but no significant effect
on mothers' health or future fertility. We quantify some of the main infant health effects of alternative
hospital delivery practices while paying close attention to the issue of instrument validity and the
possibility of multi-dimensional practice-style differences across hospitals.


II. An Overview of C-Section and Our Modeling Approach
II.a. Hospital Practice Styles and Delivery Outcomes
Figure I gives a stylized representation of the pathways leading to c-section. The left branch shows
the pathway for mothers with a planned (or scheduled) c-section. This includes women who have
had a previous c-section, those with breech pregnancy or multiple fetuses, and those with risk factors
like obesity or eclampsia (Declercq et al. 2006). Their c-sections occur with no attempted labor, often
several days before normal term.
           The right branch shows the pathway for mothers who reach normal term with no scheduled
intervention. Typically, a mother-to-be shows signs of labor and is admitted to hospital where her
progress is monitored and pain relief and labor-augmenting medications are administered.9 Barring
other factors, a decision to perform c-section at hospital h is reached when labor time exceeds the
threshold Th (which may vary with maternal characteristics and other information), resulting in an
unscheduled or intrapartum c-section. Hospital practices vary widely over how long to allow labor to
proceed (Kozhimannil et al. 2014), leading to wide variation in the probability of intrapartum c-
section.


9 Declercq et al. (2006) report that that 76% of all U.S. mothers had epidural anesthesia during labor. Many practitioners believe this
slows labor and makes c-section more likely, though the evidence is controversial ­ see Howell (2000) and Klein (2006). Reporting
rates of epidural anesthesia appear to vary widely across hospitals in our sample and we do not attempt to control for this factor.


                                                                  6
          Given these two very different pathways, we focus on low-risk first births (LRFBs), eliminating
twins, breech presentations, births to mothers younger than 18 or over 35, and five other risk factors.10
We classify hospitals as having high or low cesarean rates for LRFBs relative to other hospitals in the
same regional health care market, and use a distance-based design to identify the causal effects of
delivering at a high c-section hospital. We interpret risk-adjusted differences in c-section rates for
LRFBs as reflecting differences in the hospital-specific threshold Th.11 Several factors could play a role
in this variation, including financial incentives (e.g. Gruber and Owings 1996), malpractice pressures
(e.g. Dubay et al. 1999; Currie and MacLeod 2008; Amaral-Garcia et al. 2016), and differences in
medical training (e.g. Epstein and Nicholson 2009). Rather than try to identify these factors, however,
we take a data-driven approach and simply classify hospitals as H or L.


II.b. Econometric Framework
Our econometric framework consists of linear models for the choice of a high c-section hospital by
mother i (denoted by H i ), cesarean delivery ( Ci ), and a health outcome for the infant ( yi ):

                 !! = #" + ## %! + #$ &! + '!                                                                                         (1)

                 (! = )" + )# %! + )$ &! + *!                                                                                         (2)

                 +! = ," + ,# %! + ,$ &! + -!                                                                                         (3)

In each case the explanatory variables include %! , a measure of the relative distance from the mother's
home to a low versus high c-section hospital, and &! , a vector of controls. Equations (1) and (2) are
first-stage models for choice of hospital type and c-section delivery. Equation (3) is a reduced-form
model for the effect of relative distance on health.
          In this setting there are two possible IV estimators. The first is formed by dividing the reduced
form effect of relative distance (,# ) by the first stage effect on the type of hospital (## ). This estimator
scales the reduced form effect per additional delivery at H hospitals. The second IV estimator divides ,#
by the first stage effect of relative distance on the probability of c-section ()# ), scaling the reduced
form effect per additional c-section.




10 We do not attempt to eliminate c-sections with no sign of labor since the classification depends on indicators of labor on the mother's

discharge record which are known to be under-reported (Henry et al. 1995). See the discussion in Section IV.
11 We present supporting evidence on the timing of birth relative to the day of arrival of the mother below.




                                                                    7
          To clarify the interpretation of these estimators, consider a binary version of relative distance,
%!% , indicating whether a mother's home is closer to a high c-section hospital or not.12 Let !"! and
!#! represent indicators for whether mother i would choose an H hospital when %!% = 0 or %!% = 1,
and let ("! and (#! represent indicators for whether she would deliver by c-section. The potential
responses to changes in %!% are represented by the 4-tuple (!"! , !#! ), (("! , (#! ). For example,
mothers with (!"! , !#! ), (("! , (#! ) = (0,1), (0,0) switch hospital types in response to distance but
who always deliver vaginally (i.e., H-compliers/V always-takers).
          We make three standard assumptions. First, we assume there are no H-defiers (i.e., !#! 
!"! ). Second, we assume that distance has no direct effect on delivery mode, so (#! = ("! if !#! =
!"! .13 Finally, we assume there are no H-complier/C-defiers, ruling out rank-reversals in treatment
intensity for H compliers.14 Under these assumptions there are three subgroups of H-complying
mothers: (1) those who switch from vaginal to cesarean delivery when closer to an H hospital (H&C
compliers); (2) those who always deliver by cesarean (H complier/C always-taker); (3) those who always
deliver vaginally (H complier/V always-taker).
          Let 4# (5), 4& (5), 4' (5) represent the population shares of these three groups for patients
with &! = 5 . Then, for a given x-group the first-stage effect of relative distance on the probability of
delivery at an H hospital (i.e., ## ) identifies 4# (5) + 4& (5) + 4' (5), and the first-stage effect on the
probability of c-section (i.e., )# ) identifies 4# (5). More generally, assuming that X consists of a set of
dummies for mutually exclusive subgroups, the first-stage coefficients for the overall sample identify
the average fractions of H compliers and H&C compliers across subgroups (see Online Appendix B).
          Next, let 6! (, 8, 9, 5) represent a potential health outcome that would be observed for birth
i conditional on hospital type h, delivery mode c, relative distance z, and covariates x. We assume:
                                           6! (, 8, 9, 5) = 6! (, 8, 5)
i.e., the standard exclusion restriction that health does not depend on relative distance conditional on
delivery mode, hospital type, and x. The treatment effects for the three subgroups of H-compliers are:


12 In our analysis below we focus on a continuous measure of relative distance. However, IV estimates using an indicator for being
closer to a high c-section hospital than to a low c-section hospital are similar.
13 This rules out the possibility, for example, that being closer to the hospital affects the stage of labor at arrival, which in turn affects
the probability of c-section. To address concerns about the role of travel time we include a measure of the mother's distance to the
nearest hospital of any type in all our models.
14 Rank invariance is routinely assumed in the analysis of quantile treatment effects (e.g., Chernozhukov and Hansen 2005). Currie and
MacLeod (2017) consider a setting where rank-reversal could be important. They document substantial heterogeneity in physician
diagnostic ability, which could lead to rank reversals if better diagnosticians are concentrated at certain hospitals. Importantly, our low-
risk first birth sample excludes most of the higher-risk births considered by Currie and MacLeod (2017).


                                                                      8
                      :# (5) = ; [6! (1,1, 5) - 6! (0,0, 5)|!&(8ABCDEFG]
                      :& (5) = ; [6! (0,1, 5) - 6! (1,1, 5)|!8ABCDEFG/( - JK]
                      :' (5) = ; [6! (0,0, 5) - 6! (1,0, 5)|!8ABCDEFG/L - JK].
Note that :# , the treatment effect for H&C compliers, combines the effects of a switch from vaginal
to caesarean delivery and the effect of a shorter labor. For the other two groups delivery mode is fixed.
For C-always-takers, however, the c-section may occur earlier in the labor if they deliver at an H
hospital, leading to health benefits for this group.
          The reduced-form health effect for a given x-group is an estimate of 4# (5):# (5) +
4& (5):& (5) + 4' (5):' (5) which combines the probabilities of each complier group with their
treatment effects. Scaling by the first-stage effect on the probability of delivery at an H hospital yields
an estimate of the average treatment effect per H complier:
      [4# (5):# (5) + 4& (5):& (5) + 4' (5):' (5)]/[4# (5) + 4& (5) + 4' (5)]                                                       (4)
Scaling by the first stage effect on the probability of C-section, on the other hand, yields an estimate
of :# (5) + [4& (5):& (5) + 4' (5):' (5)]/4# (5). If there are no health effects on the C or V always-
takers, this is an estimate of :# (5). Given the strong likelihood that practice differences affect the
health of the always-takers (by reducing the time to c-section), we focus on estimates that scale by the
fraction of births moved from L to H hospitals and interpret the IV estimate as a weighted average of
effects for the 3 complier groups.


II.c. Correlated Practices and Capacities
          A concern with the interpretation of IV estimates derived from our baseline model is that high
c-section hospitals may have other differences in practices or capacities that contribute to the health
of infants -- the issue of "correlated beneficial care" identified by McClelland et al. (1994). We address
this concern in two ways. First, we directly control for four key hospital characteristics: the volume
of deliveries, the presence and level of a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), ownership status, and
the breastfeeding initiation rate at the hospital. We include the latter because we have no direct
information of breastfeeding in our birth records, and there is evidence in the literature that mothers
who deliver by cesarean are less likely to initiate breastfeeding (e.g., Hobbs et al. 2016).15



15To the extent that differences in breastfeeding initiation are caused by differences in c-section rates, they are an intermediate
outcome (or "mediator") and controlling for them may lead us to under-state the causal effects of delivering at an H hospital (see e.g.,
Rosenbaum 1984). To be conservative, however, we add these controls.


                                                                   9
         Second, to control for unobservable factors that affect specific health outcomes, we develop a
classification of hospitals based on a set of four health outcomes for infants born at the hospital, and
add a set of endogenous control variables specifying whether the delivery hospital has high or low
average values of each outcome. Specifically, we classify hospitals as having high or low average rates
of: (1) ED visits in the year after birth; (2) readmission to hospital in the year after birth; (3) low 5-
minute Apgar scores; and (4) infant death. These variables control for arbitrary sources of unobserved
heterogeneity that affect multiple dimensions of infant health, including differences in the quality of
management (Bloom et al. 2015) and differences in the quality or training of hospital staff. To address
the endogeneity of these hospital characteristics we follow the same steps as above to form a set of
four instrumental variables based on relative distance to a high- versus low-outcome hospitals on each
domain. We then estimate models with a total of 5 endogenous hospital characteristics, including our
primary variable of interest indicating high or low c-section rates among LRFBs.


III. Data Sources, Sample Overview, Relative Distance Instrument
III.a. Data Sources
We use a linked cohort data set created by the California Office of Statewide Health Planning and
Development (OSHPD) that combines patient discharge (PD) records, emergency department (ED)
records, ambulatory surgery (AS) records, and vital statistics (VS) records for all in-hospital births
between 2007 and 2011.16 Specifically, discharge records for the birth stay of the infant and mother
are linked with birth certificate data, PD/ED/AS and VS records over the following year, and
PD/ED/AS records for mothers in the year prior to birth. The resulting data set includes VS-based
information on the mother (e.g., education, race, weight, and prenatal care) and infant (gestation,
birthweight, Apgar score), as well as PD-based information on diagnoses at delivery. Pre-birth
PD/ED/AS records provide additional indicators of maternal health (such as the number of ED visits
in the year prior to birth). The post-partum PD/ED/AS and VS records provide our main health
outcomes (hospital and ED visits and infant death in the year after birth).
         A limitation of these data is the absence of information on visits to physician offices,
community clinics, and similar facilities. Thus, we miss health problems for infants or mothers that
are treated in these settings rather than at hospitals or AS centers. And despite the relatively rich
information from the birth stay records and the birth certificate, we also lack direct clinical information

16 This is known as PDD/ED/AS/Linked Birth Cohort data and is available to researchers through OSHPD. See Online Appendix C
for more information on the characteristics of the data and the derivation of our samples.


                                                           10
on factors like whether a cesarean occurred after a trial of labor, leaving us to infer trials of labor from
procedure and diagnosis codes following Henry et al. (1995).17 The offsetting benefit is that we have
a relatively large sample size, allowing us to detect plausible-sized effects with an IV research design.


III.b. Data Overview
Table I provides an overview of the characteristics of all 2.7 million births in California during our 5-
year sample window (column 1), all low-risk first births (column 2), and our analysis sample (column
3). We define LRFBs as singleton non-breech first births delivered at 37+ weeks of gestation,
corresponding to the two lowest risk groups in Robson's (2001) classification. We further eliminate
mothers under 18 or over 35 and those with any of 5 other risk factors: eclampsia, pre-eclampsia,
growth restrictions, BMI >90th percentile, or >20 prenatal visits. We do not condition on other risk
factors, allowing us to test for orthogonality of our instrument with indicators of infant health.
          The entries in column 1 show that about 50% of all California mothers are Hispanic, one-half
have no more than high school education, and one-half have their delivery paid by government
insurance (mainly Medi-Cal, the state's version of Medicaid). All three rates fall to around 40% among
LRFB mothers. LRFB mothers are also younger and lighter. Overall about one third of all California
births and one quarter of LRFBs were delivered by c-section during our sample period, similar to the
national averages reported by Osterman and Martin (2014).


III.c. Construction of Relative Distance Instrument
Our distance-based design relies on a prior classification of hospitals. To capture local variation in the
hospital types available to an expecting mother and because c-section rates vary across regions of
California (e.g. rates are much higher in Los Angeles than in the Bay Area), we elected to define high
and low c-section hospitals within Health Referral Regions (HRRs).18 As detailed in Online Appendix
C, we fit a logit model for cesarean delivery on our LRFB sample, including hospital dummies and a
set of risk factors. We classify a hospital as "high c-section" (H) for mothers in a given HRR if its
risk-adjusted c-section rate (i.e., the hospital effect in the logit) is above the patient-weighted mean for



17 Johnson & Rehavi (2016) similarly use this classification method. Martin et al. (2013b) evaluate the quality of the medical and health
data recorded on birth certificates and conclude that while some information (e.g. parity) is relatively accurate, other information (e.g.,
fetal intolerance of labor) is poorly recorded.
18 Hospital referral regions (HRRs) represent regional health care markets for tertiary medical care, defined by the Dartmouth Atlas.

There are 25 HRRs in our sample of LRFBs. If we classified hospitals on a statewide basis, we would have many more high c-section
hospitals in Southern and Central California and many more low c-section hospitals in Northern California.


                                                                   11
all hospitals in that HRR. Otherwise it is classified as "low c-section" (L).19 We note that if a hospital
serves mothers from two adjacent HRRs it may be classified as H for mothers in one HRR and L for
those in the other, depending on c-section rates at other hospitals in the two HRRs.
          Online Appendix Table I shows that the average cesarean delivery rate of LRFBs is 29% at H
hospitals and 22% at L hospitals. About two-thirds of the difference is attributable to a higher rate of
c-sections that are performed in cases where there are no indications of a trial of labor (which,
following the literature, we refer to as unscheduled c-sections hereafter).20 H hospitals are also more likely
to be for-profit than L hospitals (18% vs. 9%) and less likely to have a NICU unit (74% vs. 86%), but
have about the same average numbers of deliveries per year (3,695 versus 3,635). To address
differences in health outcomes that may be attributed to observed hospital characteristics, in our
models below we include controls for hospital ownership, type of NICU, and number of deliveries,
as well as variables measuring breastfeeding initiation rates.
          Given the hospital classifications, we then calculate the distance from the centroid of a
patient's home zip code to the centroid of the zip code of the nearest H hospital (M(! ) and the nearest
L hospital (M)! ). We define relative distance %!  M)! - M(! and an indicator for being closer to an
H hospital %!% = 1[%!  0]. We also define the distance to nearest hospital M!
                                                                            *+,
                                                                                = min[M)! , M(! ].
          The third column of Table I presents the characteristics of the subsample of LRFBs that have
non-missing patient zip code information, non-missing values for all the control variables in our main
specifications, and have M(!  20 miles, M)!  20 miles, and less than 20 miles between the mother's
home zip code and actual hospital she delivered in. These restrictions eliminate about 20% of LRFBs,
leaving our final analysis sample of 491,604 births. A comparison of columns 2 and 3 suggests that
this sample is quite similar to the overall LRFB sample.
          Figure II illustrates the strong relationship between relative distance and hospital choice for
LRFB mothers. Here we plot the fraction of mothers in each zip code who deliver at an H hospital
against the value of %! for mothers in that zip code. The data suggest a nearly symmetric S-curve




19 One concern is that the estimated hospital logit coefficients models for c-section simply reflect unobservable case-mix differences.
To probe whether our classification algorithm is biased by case-mix differences, we reclassified hospitals with various sets of risk-
adjusters. Reassuringly, the resulting classifications are all nearly perfectly correlated with our preferred classification, suggesting that
case-mix differences, although likely present, are unlikely to significantly affect our results.
20 Our data do not contain a flag for scheduled vs unscheduled c-sections; therefore, we follow the existing literature (e.g., Gregory et
al. 2002; Johnson and Rehavi 2016) and use the absence/presence of any sign of trial of labor as a proxy for scheduled/unscheduled
c-sections. We classify c-sections with or without sign of labor based on the presence or absence of at least one of a set of ICD-9-CM
diagnosis codes devised by Henry et al. (1995) that indicate dystocia or fetal distress during labor.


                                                                    12
relationship, tending toward a minimum of about 10% when %! < -15 and a maximum of about
90% when %! > 15.


III.d. Evaluating Instrument Validity
A concern with a distance-based IV strategy is that relative distance may be correlated with underlying
determinants of patient health (e.g., Hadley and Cunningham 2004; Garabedian et al. 2014). To assess
this concern, we estimated a series of OLS models for a set of observed maternal characteristics and
infant risk factors, looking for evidence of a correlation with relative distance. Specifically, for each
risk factor we fit a model of the form:
                      W! = X" + X# %! + X- &!" + . ,                                                     (5)
where &!" is a set of basic control variables we include in all our outcome models. This includes HSA
                                                          *+,
effects, year effects, distance to the nearest hospital (M!   ), a set of 17 variables summarizing 4 key
characteristics of the hospital of delivery (ownership, volume of deliveries, presence and type of
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), and breastfeeding initiation rates), and a simple measure of
neighborhood economic status based on the fraction of all mothers (including first- and higher-parity
births) from the same zip code who were covered by government insurance at their delivery. The last
variable is included to control for the possibility that lower-income families are sorted within HSAs
and are more likely to live near hospitals with higher (or lower) risk-adjusted c-section rates.
        Results for 31 different maternal characteristics and risk factors are summarized in Table II.
The list includes variables like mother's age, insurance status, smoking behavior, use of prenatal care,
the infant's gestation and birth weight, and a set of characteristics of new mothers in the mother's zip
code ­ all variables that are correlated with infant health outcomes.
        Column 1 reports estimates of the X# coefficients from this exercise, with standard errors
clustered at the mother's zip code in column 2. Controlling for HSA and the fraction of mothers in
the same zip code with government insurance, mothers living closer to H or L hospitals are statistically
indistinguishable from one another. Only 2 of the 31 estimated coefficients are near statistical
significance: an indicator for late initiation of maternal care; and maternal asthma. To summarize the
overall pattern of the differences in risk factors we fit logit models for 3 outcomes ­ an infant ED
visit in the year after birth, an infant readmission to hospital, and infant death ­ using all 31 predictors
in the table. As shown at the bottom of the table, we find no evidence that infants whose mothers live
nearer to H hospitals have higher or lower predicted risks of these outcomes. Finally, we perform a



                                                    13
joint F-test of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on all 31 listed characteristics are jointly zero in
a regression of relative distance on those characteristics and our baseline controls. The F-statistic from
this test is 1.092 ­ close to its expected value under the null, with a p-value of 0.335.21
          For comparative purposes columns 3 and 4 show the estimated coefficients and standard
errors from models of the relationship between the risk factors and actual delivery at a high c-section
hospital (i.e., we replace %! in equation (5) with !! ). Consistent with the motivation for an
instrumental-variables approach in the first place, we observe significant evidence of sorting across
hospital types. Conditional on our basic controls, mothers who deliver at H hospitals are more likely
to have government insurance; have higher rates of visiting the hospital in the year before delivery;
have higher rates of smoking during their pregnancy; and have infants that are more likely to be low
birthweight (<2500g). On balance, it appears that infants delivered at H hospitals have worse health:
predicted ED visits, inpatient readmissions and death rates are all significantly higher for these infants.
          In contrast, the results in columns 1 and 2 show that our approach of looking within HSAs
and isolating choices based on the relative distance to H versus L hospitals overcomes this sorting. In
the analysis below, however, we perform several additional checks to ascertain that our IV estimates
remain stable as we add various controls.


IV. First-Stage Relationships and Complier Characteristics
With this background, we turn to our first-stage models and a characterization of the compliers
affected by relative distance. The first two rows of Table III present estimates of the first-stage effects
of relative distance on the probabilities of giving birth in an H hospital and delivering by cesarean.
We show 4 sets of estimates. The first two columns use the continuous version of relative distance
(%! ), with only our basic controls (&!" ) or a full set of controls that includes all the variables in Table
II (in some cases expanded to a set of dummies or a polynomial function). The third and fourth
columns show analogous estimates using the binary version of our instrument (%!% ).
          The estimate of 1.304 in the first row of the first column means that a mother living 10 miles
closer to an H-hospital is 13.04 percentage points (ppts) more likely to deliver at an H hospital
(controlling for &!" ), while the 0.682 estimate in the third column means that a mother who lives closer

21 Consistent with the concerns raised by Hadley and Cunningham (2004), there is some evidence of sorting at broader geographies.
The F-test without conditioning on mother's HSA rejects that these 31 characteristics are orthogonal to relative distance (with a p <
0.001), highlighting the importance of comparing mothers who are served by the same hospital market for the validity of our distance-
based design. We have also conducted this analysis excluding the 17 variables representing characteristics of the delivery hospital and
reach the same conclusion (results available upon request).


                                                                 14
to an H hospital than to an L hospital is 6.82 ppts more likely to deliver at such a hospital. Both
estimates are highly significant. We note that the t-statistic for the continuous version of relative
distance (9.9) is large enough that a conventional t-test on a second stage coefficient has approximately
correct size (Lee et al., 2020, Table 3). Consistent with the results in Table II, we also see that adding
the extra controls has almost no effect on the estimates of the first stage effects.
           Relative distance also has a strong effect on the probability of c-section delivery. A mother
living 10 miles closer to an H hospital has a 1.59 ppt higher probability of c-section; a mother who is
simply closer to an H-hospital than an L hospital has a 0.78 ppt higher probability of c-section. Again,
these effects are virtually the same when we add the additional controls.
           The third and fourth rows of Table III show the effects of relative distance on cesarean
deliveries that occur with or without indications of labor. These estimates suggest that about three-
quarters of the extra c-sections attributable to living closer to an H hospital were unscheduled
procedures (i.e., occurring after an attempt at labor). Since indicators of labor are known to be under-
reported on the mother's discharge record, this is a lower bound on the share of c-sections after a trial
of labor caused by the instrument. Indeed, the 16% under-reporting rate found by Henry et al. (1995)
implies that at least half of the c-sections without signs of labor actually occurred after a trial of labor
­ i.e., that the vast majority of additional c-sections caused by distance-based selection of an H hospital
occurred after a trial of labor.22
           The next rows of Table III show the estimated effects of relative distance on the probabilities
of c-section and vaginal births on the day the mother arrived at the hospital versus 1 or more days
later. (We do not have information on the hour of arrival or birth). Most of the extra c-sections for
mothers who are closer to an H hospital occur on the day of arrival, while most of the reduction in
vaginal deliveries is for births after a day or more in hospital. This pattern implies that practices at H
hospitals tend to shift later vaginal births to earlier cesarean deliveries.
           Next, we show estimates of the effect of relative distance on cesarean deliveries at H and L
hospitals, respectively. Being closer to an H hospital leads to relatively large rise in the probability of
delivery by c-section at an H hospital, offset by a reduction in c-sections at L hospitals. Under our




22 Data from Henry et al. (1995) show that of 831 primary c-sections for non-breech births that were clinically coded as having trial of
labor, 701 had indications of labor on the discharge record, implying a 15.6% under-reporting rate. If we assume that distance only
affects c-section rates with signs of labor, we would expect to find that c-sections with no signs of labor account for 15.6% of the overall
first stage effect. Martin et al. (2013b) report that "trial of labor" reported on the birth certificate under-reports actual trial of labor for
cesarean delivered births by 12-25%.


                                                                      15
assumptions the latter effect is an estimate of the share of H-complier/C-ATs, who switch hospital
types in response to relative distance but have a cesarean delivery regardless of where they present.
          The bottom panel of the table shows the implied breakdowns of the H-complier population
into its three constituent subgroups. To calculate these fractions using the continuous distance
instrument we use the changes in probabilities associated with a 5-mile reduction in relative distance
to an H hospital (which has about the same effect on the probability of H-delivery as simply being
closer to an H-hospital). Both the continuous and binary versions of the instrument imply that H&C
compliers represent 12% of the overall H complier population, while C-ATs represent about 19%,
and V-ATs represent 69%.
          To further explore the effects of relative distance on hospital and delivery mode choice, we
used the discrete version of our instrument to estimate the mean characteristics of the overall group
of H-compliers and the subgroup of H&C compliers. The results are summarized in Table IV. A
comparison of the demographic characteristics of all LRFB mothers (column 1) and the H-compliers
(column 2) shows that the compliers are more likely to be Hispanic and to have at most a high school
education. They are also more likely to have government insurance, much less likely to be enrolled in
Kaiser (a large HMO with its own hospitals, most of which are classified as L), and to have visited an
ED in the year prior to birth.23 Consistent with evidence from other settings (e.g., Beckert et al.'s
(2012) study of hip replacement) these comparisons suggest that less advantaged families are more
affected by distance.
          The H&C compliers (column 3) are even more highly selected. For example, only about 14%
have a college degree; they are also more likely to live in zip codes with higher fractions of government-
insured mothers, and to have been users of the ED prior to the birth. The implication is that
differences in hospital practices have a larger impact on the delivery modes of lower-SES mothers,
even conditional on choosing a hospital based on relative distance. This complements the findings
reported by Johnson and Rehavi (2016), who show that the delivery choices of mothers who are
themselves physicians are less responsive to the financial incentives faced by their doctors.24




23 We have estimated our main models excluding Kaiser insurees and find that the resulting IV estimates are very similar to those from
our larger sample. This is as expected given there are so few Kaiser insurees among the compliers.
24 An earlier study Grytten et al. (2011) finds that in Norway, where c-section rates are among the lowest in the OECD, physician
mothers are more likely to have c-section. They attribute this to enhanced agency of these mothers in the hospital setting.


                                                                 16
          Panel D of Table IV shows the fractions of compliers whose infants have above-median
predicted probabilities of an ED visit or inpatient readmission in the year after birth.25 Infants of H&C
compliers have high risks of an ED visit or readmission, suggesting that these infants may be
particularly vulnerable to problems at delivery.


V. Impacts of High C-Section Delivery Practices on Infant and Maternal Health
V.a. Outcomes at Delivery
With this background, we now turn to the health effects of hospital-specific delivery practices. We
begin in Table V with outcomes realized at delivery. For simplicity we focus on specifications that
use the continuous version of relative distance as an instrument and include our full set of controls
(with the first stage model presented in column 3 of Table III).
          For infants, we examine the 5-minute Apgar score, admission to the NICU, use of ventilation,
and length of hospital stay.26 For mothers, we focus on labor-related injuries and the length of the
hospital stay. For each outcome, we show the mean among all LRFBs (column 1), and the OLS
coefficient from a regression of the outcome on H i and all the individual controls (column 2). Then,

in columns 3-4 we show the estimated reduced-form effects of the continuous instrument Z i and the
corresponding IV estimate of the effect of delivery at an H hospital.
          Apgar scores are widely used as diagnostic indicators of newborn health (Casey et al. 2001).27
Score range from 0 to 10: a score <7 is often taken as an indicator of poor health at birth (Currie et
al. 2019) and is highly correlated with neonatal and infant mortality (Iliodromiti et al. 2014). Note that
the average fraction of infants with a low Apgar score (<7) is under 1%, underscoring the severity of
this condition. In OLS models, delivery at an H hospital has a modest negative effect on the
probability of a score <7. The reduced form effect of relative distance is also negative and significant
(p=0.025); the associated IV estimate is relatively large in magnitude (-0.8 percentage points) and
significant (p=0.025).



25 We estimate logit models for the probabilities, including the full set of controls but excluding HSA dummies. We emphasize that

higher risk of an ED visit represents a combination of worse health and a higher probability that the family takes the infant to an ED
rather than a doctor office or clinic.
26 We use Vital Statistics reports of Apgar scores, birth injuries, NICU admissions, and ventilation.
27 The Apgar is based on 5 components (breathing, heart rate, muscle tone, reflexes, and skin color) each of which is scored 0 1 or 2.
See Finster and Wood (2005) for a brief history and discussion of the test. We have also looked at the 1-minute Apgar ­ the results are
similar but slightly attenuated. Existing studies, briefly summarized in Online Appendix Table A-I, suggest that there is a positive
association between the 5 minute Apgar score and outcomes later in life, including IQ at age 18 (Odd et al. 2007) and the probability of
graduating from high school (Stuart et al. 2011), driven by relatively poor outcomes for infants with scores of 7 or less.


                                                                  17
          To help understand this effect we examined the effect of delivery at an H hospital on a set of
joint outcomes representing the combination of delivery mode (vaginal or cesarean), timing of birth
relative to mother's arrival at hospital (same day or 1+ days later) and high- versus low-Apgar (<7 or
7).28 The results, summarized in Online Appendix Table II, show that nearly all the effect of delivery
at an H hospital on the rate of low Apgar scores derives from a reduction in the joint event of a late
delivery and a low Apgar score.29 Interestingly, about half of this effect comes from a reduction in late
cesarean deliveries with low Apgar scores, and half from a reduction in the late vaginal deliveries with
a low Apgar scores. These results suggest that the practice of ending labor earlier at H hospitals has a
net positive effect on infants born after long deliveries, some of whom would be delivered vaginally
if the mother had gone to an L hospital (i.e., the H&C compliers) and some of whom would be
delivered by a late cesarean (the H-complier/C-always takers).30
          Looking at the other health outcomes for infants in Table V, we find that delivering at H
hospitals has little or no effect on NICU admissions, but a positive effect on the incidence of
ventilation. The latter is consistent with a large literature suggesting that infants delivered by cesarean
are more likely to have problems with fluid in their lungs and initiation of breathing (see Online
Appendix A). Last, we examine the newborn's length of stay. OLS models indicate that infants born
at H hospitals spend about 0.16 extra days in hospital before going home. In contrast, IV estimates
show insignificant effects, though we cannot rule out modest impacts (of either sign).
          The bottom panel of the table focuses on maternal outcomes at birth. We first examine the
rates of two common complications associated with difficult labors. (As highlighted earlier, our data
and design are under-powered for a fuller analysis of the effects of H delivery on rare but important
maternal health outcomes). First-time mothers commonly experience both perineal laceration (PL)
and trauma to the perineum and vulva (29% for PL, 46% for trauma). Both complications are highly
negatively associated with c-section delivery, as these complications mainly stem from the process of
labor and vaginal delivery. Thus, perhaps unsurprisingly, both the OLS and IV estimates of the effect
of delivery at an H hospital are relatively large and negative.



28 Unfortunately, we do not observe exact time of admission or hour of birth. We only know the days elapsed between her admission
to the hospital and the birth date of the baby. According to Declercq et al. (2006), the mean time in labor for first-time mothers is
around 11 hours. Consistent with this, the delay from admission to birth is 0 or 1 day in 95% of cases.
29 Specifically, of the 0.82 percentage point reduction in the rate of low Apgar scores, 0.65 percentage points comes from a reduction
in the probability of a late deliver and a low Apgar (standard error=0.26).
30 We have also investigated other indicators of prolonged labor, including a code on the birth certificate, which yields qualitatively

similar results. However, average reported rates for prolonged labor on the birth certificate vary widely across hospitals (from 0 to 16%)
so we are reluctant to attach much weight to this variable and do not use it elsewhere in the paper.


                                                                   18
          Turning to maternal length of stay, we estimate separate models for the number of days from
admission to the birth, and for the number of days from birth until maternal discharge, i.e. the post-
birth LOS. As expected, OLS models show that mothers who deliver at H hospitals have a shorter
period from hospital admission to birth, offset by a longer post-birth stay. Turning to the IV estimates,
we find that delivery at an H hospital has a negative effect on the length of labor (consistent with the
results in Table III) and a small positive effect on the post-birth stay of mothers. Consequently, the
net effect on the total length of the maternal stay is small (-0.045+0.075 = 0.03 days) and statistically
insignificant, similar to our findings for infant LOS.
          At first glance the small and insignificant effect of delivery at a high c-section hospital seems
inconsistent with the average duration for mothers who deliver by c-section is longer than the average
for mothers who deliver vaginally. However, it is important to interpret this finding in light of the
potential outcomes for the two groups who deliver by cesarean at H hospitals: the C-AT's, who would
have a c-section regardless of hospital choice, and the H&C compliers. For the always-takers (who are
about 2× more prevalent) the shorter time in labor at H hospitals is potentially helpful, shortening the
needed recovery time after surgery. The net benefit for the compliers is less clear: some would have
significant injuries if they delivered at an L hospital, so the switch to cesarean delivery could reduce
the post-birth stay. Others might have been able to deliver vaginally without injuries, implying that the
switch to an H hospital and a cesarean delivery would increase their post-birth length of stay. Taking
account of these three sets of effects and the higher prevalence of C-AT's we believe it is highly
plausible that average length of stay is about the same at H and L hospitals.31


V.b. Post-Delivery Admission Outcomes ­ Infants
We now turn to our main health outcomes based on hospital and ED/ASC visits in the year after
birth. For infants, in the upper panel of Table VI, we show results for six outcomes: (1) any ED visit
in the year after birth; (2) an ED visit for acute respiratory conditions; (3) any readmission to hospital
in the first month after birth (the neonatal period); (4) any readmission to hospital in the year after
birth; (5) 6 or more days in the hospital or death within a month of birth; (6) death within a year of
birth. We include the fifth outcome, combining longer inpatient stays and death in the neonatal
period, as a proxy for an "adverse health event" at birth. This outcome has a reasonably high rate of

31 We have investigated a few other outcomes at birth, namely unplanned hysterectomy and asphyxia of the neonate. In our sample, the
mean rate of unplanned hysterectomy is only 1 in 10,000; we find no evidence of an effect of H delivery, but the precision of our
estimates is low. Asphyxia is also rare (3.2 per 1000), and we find very weak evidence (t=0.5) that H hospital reduce asphyxia. There is
somewhat stronger evidence that H hospitals reduce asphyxia-related infant deaths.


                                                                  19
prevalence (67 per 1,000) whereas death among LRFB's is extremely rare, making it relatively difficult
to model.32
          The estimated OLS coefficients imply that delivery at an H hospital is associated with small
positive effects on ED visits and inpatient stays, and with a higher probability of a longer hospital stay
or death in the first month. These results are broadly consistent with a large observational literature
suggesting that higher rates of cesarean delivery are correlated with worse infant health outcomes.
          In contrast, the IV estimates suggest a more nuanced story. Specifically, our IV estimates of
the effect on ED visits are relatively large and positive, particularly for respiratory-related illnesses.
The point estimate represents a nearly 40% increase in the incidence of these visits, accounting for
about 60% of the overall rise in ED visits. On the other hand, the IV estimates also indicate a
significant reduction in the risk of more severe conditions that necessitate a hospital stay and possibly
lead to death, particularly in the first month.
          More insight into these offsetting effects is provided in Figure III, where we plot the estimated
cumulative hospital readmission rates (Panel a) and ED visit rates (Panel b) by month for hospital
compliers who deliver at H and L hospitals ­ i.e., the potential outcomes of the compliers, estimated
using the suggestion of Abadie (2003) ­ as well as the associated cumulated treatment effects of
delivering at an H hospital (with point-wise confidence bands). Focusing first on Panel a, we see that
the time path of readmissions is concave, with a particularly pronounced rise in the first month after
birth for compliers who deliver at L hospitals. The estimated (IV) effect of delivery at an H hospital
emerges in the first month and then stabilizes, indicative of a health gap at birth for children delivered
in L hospitals that requires readmission. This pattern is consistent with recent experimental and
observational studies showing that policies that prolong the second stage of labor (as at L hospitals)
lead to lower c-section rates but to some immediate neonatal complications (Zipori et al. 2019;
Gimovsky and Berghella 2016).33 The time profiles of the cumulative probabilities of an ED visit
(Panel b) are less concave and only diverge gradually, with a higher rate of growth (i.e., a higher hazard
of a first ED visit) for compliers who deliver at H hospitals. The estimated (IV) effect of delivery at



32 Online Appendix Table III shows the characteristics of all LRFBs and those that resulted in an infant death within a year of birth.
Infants that die are about 7 times more likely to be low birth weight (<2,500 grams) than those that survive, and over 30% have a 5-
minute Apgar score below 7. Infants that ultimately die are about 4 times more likely to be readmitted as an inpatient but have about
the same probability of an ED visit in the year after birth as other infants. They are also more likely to have been delivered by cesarean,
though the latter correlation is driven by procedures with no signs of labor: the mean death rate is 1.1/1000 for vaginal births, 0.9 for
c-sections with signs of labor, and 2.9 for cesareans with no signs of labor.
33 Given the small sample size, these studies are somewhat underpowered to obtain precise estimates of the health impacts of
prolonging the second stage of labor.


                                                                   20
an H hospital on infant ED visits appears to be very small in the neonatal period, starts materializing
approximately two months after birth and keeps on rising throughout the first year of life.
          Sensitivity analysis. Although we noted in the discussion of Table II that relative distance to
an H hospital (our main instrumental variable) is orthogonal to a wide set of maternal characteristics
and risk factors, it is informative to examine how the estimated effects of relative distance on infant
ED visits, readmissions, and death are affected by including or excluding these characteristics.34 The
results of such an exercise are summarized in the four panels of Figure IV, each of which shows the
range of possible reduced form impacts that could be obtained by adding any combination of 12 groups
of additional controls to our basic control set (for a listing of these groups of controls, see Online
Appendix Figure I, which groups the variables from Table II). Specifically, for a given k=0,...,12 we
randomly select k of the 12 possible groups of controls, then re-estimate the reduced form models.
By repeatedly sampling we obtain a distribution of potential reduced form estimates for each k. The
panels in Figure IV show the minimum, maximum, mean, and median reduced form estimate for all
ED visits (panel a), ED visits for acute respiratory conditions (panel b), inpatient readmissions in the
first month (panel c), and neonatal death (panel d). Consistent with the results in Table II, we find
that adding any subset of controls has a negligible effect on the magnitude (or precision) of the reduced
form effects of relative distance on either measure of ED visits or on the reduced form effects on
inpatient readmissions or death in the neonatal period.35 Online Appendix Figure I shows the results
of a similar robustness exercise, in which we include only one set of these additional controls at a time
for interpretability; results are again very stable.
          Interpreting estimated effect on infant death. Our IV point estimate of the effect of H
delivery on infant death (2.6/1000) is large relative to the mean death rate for all LRFBs of 1.2/1000,
though we emphasize that the estimate is only on the border of conventional statistical significance.
Nevertheless, to contextualize the plausibility of this estimate, we provide two additional pieces of
evidence.
          First, as we noted in the discussion of Table IV, infants of the compliers whose behavior
drives the IV estimates are less healthy than other LRFB's. We therefore estimated the mean potential
death rate of the hospital complier group when delivering at L hospitals The estimated rate is 2.2
deaths per thousand (with a standard error of 1.0 deaths), which is substantially higher than the overall


34See Altonji, Elder and Taber (2005) and Oster (2017) for discussions.
35The first stage effect of relative distance on the probability of delivering at an H hospital is extremely stable across specifications that
add any or all the extra controls.


                                                                     21
mean for LRFBs, suggesting that the infants of distance-complying mothers are frailer than the overall
population. Relative to this base rate, however, the estimated effect of delivery at an H hospital is still
very large.
          Second, we address a possible objection to our modeling framework: that the risk of death is
so low that a linear probability model is inappropriate. In Online Appendix Table III we re-estimate
the reduced-form model using logistic and probit regressions. In both cases, we find that relative
distance has a negative effect on the risk of death (with p-value of 0.045 for logistic and 0.039 for
probit, versus 0.032 in the OLS reduced form model). Moreover, the implied average marginal effect
of a 10-mile reduction in the relative distance to an H hospital is quite similar to the effect implied by
our OLS reduced form: -0.034 in both the logistic and probit specifications, versus -0.026 for the
OLS model.36 We conclude that relative proximity to an H hospital has a comparably sized negative
effect on the probability of death regardless of functional form, but again emphasize that these results
should be interpreted cautiously given that our confidence intervals of these effects all begin near 0.


V.c. Post-Delivery Admission Outcomes ­ Mothers
Returning to Table VI, the lower panel presents a parallel set of models for maternal ED visits and
readmissions in the year after birth. OLS models show that delivery at an H hospital is associated
with a small increase in the probability of visiting an ED or ASC in the following year, and a very small
effect on inpatient readmissions. The associated IV estimates show the same pattern, with positive
but insignificant point estimates for both types of visits (p=0.11 for ED/ASC visits; p=0.16 for
inpatient visits). We conclude that any effects of delivery at an H hospital on mothers ED or
readmissions in the year after birth may be positive but are likely smaller in magnitude that the effects
on infants. We also note that these outcomes do not capture some of the important hypothesized
effects of increased rates of cesarean delivery on mothers. For example, we do not have sufficient
power to investigate issues such as the possibility that a higher cesarean delivery rate leads to higher
risk of placenta previa in subsequent births.


V.d. Falsification Test Based on Breech Deliveries
A concern with our distance-based IV strategy is that H hospitals have other practice differences
that contribute to the reduced-form effect of relative distance on infant health. We evaluate this

36We also conducted a similar analysis using a binary version of the instrument ­ which yields a very similar IV estimate of the effect
of death ­ and found that computing the reduced form effect using OLS or logit gives nearly the same effect.


                                                                  22
concern using multi-channel models in the next section. Before proceeding, however, we briefly
discuss a simple falsification test using breech presentation pregnancies, which in recent years are
nearly always delivered by cesarean in the U.S.37 Specifically, we constructed a sample of low-risk
breech presentation first births (BPFBs), and fit our first-stage and reduced-form models, looking
for any evidence of different birth outcomes at H versus L hospitals.38 If H hospitals differ from L
hospitals in ways that impact health outcomes independent of delivery mode, we might expect those
effects to manifest in the BPFP population, for whom delivery mode is not a function of their
delivery hospital.
          As shown in Online Appendix Table IV, we find that the first-stage effect of relative
distance on the probability of delivery at an H hospital is about the same for BPFBs as LRFBs, while
the effect on cesarean delivery is insignificant as expected. However, in contrast to the positive
reduced form effect of relative distance on the probability of an ED visit for respiratory-related
problems in the year after birth for LRFBs, we find a zero effect for BPFBs (estimate = -0.002,
standard error = 0.097). Similarly, instead of the negative reduced form effect on the probability of an
inpatient readmission in the neonatal period for LRFBs, we find a marginally significant positive
effect for BPFBs (estimate = 0.133, standard error = 0.066). Reassuringly, there is no evidence that
practice differences or unobserved characteristics of H hospitals lead to a positive bias in the effect
of H delivery on respiratory-related ED visits or a negative bias in the effect on neonatal admissions.


V.e. Allowing for Other Hospital Practice Differences
A concern for interpreting our findings on the effects of delivery practices at H hospitals is the
possibility of other practices (that do not determine delivery mode) differing at these hospitals. While
all our models control for differences in NICU, ownership, delivery volume, and breastfeeding
initiation, and our falsification test based on breech deliveries is reassuring, one might still be worried
about the possible impact of such differences.
          As a way to address these concerns, we classify hospitals based on the risk-adjusted outcomes of
infants there and add a control for the class of the hospital. To the extent that unobserved


37 Policy in the U.S. regarding c-section for breech position was heavily influenced by results from a randomized trial in 2000 that
found lower risk of death for cesarean delivery. Mühlrad (2019) studies the effect of the publication of the trial results in Sweden,
where cesarean rates for breech position rose, but did not reach anything like U.S. levels.
38 The sample contains 12,744 breech presentation first births with no other risk factors. 98% were delivered by cesarean. The
mothers are better educated and more likely to be white non-Hispanic than those in our main sample. The infants have very similar
mean birth weights as LRFB's (3278 grams versus 3348) are somewhat less likely to have an ED visit in the year after birth (30.9%
versus 33.8%) or an inpatient readmission (7.3% versus 8.2%).


                                                                  23
characteristics of a given hospital lead to different health outcomes, these will be revealed in the
average outcomes of infants born at that hospital and captured by the control for the class of the
hospital. Given our main infant health outcomes of interest, we classify hospitals along four
dimensions: (1) high or low fraction of infants with an Apgar score <7; (2) high or low fraction of
infants born at the hospital that have an ED visit in the year after birth; (3) high or low fraction of
infants born at the hospital that have an inpatient readmission in the year after birth; (4) high or low
fraction of infants born at the hospital that die within a year of birth.
          Since the choice of delivery hospital is endogenous, we follow the same steps we used to
develop our primary instrumental variable (%! ) and form 4 new instrumental variables based on relative
distance to a high- versus low-outcome hospitals. We then fit a set of models that include controls
for all 4 outcome classes of the delivery hospital as well as its high or low c-section status.
          Table VII presents the results for these multichannel models. We focus on a set of 7 outcomes,
ranging from the incidence of a low Apgar score to death within a year of birth. For reference, in the
odd-numbered columns of the Table we report the estimated IV coefficient for H delivery from our
baseline specification. Then, in the even numbered columns, we report the estimated coefficients on
H delivery and on the other four endogenous hospital characteristics. The first-stage models for the
5 endogenous characteristics, along with the reduced form models for the 7 outcome variables, are
reported in Online Appendix Table V.39
          Looking across the outcomes in Table VII we see that the estimated effect of delivery at a
high c-section hospital on each of the 7 outcomes is very similar whether we control for the other 4
endogenous hospital characteristics or not. The estimated standard errors from the multichannel
models are typically 25% larger, and the point estimates move up or down slightly, so the effects on
low Apgar scores and death outcomes are no longer significant at conventional levels. For ED visits
and neonatal inpatient visits, however, the estimated effects of delivery remain highly significant. This
analysis suggests that our estimates are not confounded by other hospital practices.
          Based on this evidence we conclude that even when we account for both observed differences
across hospitals and for unobserved factors that shift mean infant health outcomes across hospitals,
there is systematic evidence that delivery at hospitals with policies leading to higher c-section rates
leads to offsetting health costs and benefits, with rises in ED visits in the year after birth but a

39The first stage models all show that relative proximity to a high versus low outcome hospital in a specific domain is the dominant
factor predicting the choice of a high outcome hospital in that domain. The multi-equation F-statistic for the set of 5 first stage
models is reassuringly large. Results for specifications where we control only for one endogenous hospital characteristic at a time are
reported in Online Appendix Table VI and yield very similar conclusions.


                                                                  24
reduction in the rate of inpatient visits immediately after birth. Moreover, delivery at a high c-section
hospital has if anything a negative effect on infant mortality.


V.f. Heterogeneity in the Health Effects of Delivery at a High C-Section Hospital
One issue for the interpretation and extrapolation of our findings is the extent of heterogeneity in the
treatment effects associated with delivery at a high c-section hospital.40 To address this, in Online
Appendix D, we extend our instrumental variables setup using a simple control function approach
that allows for a random effect in the impact of H delivery (Garen 1984; Heckman and Vytlacil 1998;
Wooldridge 2015). The results of this analysis suggest that average treatment effects (ATEs) of delivery
at a high c-section hospital are very close to the LATEs from our baseline IV procedure. Additionally,
we find little evidence of heterogeneity along markers of infant health (birthweight & gestation), some
evidence of heterogeneity across HRRs with lower and higher c-section rates, and mixed evidence on
the question of Roy-style sorting across outcomes, which may not be too surprising given that the
effect of delivery at H varies across outcomes.


VI. Summary and Discussion
          Summary of impacts. Taken together, our results paint a nuanced picture of the health-
related costs and benefits of hospital delivery policies. To help summarize our findings, consider a
shift of 100 LRFB deliveries for H-complying mothers from a low c-section hospital (L) to a high c-
section hospital (H). Our analysis suggests that this move would lead to around 11 extra c-sections,
with 5 fewer vaginal deliveries on the day of the mother's arrival and 6 fewer vaginal deliveries at least
a day after. At birth there would be 7 fewer mothers with 2nd degree or higher perineal lacerations
and 0.8 fewer infants with a 5-minute Apgar score <7. In the year after the birth there would be 8.8
additional infants with at least one ED visit (5 of which are for respiratory-related illnesses), but 3.2
fewer infants with an inpatient stay, mainly in the neonatal period. In addition, there is evidence of
roughly 0.2 fewer infant deaths.
          On the cost side, the extra ED visits point toward a reduction in the respiratory health of the
newborns, consistent with a growing body of epidemiological and clinical studies (Hyde et al. 2012)
that suggests immune-system benefits of vaginal birth. These costs could accumulate if some of the
infants delivered by cesarean go on to develop asthma, which has also been suggested in the

40 There is a large and growing literature on heterogeneous treatment effects: see Imbens and Wooldridge (2009) for a general discussion
and Cornelissen et al. (2016) for a recent survey emphasizing heterogeneity in marginal treatment effects.


                                                                  25
epidemiological literature (e.g., Keag et al. 2018). On the benefit side, the combination of fewer low-
Apgar infants, lower inpatient readmissions, and potentially lower deaths suggest some important
advantages for a subset of the infants delivered by cesarean after a shorter labor rather than by cesarean
or vaginally after a long and stressful labor. Apart from the result on death, these benefits could still
be long-lasting if, as suggested in recent studies, the prevention of births with low Apgar scores leads
to improved outcomes later in life (e.g., Stuart et al. 2011), or more generally if the elimination of some
prolonged stressful labors leads to improved long-term health.41
          How do our estimates relate to the existing literature? With respect to the health impacts of
earlier c-section, Tolcher et al. (2014) present a meta-analysis of the related literature on the effects of
the delay between the time a decision is made to perform c-section and delivery. They find an
inconclusive link, though some studies ­ e.g. Thomas et al. (2004) ­ find that that extended delay is
associated with worse outcomes. Rennie and Rosenbloom (2011) review animal and human studies
on the timing of delivery and the risk of hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (brain injury due to
asphyxia) and conclude there is strong evidence of a link, though the reported incidence of this
condition in our data is extremely low (0.2 per 1,000 births). Finally, it is worth noting that there is
extensive litigation in the U.S. arising from claims that c-section was performed "too late" or was not
performed when it was indicated, resulting in injuries or death of the infant. Our reading is that courts
have often agreed with the plaintiffs, despite the lack of a clear scientific consensus.
          Possible effects on mothers and future births. Our analysis has mainly focused on infants,
but we note that there are also potentially important health concerns for mothers and later children
associated with the policies at H hospitals. Looking at maternal ED visits and inpatient readmissions
in the year after birth we find no evidence of large impacts of delivery at an H hospital (Table VI), but
it is important to note that a body of clinical literature suggests there may be important long-run effects
of cesarean delivery that are not measured in our approach. One important factor is that first-time
mothers who deliver by cesarean are very likely to have all subsequent births by c-section. This means
that there are likely health impacts for their future children, such as risk of respiratory illnesses.
Additionally, there is clinical evidence that mothers who have had a c-section are at increased risk of
abnormal placentation in subsequent pregnancies (see Online Appendix Table A-II). There is also
some epidemiological and design-based evidence that a primary c-section reduces subsequent fertility
(e.g., Halla et al. 2020), though Mühlrad (2019) finds no fertility impact of a policy that led to more

41For example, in an observational study of around 150,000 births in Sweden Sandstrom et al. (2017) conclude that prolonged labor is
associated with birth-asphyxia related complications.


                                                                26
cesarean deliveries for breech presentation births. On the other hand, cesarean delivery could lead to
reduced risk of pelvic floor disorders (see Keag et al. 2018 for a recent review) which affect a high
fraction of all women.
          Though our data do not permit a full analysis of these important margins, we did attempt to
examine impacts on fertility and on higher-order births, with results presented in Online Appendix
Table VII. The estimates point to a negative, albeit imprecise, impact of delivering at an H hospital at
first birth on the probability of having a second birth during our sample period. Our point estimate
of a 3.5 ppt fertility reduction (with a standard error of 2.2 ppts) over our sample period is in line with
estimates from Halla et al. (2020). Conditional on having a second birth in sample, delivery at an H
hospital at first birth leads to an increase in c-section rates at 2nd birth of 16.6 ppts (s.e. = 4.2 ppt).
Unlike first births, the increase in c-section rates is almost entirely driven by an increase in scheduled
procedures. In line with this finding, we find suggestive evidence that second-born infants have slightly
shorter gestation and lower birth weight (although none of these estimates are statistically significant).
Consistent with the idea that many of the complications associated with cesarean deliveries manifest
during subsequent pregnancies, we find suggestive evidence that, at second birth, mothers and their
infants experience longer length of stay at birth and a higher probability of rehospitalization in the
first year after birth. We caution that this analysis should be interpreted carefully, both because of
power issues and because of the possibility of compositional effects deriving from differential fertility.


VII. Conclusion
As countries around the world grapple with how to stem the growing use of unnecessary and costly
medical interventions, hospitals with high intervention rates, especially among patients without any
medical risk factors, face increasing scrutiny. In the case of childbirth, c-section rates around the world
have skyrocketed over the past two decades, in many places far exceeding the World Health
Organization's longstanding recommended rates of 10-15%.42 Supply-side efforts to reduce these rates
often focus on low-risk first births, where hospital delivery practices vary enormously, but where our
understanding of the costs and benefits of these differing practices is limited.
          This paper has examined some of the primary costs and benefits of high c-section hospital
delivery practices among low-risk first births. Our distance-based instrumental variables analysis


42 The World Health Organization revised these recommendations in 2018, but the 10-15% range from their 1985 report is still

frequently cited as a benchmark. See https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/guidance-to-reduce-unnecessary-caesarean-
sections/en/


                                                               27
suggests that hospital delivery practices at high c-section hospitals have important infant health
benefits as well as costs. The benefits derive from the truncation of long, difficult labors that risk
causing serious harm when allowed to proceed, as many would at low c-section hospitals. One possible
explanation is that hospitals do not know which c-sections are (un)necessary until after the fact, as they
are unable to perfectly identify which observably low-risk infants would suffer most from longer
labors. We also document important negative impacts of high c-section delivery practices on infant
health, most notably the increased risk of ED visits in the year after birth; these potentially long-lasting
effects should be considered in developing policies to regulate delivery practices.
        It is important to note some important limitations of our analysis. First, our analysis of first
births in California is underpowered to study cascading effects of first-birth delivery practices on
second and higher-order births where the practice of vaginal birth after c-section (VBAC) is the subject
of considerable debate. Second, our findings may not generalize to contexts with different--especially
higher--baseline intervention rates. And third, our data, while comprehensive, only capture relatively
serious health outcomes. We do not capture subtler hypothesized effects of delivery mode on
outcomes such as the child's weight gain or cognitive functioning that may be reported in primary
care visit data and education records later in life. Further analysis along these dimensions would help
provide a more complete picture of the costs and benefits of hospital delivery practices.
        Despite these caveats, our analysis provides a first step towards understanding the potential
ramifications of proposals to reduce low-risk primary cesarean delivery rates. Methodologically, we
provide guidance on ways to evaluate and extend distance-based research designs for analyzing
hospital practices. Our findings suggest that designs based on local differences in hospital types and
patient location could prove useful for achieving improved balance in similar designs, thus facilitating
research in non-emergency settings where ambulance-based designs, as in Doyle et al. (2015), are
infeasible. Finally, we show how concerns over correlated care can be addressed using a
straightforward multi-channel instrumental variables approach. These issues arise frequently in
evaluations in healthcare (e.g. McClellan et al. 1994; Doyle et al. 2015), education (e.g. Walters 2015),
welfare programs (e.g. Doyle 2007), crime (e.g. Kling 2006), and public assistance (e.g. Maestas et al.
2013). An approach similar to ours could be applied in a variety of settings where data on multiple
characteristics and outcomes of the unit of study ­ the hospital in our case ­ are available.




                                                    28
References
Abadie, A. (2003). Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment response models. Journal of
    Econometrics, 113(2), 231-263.
Alexander, D. (2015). Does physician pay affect procedure choice and patient health? Evidence from
    Medicaid c-section use. Working paper.
Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., and Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
    Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools. Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 151-184.
Amaral-Garcia, S., Bertoli, P., Friedrichsen, J., and Grembi, V. (2016). Hospital-level policy can affect
     physician behavior and reduce C-section rates. DIW Economic Bulletin, Deutsches Institut ffs
     Wirtschaftsforschung (DIW), Berlin, 6(43), 495-501.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) (2014). Safe prevention of the primary
    cesarean delivery. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 123(1), 693-711.
Baicker, K., A. Chandra and J. Skinner (2012). Saving Money or Just Saving Lives? Improving the
    Productivity of U.S. Health Care Spending. Annual Review of Economics, 4, 33-56.
Barnato, A. E., et al. (2005). Hospital Level Racial Disparities in Acute Myocardial Infarction Treatment and
    Outcomes. Medical Care, 43(4), 308-319.
Beckert, W., Christensen, M., and Collyer, K. (2012). Choice of NHS-funded hospital services in England.
    The Economic Journal, 122(560), 400-417.
Bloom, N., Propper, C., Seiler, S., & Van Reenen, J. (2015). The impact of competition on management
    quality: evidence from public hospitals. The Review of Economic Studies, 82(2), 457-489.
Boerma, T., Ronsmans, C., Melesse, D. Y., Barros, A. J., Barros, F. C., Juan, L., ... & Neto, D. D. L. R.
    (2018). Global epidemiology of use of and disparities in caesarean sections. The Lancet, 392(10155),
    1341-1348.
Casey, B. M., McIntire, D. D., and Leveno, K. J. (2001). The continuing value of the Apgar score for the
    assessment of newborn infants. New England Journal of Medicine, 344(7), 467-471.
Chandra, A. and Staiger, D. O. (2007). Productivity spillovers in healthcare: evidence from the treatment of
    heart attacks. Journal of Political Economy, 115(1), 103-140.
Chandra, A. and Staiger, D. O. (2020). Identifying sources of inefficiency in health care. The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 135(2), 785­843.
Chernozhukov, V., and Hansen, C. (2005). An IV model of quantile treatment effects. Econometrica, 73(1),
    245-261.
Clark, E. A., and Silver, R. M. (2011). Long-term maternal morbidity associated with repeat cesarean
    delivery. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 205(6), S2-S10.
Cohen, W. R., Sumersille, M., and Friedman, E.A. (2018). Management of labor: Are the new guidelines
    justified? Journal of Midwifery and Women's Health, 63(1), 10-13.
Cornelissen, T., Dustmann, C., Raute, A., and Schoenberg, U. (2016). From LATE to MTE: Alternative
    approaches for the evaluation of policy interventions. Labour Economics, 41, 47-60.
Costa-Ramón, A. M., Rodriguez-Gonzalez, A., Serra-Burruel, M. and Campillo-Arero, C. (2018). It's about
    time: Cesarean sections and neonatal health. Journal of Health Economics, 59, 46-59.
Currie, J., and MacLeod, W. B. (2008). First do no harm? Tort reform and birth outcomes. Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 123(2), 795-830.
Currie, J., and MacLeod, W. B. (2017). Diagnosing Expertise: Human Capital, Decision Making, and
    Performance among Physicians. Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1), 1-43.
Currie, J. and Mueller-Smith, M. and Rossin-Slater, M (2019). Violence while in Utero: The Impact of
    Assaults During Pregnancy on Birth Outcomes. NBER Working Paper #24802. Cambridge MA: NBER.
Cutler, D. (2007). The lifetime costs and benefits of medical technology. Journal of Health Economics, 26(6),
    1081-1100.
Cutler, D., Skinner, J. S., Stern, A. D., & Wennberg, D. (2019). Physician beliefs and patient preferences: A
    new look at regional variation in health care spending. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1),
    192-221.
Dartmouth Atlas, undated. List of Hospital Referral Regions. Available at:
    http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/tools/faq/researchmethods.aspx.
Dembosky, A. (2018). California's Message To Hospitals: Shape Up Or Lose 'In-Network' Status. NPR
    Report. Downloaded from https://www.npr.org/sections/health-
    shots/2018/05/23/611975420/californias-message-to-hospitals-shape-up-or-lose-in-network-status
Declercq, E. R., Sakala, C., Corry, M. P., and Applebaum, S. (2006). Listening to Mothers II: Report of the
    Second National US Survey of Women's Childbearing Experiences. New York: Childbirth Connections.
Doyle, J. J Jr. (2007). "Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
    Care." American Economic Review, 97 (5): 1583-1610.
Doyle Jr, J. J., Graves, J. A., Gruber, J., and Kleiner, S. A. (2015). Measuring returns to hospital care:
    Evidence from ambulance referral patterns. Journal of Political Economy, 123(1), 170-214.
Dubay, L., Kaestner, R., and Waidman, T. (1999). The impact of malpractice fears on cesarean section rates.
    Journal of Health Economics, 18(4), 491-522.
Epstein, A. J., & Nicholson, S. (2009). The formation and evolution of physician treatment styles: An
    application to cesarean sections. Journal of Health Economics, 28(6), 1126-1140.
Finkelstein, A., Gentzkow, M., and Williams, H. (2016). Sources of Geographic Variation in Health Care:
    Evidence from Patient Migration. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1681-1726.
Finster, M., and Wood, M. (2005). The Apgar score has survived the test of time. The Journal of the American
    Society of Anesthesiologists, 102(4), 855-857.
Fisher, E., Wennberg, D.E., Stukel, T.A., Gottleib, D.J., Lucas, F.L. and Pinder, E.L. (2003). The
    implications of regional variations in Medicare spending. Part 2: Health outcomes and satisfaction with
    care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 138(4), 288­298.
Frigoletto, F. D., Lieberman, E., Lang, J. M., Cohen, A., Barss, V., Ringer, S., and Datta, S. (1995). A
    Clinical Trial of Active Management of Labor. The New England Journal of Medicine, 333(12), 745-750.
Garabedian, L. F., Chu, P., Toh, S., Zaslavsky, A. M., and Soumerai, S. B. (2014). Potential Bias of
    Instrumental Variable Analyses for Observational Comparative Effectiveness Research. Annals of Internal
    Medicine, 161(2), 131-138.
Garen, John (1984). The returns to schooling: A selectivity bias approach with a continuous choice variable.
    Econometrica, 52(5), 1199-1218.
Gimovsky, A. C., and Berghella, V. (2016). Randomized controlled trial of prolonged second stage:
    extending the time limit vs usual guidelines. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 3(214), 361-e1.
Goer, H., Romano, A. and Sakala, C. (2012). Vaginal or cesarean birth: What is at stake for women and
    babies? New York: Childbirth Connections.
Gregory, K. D., Korst, L. M., Gornbein, J. A., and Platt, L. D. (2002). Using Administrative Data to Identify
    Indications for Elective Primary Cesarean Delivery. Health Services Research, 37(5), 1387-1401.
Gregory, K. D., Jackson, S., Korst, L., and Fridman, M. (2012). Cesarean versus Vaginal Delivery: Whose
    Risks? Whose Benefits? American Journal of Perinatology, 29(01), 07-18.
Gruber, J., and Owings, M. (1996). Physician financial incentives and cesarean section delivery. RAND
    Journal of Economics, 27(1), 99.
Grytten, J., Skau, I., and Sørensen, R. (2011). Do expert patients get better treatment than others? Agency
    discrimination and statistical discrimination in obstetrics. Journal of Health Economics, 30(1), 163-180.
Hadley, J. and Peter P. Cunningham (2004). Availability of safety net providers and access to care of
    uninsured persons. Health Services Research, 39(5), 1527-1546.
Halla, M., Mayr, H., Pruckner, G. J., and Garcia-Gomez, P. (2020). Cutting fertility? The effect of cesarean
    deliveries on subsequent fertility and maternal labor supply. Journal of Health Economics, 72, 102325.
Heckman, J.J. and Vytlacil, E. (1998). Instrumental variables models for the correlated random coefficients
    model: Estimating the average return to schooling when the return is correlated with schooling. Journal of
    Human Resources, 33(4), 974-987.
Henry, O. A., Gregory, K. D., Hobel, C. J., and Platt, L. D. (1995). Using ICD-9 codes to identify
    indications for primary and repeat cesarean sections: Agreement with clinical records. American Journal of
    Public Health, 85(8), 1143.
Hobbs, A.J., Mannion, C.A., McDonald, S.W. et al. (2016). The impact of caesarean section on
    breastfeeding initiation, duration and difficulties in the first four months postpartum. BMC Pregnancy
    Childbirth 16, 90.
Howell, C. J. (2000). Epidural versus non-epidural analgesia for pain relief in labour. The Cochrane Database of
    Systematic Reviews, (2), CD000331.
Hyde, M. J., Mostyn, A., Modi, N., and Kemp, P. R. (2012). The health implications of birth by caesarean
    section. Biological Reviews, 87(1), 229-243.
Iliodromiti, Stamatina, Mackay, Daniel F., Smith, Gordon C. S., Pell, Jill P. and Nelson, Scott M. (2014).
    Apgar score and the risk of cause-specific infant mortality: a population-based cohort study. Lancet, 384,
    1749-1755.
Imbens, G.W. and Wooldridge, J.M. (2009). Recent developments in the econometrics of program
    evaluation. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1), 5-86.
Jachetta, C. (2014) Cesarean Sections and Later Child Health Outcomes. Unpublished manuscript.
    University of Illinois Urbana Champaign Department of Economics. Downloaded from
    http://www.christinejachetta.com/
Jensen, V. M. and Wüst, M. (2015). Can cesarean section improve child and maternal health? The case of
    breech babies. Journal of Health Economics, 39, 289-302.
Johnson, E. M., and Rehavi, M. M. (2016). Physicians treating physicians: Information and incentives in
    childbirth. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(1), 115-41.
Joint Commission (2016). Specifications manual for Joint Commission National Quality Measures
    (v2016A1): measure information form. Perinatal Care PC-02: Cesarean Birth.
Keag, O. E., Norman, J. E., and Stock, S. J. (2018). Long-term risks and benefits associated with cesarean
    delivery for mother, baby, and subsequent pregnancies: Systematic review and meta-analysis. PLOS
    Medicine 15(1), e1002494.
Klein, M. C. (2006). Does epidural analgesia increase rate of cesarean section? Canadian Family Physician,
    52(4), 419.
Kling, J. (2006). Incarceration length, employment and earnings. American Economic Review 96(3), 863­876.
Kozhimannil, K. B., Arcaya, M.C. and Subramanian, S.V. (2014). Maternal clinical diagnoses and hospital
    variation in the risk of cesarean delivery: Analyses of a national US hospital discharge database. PLOS
    Medicine, 11(10), e1001745.
Lee, D.S., McCrary, J., Moreira, M.J., and Porter, J. Valid t-ratio inference for IV. Princeton University
    unpublished manuscript.
López-Zeno, J. A., Peaceman, A. M., Adashek, J. A., and Socol, M. L. (1992). A controlled trial of a program
    for the active management of labor. New England Journal of Medicine, 326(7), 450-454.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, NICE (2011). Cesarean section. Downloaded from
    https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg132.
Maestas, N., Mullen, K. J., & Strand, A. (2013). Does Disability Insurance Receipt Discourage Work? Using
    Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt. American Economic Review, 103(5),
    1797-1829.
Martin, J. A., Hamilton, B. E., Ventura, S. J., Osterman, M. J. K., and Mathews, T. J. (2013a). Births: final
    data for 2011. National Vital Statistics Reports 62(1)
Martin, J.A., Wilson, E.C., Osterman, M.J.K., Saadi, E.W., Sutton, S.R., and Hamilton, B.K. (2013b).
    Assessing the quality of medical and health data from the 2003 birth certificate revision: Results from
    two states. National Vital Statistics Reports 62(2).
McClellan, M., McNeil, B. J., and Newhouse, J. P. (1994). Does more intensive treatment of acute
    myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality? Analysis using instrumental variables. Journal of the
    American Medical Association, 272(11), 859.
Morris, T. (2013). Cut It Out: The C-Section Epidemic in America. NYU Press.
Mühlrad, H. (2019). Cesarean sections for high-risk births: Health, fertility and labor market outcomes.
    Lund University Department of Economics working paper.
Oster, E. (2017). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence. Journal of Business and
    Economic Statistics, 1-18.
Osterman, M.J.K, and Martin, J. A. (2014). Trends in low-risk cesarean delivery in the United States, 1990-
    2013. National Vital Statistics Reports 63(6).
Phibbs, C. S., Mark, D. H., Luft, H. S., Peltzman-Rennie, D. J., Garnick, D. W., Lichtenberg, E., & McPhee,
    S. J. (1993). Choice of hospital for delivery: a comparison of high-risk and low-risk women. Health
    Services Research, 28(2), 201.
Podulka, J., Stranges, E., and Steiner, C. (2011). Hospitalizations related to childbirth, 2008. HCUP statistical
    brief, 110.
Rennie, J. and Rosenbloom L. (2011). How long have we got to get the baby out? A review of the effects of
    acute and profound intrapartum hypoxia and ischaemia. The Obstetrician and Gynecologist, 13, 169-174.
Robson, M.S. 2001. Classification of cesarean sections. Fetal and Maternal Medicine Review, 12(1), 23-39.
Romley, J. A., A. B. Jena, and D. P. Goldman (2011). Hospital Spending and Inpatient Mortality: Evidence
    from California. Annals of Internal Medicine, 154(3), 160-167.
Rosenbaum, P. R. (1984). The consequences of adjustment for a concomitant variable that has been
    affected by treatment. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A 147(5): 656-666.
Rysavy, M.A. et al. (2015). Between-hospital variation in treatment and outcomes in extremely preterm
    infants. New England Journal of Medicine, 372(19), 1801-1811.
Sakala, Carol, Suzanne F. Delbanco and Harold D. Miller (2013). The cost of having a baby in the United
    States. Truven Health Analytics Marketscan Study.
Sandström, A., Altman, M., Cnattingius, S. et al. (2017). Durations of second stage of labor and pushing,
    and adverse neonatal outcomes: a population-based cohort study. J Perinatol 37, 236­242.
Shah, N. (2017). Keynote to American Ob-Gyns: C-section rates linked to hospital complexities. Retrieved
    from https://www.ariadnelabs.org/resources/articles/news/keynote-to-american-ob-gyns-c-section-
    rates-linked-to-hospital-complexities/
Skinner, J. (2012). Causes and Consequences of Regional Variations in Health Care. Handbook of Health
    Economics, 2, 45-93.
Spong, C. Y., Berghella, V., Wenstrom, K. D., Mercer, B. M., and Saade, G. R. (2012). Preventing the first
    cesarean delivery: Summary of a joint Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
    Human Development, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, and American College of Obstetricians and
    Gynecologists Workshop. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 120(5), 1181-1193.
Stuart, Andrea MD; Otterblad Olausson, Petra PhD; Källen, Karin PhD (2011). Apgar Scores at 5 Minutes
    After Birth in Relation to School Performance at 16 Years of Age. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 118(2), 201-
    208.
Thomas, J., Paranjothy, S., and James, D. (2004). National cross sectional survey to determine whether the
    decision to delivery interval is critical in emergency caesarean section. British Medical Journal, 328(7441),
    665-671.
Tolcher, M. C., Johnson, R. L., El-Nashar, S. A., and West, C. P. (2014). Decision-to-incision yime and
    neonatal outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstetric Anesthesia Digest, 35(1), 536-548.
Walters, C. R. (2015). Inputs in the production of early childhood human capital: Evidence from Head
    Start. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(4), 76-102.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2015). Control function methods in applied econometrics. Journal of Human Resources,
    50(2), 420-445.
World Health Organization (1985). Appropriate technology for birth. Lancet 2, 436-437.
-- (2018). WHO recommendations non-clinical interventions to reduce unnecessary caesarean sections.
    Downloaded from https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/infographic-unnecessary-caesarean-
    section.pdf
Zipori, Y, Grunwald, O., Ginsberg, Y., Beloosesky, R. and Weiner, Z. (2019). The impact of extending
    second stage labor to prevent primary cesarean delivery on maternal and neonatal outcomes. American
    Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 220:191.e1-7.
    Table I: Characteristics of All Births, Low-Risk First Births and Analysis Sample
                                                                 Low-Risk      Analysis
                                                  All Births    First Births   Sample
                                                      (1)            (2)         (3)
Mother's characteristics
 Age                                                                 28.3                25.4               25.6
 High School or Less (%)                                             49.6                41.5               41.2
 Mean weight (pounds)                                                149                 137                137
 Race/eth: Hispanic (%)                                              50.9                44.2               44.2
               White (nonhispanic) (%)                               27.7                32.2               31.7
               Asian (nonhispanic) (%)                               12.2                15.5               17.6
               Black (nonhispanic) (%)                               5.8                 5.5                5.6
 Insurance: Medi-Cal (%)                                             46.0                41.1               39.8
              Private non-Kaiser (%)                                 34.3                38.0               39.9
              Private Kaiser (%)                                     13.1                14.2               14.9
Birth risk factors and characteristics
 Mean parity                                                          2.1                1.0                1.0
 Previous c-section (%) (among parity>1)                              24.7                0.0                0.0
 Breech presentation (%)                                              3.4                0.0                0.0
 Mean number prenatal care visits                                     12.0               12.1               12.2
 Maternal ED visit year prior to birth (%)                            20.6               19.9               19.5
 Maternal IP visit year prior to birth (%)                            5.5                4.0                3.9
 Mean gestation (weeks)                                               39.2               39.9               39.9
 Mean birthweight (grams)                                            3,309              3,347              3,348
Delivery outcomes
 C-section delivery (%)                                              32.7                25.5               25.6
 C-section without indicated trial of labor (%)                      23.7                 9.4                9.2
 Delivered at H hospital (%)                                         51.8                51.6               51.5
Postpartum outcomes
 Infant readmitted to ED (%)                                         33.9                34.0               33.8
 Infant readmitted as inpatient (%)                                  9.3                 8.2                8.2
 Mother readmitted (any type) (%)                                    16.8                15.3               14.9
Births                                                            2,699,302           631,506            491,604
Notes: All births include all live in-hospital births in California, 2007-2011. Low risk first births include singleton
nonbreech full term (37+ weeks) first births to mothers age 18-35 with no indications of eclampsia, pre-eclampsia, or
growth restrictions, mother's BMI < 33.83 (90th percentile), and  20 prenatal visits. Analysis sample includes mothers
with valid home zip code, for whom distance to nearest high or low c-section hospital  20 miles, and for whom
distance to actual hospital of delivery  20 miles.
 Table II: Orthogonality of Relative Distance to Maternal Characteristics and
                                 Risk Factors
                                                        Effect of moving 10 miles
                                                       closer to H hospital on row          Effect of delivering at H
                                                                  variable                  hospital on row variable
                                                           (s.e. in parentheses)              (s.e. in parentheses)
                                                                     (1)                                (2)

Maternal Characteristics
  Mother's Age                                                0.049    (0.073)                    0.033    (0.051)
  Mother's Education                                         -0.035    (0.053)                    0.043    (0.033)
  White (non-Hispanic)                                        0.019    (0.013)                    0.016    (0.004)
  Black                                                      -0.001    (0.007)                   -0.010    (0.002)
  Asian                                                      -0.010    (0.011)                   -0.002    (0.006)
  Hispanic                                                   -0.008    (0.013)                   -0.002    (0.006)
  Father Present                                              0.000    (0.002)                    0.001    (0.001)
  Gov't Insurance                                            -0.003    (0.009)                    0.053    (0.009)
  Private Insurance                                           0.009    (0.010)                   -0.062    (0.010)
  Mother's Height (inches)                                    0.025    (0.044)                    0.031    (0.020)
  Mother's Weight (pounds)                                    0.035    (0.300)                    0.090    (0.170)
  BMI Pre-pregnancy                                          -0.012    (0.041)                   -0.006    (0.027)
Mother's Use of Hospital in Year Before Birth
  Any ED Visit                                                0.005    (0.004)                    0.010    (0.002)
  Number ED Visits                                            0.008    (0.006)                    0.016    (0.004)
  Inpatient Stay                                             -0.001    (0.001)                    0.006    (0.001)
Prenatal Care:
  Prenatal Visits (#)                                         0.003    (0.061)                    0.197    (0.044)
  Month Started Pre. Care                                     0.026    (0.019)                   -0.022    (0.016)
  Late Prenatal Care (>4th mo)                                0.004    (0.002)                    0.002    (0.002)
Other Risk Characteristics
  Diabetes                                                   -0.001    (0.001)                   -0.002    (0.001)
  Herpes                                                     -0.001    (0.000)                    0.000    (0.000)
  Asthma                                                      0.001    (0.001)                   -0.004    (0.001)
  Smoked When Pregnant                                        0.001    (0.001)                    0.000    (0.001)
  Cigs/Day Pre-pregnancy                                      0.018    (0.026)                    0.031    (0.015)
Infant Characteristics
  Gestation (days)                                            0.077    (0.072)                   -0.460    (0.054)
  Birth Weight (grams)                                        2.643    (4.002)                   -4.778    (2.103)
  Low Birth Weight (<2500 g)                                  0.000    (0.001)                    0.002    (0.001)
Characteristics of Mother's Home Zip Code
  Mean Income (1000 US $)                                     1.428    (1.043)                   -0.175    (0.188)
  Zip Mean Mother Educ.                                       0.011    (0.044)                    0.015    (0.008)
  Zip Mean Dropout                                            0.005    (0.008)                    0.000    (0.001)
  Zip Mean Black                                             -0.003    (0.006)                   -0.004    (0.001)
  Zip Mean Hispanic                                          -0.006    (0.014)                    0.001    (0.002)
Logit predictions based on above 31 covariates
  Predicted Pr(Infant ED visit)                               0.001    (0.003)                    0.004    (0.002)
  Predicted Pr(Infant readmission)                            0.000    (0.001)                    0.001    (0.000)
  Predicted Pr(Infant death) x 100                           -0.001    (0.002)                    0.003    (0.001)

F-tests based on above 31 covariates
  Joint F-statistic: F(31,1249)                                            1.092                              13.492
  Joint F-test p -value                                                    0.335                               0.000
Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and standard errors from regression of row variable on relative distance in
10s of miles to a high c-section (H) hospital (column 1) or delivery at an H hospital (column 2). All models include HSA
and year effects, distance from home to nearest hospital, hospital confounds (ownership, volume, NICU level, and
breastfeeding initiation rate measures), and fraction of mothers in zip code with government insurance. Logit
predictions from logit model of respective outcome on all demographic and risk factors listed above. Bottom two
rows present F-statistics and p-values from the joint F-test for all 31 row variables in reverse regression with relative
distance or delivery hospital type as dependent variable. Standard errors clustered by zip code.
         Table III: Estimated Effects of Relative Distance on Place, Mode, and Timing of Delivery
                                                       Instrument=Relative Distance to H          Instrument= Indicator for Closer to
                                                                  Hospital                                   H Hospital
                                                              Coefficients × 100                          Coefficients × 10

                                                      Baseline controls                          Baseline controls
                                                                              All controls                             All controls
                                                            only                                       only
                                         Mean
Outcome Variable                            (1)               (2)                 (2)                    (4)               (5)

Deliver at H Hospital                       0.515            1.304               1.328                  0.682             0.694
                                                            (0.135)             (0.134)                (0.094)           (0.091)
C-section Delivery                          0.256            0.159               0.149                  0.078             0.080
                                                            (0.028)             (0.027)                (0.021)           (0.020)
Scheduled c-section                         0.092            0.048               0.043                  0.019             0.013
                                                            (0.021)             (0.019)                (0.013)           (0.013)
Unscheduled c-section                       0.163            0.111               0.106                  0.059             0.067
                                                            (0.027)             (0.021)                (0.018)           (0.016)

Delivered 1+ Days After Arrival             0.479            -0.025              -0.023                 -0.015            -0.025
                                                            (0.032)             (0.032)                (0.025)           (0.025)

Delivered 2+ Days After Arrival             0.046            -0.027              -0.027                 -0.012            -0.014
                                                            (0.013)             (0.012)                (0.010)           (0.010)
C-section on Day of Arrival                 0.125            0.102               0.092                  0.057             0.058
                                                            (0.020)             (0.021)                (0.016)           (0.015)

C-section 1+ Days After Arrival             0.132            0.059               0.062                  0.021             0.022
                                                            (0.020)             (0.019)                (0.015)           (0.015)

Vaginal Del. on Day of Arrival              0.396            -0.077              -0.069                 -0.041            -0.033
                                                            (0.030)             (0.029)                (0.023)           (0.023)

Vaginal Del. 1+ Days After Arrival          0.347            -0.084              -0.085                 -0.036            -0.047
                                                            (0.028)             (0.029)                (0.022)           (0.021)

Breakdown of C-Section Deliveries:
C-Section at H Hospital                     0.149            0.401               0.403                  0.208             0.213
                                                            (0.041)             (0.041)                (0.030)           (0.030)
C-Section at L Hospital                     0.106            -0.243              -0.254                 -0.130            -0.133
                                                            (0.033)             (0.030)                (0.024)           (0.022)
Fractions of Complier Groups -- Moving 7 mi. closer to H hospital (col. 2-3) or closer to H hospital (col. 4-5)
P(H Complier)                                               0.091               0.093                  0.068             0.069
P(C&H Complier)                                             0.011               0.010                  0.008             0.008
P(H Complier & C Always-Taker)                              0.017               0.018                  0.013             0.013
P(H Complier & V Always-Taker)                              0.063               0.065                  0.047             0.048

P(C Complier|H Complier)                                  0.122              0.112                0.114               0.116
P(C Always-Taker|H Complier)                              0.186              0.191                0.191               0.191
P(V Always-Taker|H Complier)                              0.692              0.697                0.695               0.693
Notes: Analysis Sample=491,604 low-risk first births. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at 5-digit ZIP code level.
"Baseline controls" are dummies for Hospital Service Area and year of birth, controls for distance to closest hospital, and
fraction of new mothers in ZIP code covered by Medi-Cal or other public insurance, and hospital confounds (ownership,
volume, NICU level, and breastfeeding initiation rate measures). "All controls" include 59 additional controls: mother's age (17
dummies), mother's education (8 dummies), race (4 dummies), father present, insurance type (3 dummies), cubic in mother's
height, cubic in mother's weight, pre-pregnancy BMI, mother's pre-birth hospital use (3 variables), prenatal care (3 variables),
mother's diseases and smoking (5 variables), birthweight and gestation (3 variables) and ZIP code characteristics (5 variables).
                         Table IV: Characteristics of Compliers

                                                                              Hospital and
                                   Analysis           Hospital (H)          Procedure (H&C)
                                   Sample              Compliers               Compliers
                                     (1)                  (2)                     (3)
A. Socio-Economic Characteristics of Mother
 Race/Ethnicity
  White                            31.7%             25.9      (5.1)         24.1      (12.5)
  Black                             5.6%              0.7      (1.5)          6.9       (5.8)
  Asian                            17.6%             11.3      (4.8)         15.8      (11.0)
  Hispanic                         44.2%             62.2      (5.7)         53.9      (12.9)
Education
 High School or Less                41.2%            54.4      (4.7)         67.1      (14.1)
 Some College                       20.1%            12.9      (2.1)         18.4       (8.6)
 BA or Higher                       38.7%            32.6      (5.3)         14.4      (14.5)
Home Zip Code Characteristics
 Income < Median                    50.0%            47.0      (11.6)        95.5      (22.3)
 Gov Insurance Rate > Mean          51.8%            49.0      (11.8)        93.3      (21.9)
B. Mother's Insurance Coverage at Delivery
  Government-provided             43.3%              62.4      (5.7)         80.7      (16.0)
  Private: all                    52.9%              34.0      (5.7)         19.4      (15.2)
  Private: Kaiser                 14.6%               5.8      (2.6)          0.0       (8.0)
  Other                            3.8%               3.6      (1.0)          0.0       (4.2)
C. Other Maternal/Infant Characteristics
  Mother height < 5 ft.            4.2%              5.8       (0.8)         8.1        (5.0)
  Mother visit ED prepartum       19.5%              22.5      (2.2)         36.2       (9.7)
  Number prepartum ED visits      25.8%              30.8      (3.3)         52.7      (14.1)
  Male baby                       51.0%              54.2      (1.5)         63.2      (10.8)
  Birth weight < median           50.0%              51.1      (1.8)         51.8      (10.1)
  Low birth weight (<2500 g)       2.3%               2.7      (0.5)          3.5       (3.1)

D. Predicted Probabilities of Infant ED Visits and Inpatient Admissions
 Prob(ED Visit) > median             50.0%           67.8      (6.3)         95.0      (18.2)
 Prob(Inpat. Adm) > median           50.0%           71.0      (6.4)         94.3      (16.9)
Notes: Column 1 shows estimated means (in percents) for analysis sample of low-risk first
births. Column 2 shows means for births that are delivered at H hospitals as a result of being
relatively closer to such hospitals; column 3 shows means for births that are delivered by c-
section as a result of being closer to an H-hospital. Models used to estimate complier
characteristics include all controls from Table 2 plus characteristic itself. Standard errors,
clustered by maternal zip code, in parentheses.
 Table V: Effects of Delivery at High C-Section Hospital on Infant and Maternal Outcomes At
                                             Birth


                                                                               Reduced-Form
                                                                                Coefficients
                                             Mean        OLS Coefficients         (x100)           2SLS coefficients
Outcome Variable                              (1)              (2)                  (3)                    (4)

First-Stage Models:
 Deliver at H hospital                       0.515               --                 1.328                  --
                                                                                   (0.134)
Infant Outcomes:
Low (<7) 5-minute Apgar (x100)               0.700             -0.065               -1.084               -0.816
                                                              (0.035)              (0.471)              (0.362)
NICU admission, including transfers          0.040             -0.005               -0.001               -0.001
                                                              (0.001)              (0.014)              (0.010)
Ventilation                                  0.015             0.002                0.061                0.046
                                                              (0.001)              (0.018)              (0.014)
Length of stay (days)                        2.354             0.159                0.105                0.077
                                                              (0.013)              (0.140)              (0.104)
Maternal Outcomes:
Trauma to perineum and vulva                 0.461             -0.095               -0.081               -0.061
 during labor                                                 (0.004)              (0.045)              (0.031)
Perineal laceration                          0.290             -0.052               -0.096               -0.072
 (2nd degree or higher)                                       (0.003)              (0.034)              (0.024)
Length of labor (days)                       0.530             -0.044               -0.061               -0.045
 (birth - admission)                                          (0.003)              (0.039)              (0.028)
Post-birth stay (days)                       2.105             0.160                0.101                0.075
 (discharge-birth)                                            (0.007)              (0.073)              (0.054)

Notes: Analysis Sample=491,604 low-risk first births, except models for 5-minute Apgar, which includes
487,643 observations, and models for length of stay, length of labor and length of post-birth stay, which have
482,187 observations. Length of labor is measured by number of days from mother's admission to birth, top-
coded at maximum of 3 days. Mother's length of stay is top-coded at 5 days. Post birth stay is length of stay
minus length of labor. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at 5-digit ZIP code level. All models include the
full set of controls described in note to Table 2. OLS coefficients from regression of outcome on an indicator of
delivery at a high c-section hospital and controls. Instrumental variable in all cases is relative distance to high c-
section hospital, and endogenous variable in 2SLS models is delivery at high c-section hospital.
  Table VI: Effects of Delivery at High C-Section Hospital on Subsequent Hospital Visits and Post-Birth
                                              Outcomes

                                                                                          Reduced-Form
                                                                                           Coefficients
                                                       Mean         OLS Coefficients         (x100)           2SLS coefficients
Outcome Variable                                        (1)               (2)                  (3)                    (4)
Infant Outcomes:
Any ED visit in year after birth                       0.338              0.005                0.117                0.088
                                                                         (0.004)              (0.049)              (0.037)
ED visit for acute respiratory condition               0.126              0.007                0.070                0.053
                                                                         (0.002)              (0.028)              (0.021)
Inpatient stay in neonatal period                      0.041              0.002                -0.042               -0.032
                                                                         (0.001)              (0.012)              (0.009)
Inpatient stay in year after birth                     0.085              0.006                -0.034               -0.026
                                                                         (0.001)              (0.021)              (0.016)
6+ days in hospital or death in neonatal               6.746              0.435                -2.803               -2.063
 period (x100)                                                           (0.122)              (1.526)              (1.115)
Death in year after birth (x100)                       0.121              0.008                -0.344               -0.259
                                                                         (0.013)              (0.161)              (0.120)
Maternal Outcomes:
Any inpatient stay or ED/ASC visit                     0.149              0.003                0.033                0.025
                                                                         (0.002)              (0.025)              (0.018)
Any ED visit in year after birth                       0.129              0.002                0.029                0.022
                                                                         (0.001)              (0.024)              (0.018)
Inpatient stay in year after birth                     0.022             0.001                  0.008                 0.006
                                                                        (0.001)                (0.007)               (0.006)
Notes: Analysis Sample=491,604 low-risk first births. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at 5-digit ZIP code level. All
models include the full set of controls described in note to Table 2. OLS coefficients from regression of outcome on an
indicator of delivery at a high c-section hospital and controls. Instrumental variable in all cases is relative distance to high
c-section hospital, and endogenous variable in 2SLS models is delivery at high c-section hospital.
  Table VII: Single- and Multi-Channel Instrumental Variables Estimates of Effects of Delivery at High C-Section Hospital

                               Low (<7) 5-                                                                                          6+ days in hosp.
                              minute Apgar                             Acute resp. ED         Neonatal           Inpat. visit in      or neonatal
                                  (x100)            Any ED visit            visit           inpatient visit         first year       death (× 100)       Death (× 100)
                              (1)       (2)         (3)     (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)         (9)       (10)     (11)      (12)      (13)     (14)
                              -0.816 -0.655       0.088 0.132          0.053 0.077         -0.032 -0.031       -0.026 -0.024        -2.063 -1.946       -0.259 -0.298
 Deliver at H hospital
                             (0.362) (0.453)     (0.037) (0.052)      (0.021) (0.028)      (0.009) (0.011)     (0.016) (0.017)      (1.115) (1.348)     (0.120) (0.165)
 Deliver at low 5-minute               0.942                0.000              -0.010               -0.001               -0.007               1.622              -0.040
 Apgar hospital                       (0.430)              (0.044)             (0.024)              (0.010)              (0.016)             (1.239)             (0.138)

 Deliver at high infant                -0.586               0.132               0.096                0.014                0.023              -3.888              -0.213
 ED use hospital                      (0.669)              (0.071)             (0.038)              (0.017)              (0.024)             (1.998)             (0.233)
 Deliver at high infant                0.621                -0.062              -0.007               0.024                0.030               2.699              -0.017
 inpatient use hospital               (0.382)              (0.041)             (0.019)              (0.008)              (0.012)             (1.148)             (0.129)
 Deliver at high infant                -0.400               0.096               0.045                0.008                0.025              -0.079               0.057
 death hospital                       (0.404)              (0.050)             (0.025)              (0.010)              (0.017)             (1.339)             (0.157)
Notes: Analysis Sample=491,604 low-risk first births. All models include the full set of controls described in note to Table 2. In the odd-numbered columns we report
the estimated IV coefficient for H delivery from our baseline specification. In the even numbered columns, we report the estimated coefficients on H delivery and on
the other four endogenous hospital characteristics. Instrumental variables are relative distance to high c-section hospital, relative distance to low 5-minute Apgar
hospital, relative distance to high infant ED use hospital, relative distance to high infant inpatient use hospital, and relative distance to high infant death hospital.
Standard errors in parentheses clustered by mother's zip code.
                                                    Figure I: Pathways to C-Section Delivery




                                                    planned c-section             no planned c-section
                                                                                   go to term
                                           "scheduled" c-section
                                           (no trial of labor)          onset of labor          no onset of labor
                                                                                                induce labor



                                                                                         T=0

                                                                                                   vaginal delivery

                                                                                         T=Th        if still in labor  c-section
                                                                                                     "unscheduled" c-section
                                                                                                     (trial of labor)
Notes: Figure displays pathways to c-section delivery, focusing on timing mechanisms and hospital-specific cutoffs in
the bottom right side, which we argue generate differences in c-section rates for our low-risk first birth sample. See
text for details.




                                           Figure II: Relative Distance and Probability of Delivery
                                                       at High C-Section (H) Hospital
                                                    600+ patients
 Fraction Delivering at H Hospital




                                                    300-599 patient
                                     0.8            75-299 patients
                                                    <75 patients
                                     0.6

                                     0.4

                                     0.2

                                     0.0
                                           -20               -10                   0                      10                 20
                                                            Relative Distance to H vs. L Hospital (miles)

Notes: each point represents a home zip code. Fitted logistic shown in red.
Figure III: Time Profiles of Probabilities of Hospital Readmissions and ED Visits of Compliers

        a. Hospital Readmissions
                                                      0.16
                                                                                                                                Hospital
   Cumulative Probability of Readmission




                                                                                                                                Compliers at L
                                                      0.12                                                                      Hospitals

                                                      0.08
                                                                                                                                Hospital
                                                      0.04                                                                      Compliers at
                                                                                                                                H Hospitals

                                                      0.00
                                                                                                                                IV Estimate of
                                                      -0.04                                                                     Effect of
                                                                                                                                Delivery at H
                                                                                                                                Hospital
                                                      -0.08
                                                              0   7   28   60   90 120 150 180 210 230 270 300 330 365
                                                                                      Days Since Birth


  b. Emergency Department Visits
                                                       0.60
      Cumulative Probability of At Least 1 ED Visit




                                                                                                                                 Hospital
                                                       0.50                                                                      Compliers at L
                                                                                                                                 Hospitals
                                                       0.40

                                                       0.30                                                                      Hospital
                                                                                                                                 Compliers at
                                                       0.20                                                                      H Hospitals

                                                       0.10                                                                      IV Estimate of
                                                                                                                                 Effect of
                                                       0.00                                                                      Delivery at H
                                                                                                                                 Hospital
                                                      -0.10
                                                              0   7   28   60   90 120 150 180 210 230 270 300 330 365
                                                                                      Days Since Birth

Notes: Figures report the estimated cumulative hospital readmission rates (Panel a) and ED visit rates (Panel b) by month for hospital compliers who
deliver at H and L hospitals as well as the associated cumulated treatment effects of delivering at an H hospital (with point-wise confidence bands).
  Figure IV: Sensitivity of Reduced-Form Effects of Relative Distance on Infant Outcomes --
                              Distributions of Possible Estimates
                  a. ED Visits                                                                                                                 b. ED Visits for Acute Respiratory Conditions

                          0.14                                                                                                                  0.09


                          0.13                                                                                                                  0.08
 Reduced Form Estimate




                                                                                                                       Reduced Form Estimate
                          0.12                                                                                                                  0.07


                          0.11                                                                                                                  0.06


                          0.10                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                     Maximum           Mean       Median       Minimum                                                                     Maximum           Mean       Median       Minimum
                          0.09                                                                                                                  0.04
                                   0     1      2      3       4   5      6   7      8     9   10   11   12                                              0     1      2      3       4   5      6   7      8     9   10   11   12

                                                           Number of Groups Selected                                                                                             Number of Groups Selected



                         c. Inpatient Readmissions                                                                                        d. Death (x100)
                          -0.03                                                                                                                 -0.33

                                                                                                                                                -0.34
 Reduced Form Estimate




                                                                                                                       Reduced Form Estimate
                                                                                                                                                -0.35

                          -0.04                                                                                                                 -0.36

                                                                                                                                                -0.37

                                                                                                                                                -0.38
                                                     Maximum           Mean       Median       Minimum                                                                     Maximum           Mean       Median       Minimum

                          -0.05                                                                                                                 -0.39
                                    0     1     2      3       4   5      6   7      8     9   10   11   12                                               0     1      2     3       4   5      6   7      8     9   10   11   12

                                                           Number of Groups Selected                                                                                              Number of Groups Selected
Notes: Each figure above display the sensitivity of our reduced-form coefficient estimates to inclusion of up to 12 groups of additional controls. To construct these plots, we run regressions of the indicated outcome on
our baseline set of controls and every permutation of these 12 groups of controls. For regressions that include, say, 1 extra group of controls, for which there are 12 possibilities, the blue circle (red diamond) indicates
the maximum (minimum) point estimate on relative distance of those 12 regressions. The 12 groups of controls correspond to: (1) maternal education, (2) maternal age, (3) insurance type, (4) maternal race, (5)
maternal pre-birth ED/hospital utilization, (6) presence of father, (7) maternal height & weight, (8) birthweight & gestation, (9) prenatal care timing & frequency, (10) indicators for maternal asthma, diabetes, and
herpes, (11) maternal smoking, and (12) zip code characteristics (mean maternal education and race, constructed leaving out the reference mother).
                                    Online Appendices for:
                    The Health Impacts of Hospital Delivery Practices

        David Card                           Alessandra Fenizia                           David Silver
    UC Berkeley and NBER                  George Washington University                Princeton and NBER




Appendix A: An Overview of the Literature on the Health Effects of Cesarean Delivery


Infant Outcomes. Table A-I summarizes a selection of recent studies on the short and medium-run
health effects of cesarean delivery for infants. We review studies on injury or death of the baby; lung
function and respiratory problems; asthma; immune system; and breastfeeding. Not included in the
table are several other active areas of research that study impacts of cesarean delivery on longer-term
outcomes such as the probability of adult obesity (see the recent review by Darmasseelane et al.,
2014).
         Across the board a general finding is that babies delivered by c-section fare worse: higher
neonatal and post-neonatal death; elevated risks of respiratory system problems including asthma;
evidence of digestive system disorders, and lower rates of breastfeeding. An unusually detailed
prospective study by Villar et al. (2007) of births in eight Latin American countries illustrates the
general nature of these findings and the difficulty in interpreting the results as causal.1 The authors
show that neonatal death rates for cephalic fetuses delivered by c-section after trial of labor are
substantially higher than rates for those delivered vaginally (0.65% versus 0.38%). Eliminating the
roughly 30% of intrapartum c-sections performed after indications of fetal distress, the neonatal
death rate of the remaining c-section group falls to 0.51% -- not statistically different from the rate
for the vaginal births (but still higher), and indicative of a potentially large endogeneity bias in the
overall comparison.




1This study is unusual in collecting detailed data on reasons for c-section, gathered immediately after the birth by trained
survey staff.
        Our reading of the literature is that the most widely documented correlation is between c-
section delivery and respiratory problems. Such a pattern has been documented in large-scale cohort
studies in several Nordic countries (e.g., Hansen et al., 2008; Tollanes et al., 2008) and in meta
analyses of the literature (e.g., Thavagnanam et al., 2008). As discussed in a recent review by Hyde et
al. (2012), there is clinical evidence that babies born by c-section have worse lung function
immediately after birth -- possibly attributable to a therapeutic effect of the labor process (including
release of hormones and clearance of lung liquid). A number of researchers also hypothesize that
there is a transfer of microbes from mother to infant during labor that aid in the development of the
immune and digestive systems (e.g., Neu and Rushing, 2012).
Maternal Outcomes. Table A-II presents a parallel summary of the literature on the health effects
of cesarean delivery on mothers. Here the literature is less numerous: our reading is that the major
health risks include complications at birth and maternal death; reduction in future fertility; abnormal
placentation in subsequent pregnancies; and risk of future stillbirths. Most studies find that mothers
who deliver by c-section have higher risk of birth-related complications (such as need of a blood
transfusion), higher risk of severe morbidity and mortality in the period after the birth, reduced
future fertility, higher risk for placenta previa (placenta near or covering the cervix) and placenta
accreta/increta/percreta (abnormal placental attachment). Evidence on future stillbirths is less clear.
        As with the literature on infant health effects, most of these studies are based on
observational designs, making it difficult or impossible to assert causality, though some of the
potential effects are grounded in clinic evidence (see for example the review of studies on abnormal
placentation by Clark and Silver, 2011). An interesting exception is the study by Halla et al. (2019)
on future fertility, which uses day of the week of the birth as an instrument for c-section. We find
that there appear to be more pre-scheduled c-sections on weekdays, leading to concerns over this
instrument in our setting.
                       Table A-I: Summary of Literature on Infant Health Effects of C-Section Delivery

Health Issue              Study authors; design; main findings
1. Delivery injuries   a. Rouse and Owen (1999): prophylactic CS for large fetuses (>4000g) has small impact on permanent brachial plexus injury
and death
                       b. Alexander et al. (2006): 1.1% of CS babies have some birth injury - mostly cuts from the incision
                       c. Villar et al. (2007): CS might decrease death for cephalic pregnancies, definitely for breech; increased NICU, but rupturing of
                       membranes may be protective
                       d. MacDorman et al (2008): CS has 1.7-2.4 higher risk of infant neonatal mortality for primary, low-risk births. Intention to
                       treat analysis combines CS after TOL with vaginal births as intended vaginal
                       e. Molina et al. (2015): cross-national analysis of CS and infant morality; neonatal mortality rates decline until CS rate of 20%,
                       then stable across countries

2. Lung Function       a. Hansen et al. (2008): Danish cohort study (cov-adj); scheduled CS increases risk of respiratory illness 200-400%
and Repiratory         b. Moore et al. (2012): Australian register study (cov-adj); elective CS increases risk of hospitalization for bronchiolitis by 10%
Problems               in first year of life
                       c. Hyde et al. (2012): review of clinical literature; CS without TOL associated with reduced lung function after birth
                       d. Kristensen and Hendriksen (2016): Danish register study (cov-adj); elective CS associated with 20% higher risk of
                       pneumonia and other mucosal system disorders

3. Asthma              e. Salam et al (2006): retrospective study of California youth; CS raises incidence of allergy by 26% (cov-adj)
                       b. Roduit et al. (2008): Dutch cohort study (cov-adj). CS associated with 20% increase in risk of childhood asthma, higher
                       effect for allergic parents
                       c. Thavagnanam et al. (2008): meta analysis of 23 studies of CS and asthma; CS associated with 45% increase in risk at age 8
                       d. Tollanes et al. (2008): Norwegian register study (cov-adj); CS raises risk of asthma by age 18 by 50%
                       e. Jachetta (2014): IV study using MSA-level malpractice premiums instrument; CS associated with higher rate of
                       hospitalization for asthma and lung disease

4. Immune              a. Neu and Rushing (2011): review of clinical literature; CS without TOL affects micobial colonization/immune response
   System              b. Sevelsted et al. (2016): Danish register study (cov-adj); CS associated with higher risk of immune deficiency, inflammatory
                       bowel disorders
                       c. Stokholm et al. (2016): prospective study of Copenhagen births; CS associated with different gut microbes in first year
5. Breastfeeding       Prior et al (2012): meta-analysis of 48 studies; CS without TOL associated with lower rate of early initiation of breastfeeding;
                       CS after TOL same as vaginal births

Notes: CS = c-section delivery; OR = odds ratio; TOL=trial of labor; cov-adj = covariate adjustment; IV=instrumental variables
         Table A-II: Summary of Literature on Maternal Health Effects of C-Section Delivery

Health Outcome             Study authors; design; main findings
1. Complications at     a. Lydon-Rochell et al. (2000): cohort of primiparous women in Washington State; 80% higher
birth; mortality        rate of rehospitalization in 60 days following CS
                        b. Deneux-Tharaux et al. (2006): 3.5 times more likely for mom to die in CS
                        c. Villar et al (2007): WHO-supported study of Latin American births; incidence of mother
                        injury/death increases in CS
                        d. Kuklina et al (2009): rise in CS explains rise in maternal morbidity at birth
                        e. Curtin et al. (2015): US births in 2013; (no cov-adj); higher rates of tranfusion, ICU admission
                        f. Molina et al. (2015): cross-national analysis of CS and maternal morality; mortality rates
                        decline until CS rate of 20%, then stable across countries

2. Fertility            a. Hall et al. (1989): U.K. cohort study (cov-adj); 23% lower fertility
                        b. Kjerulff et al. (2013): U.S. cohort study (covariate adustment); 16% lower fertility
                        c. Gurol-Urganci et al. (2013): meta analysis of 18 cohort studies; mean effect = 9% reduction in
                        fertility following CS
                        d. Halla et al. (2018): IV based on day of delivery; lower fertility
3. Abnormal             a. Hemminki et al. (2005): Finish register (cov-adj); 90% higher risk
Placentation (previa,   b. Getahun et al. (2006): U.S. linked cohorts (cov-adj); 30-100% higher risks
accreta, etc.)
                        c. Gurol-Urganci et al. (2011): U.K. cohort study and meta analysis of 37 studies; CS at first birth
                        raises risk of placenta previa in second by 50-60%
                        d. Clark andat
                        e. Colmorn   Silver (2011):
                                       al (2015):   review
                                                  Nordic   of previous
                                                         Obstetrics Surveillance Study; CSrisks
                                                                       studies; increased  associated with a higher risk of
                        uterine rupture, hysterectomy, abnormally invasive placenta and multiple blood transfusions


4. Future Stillbirth    a. Bahtiyar et al. (2006): large U.S. cross-section study (cov-adj); no effect
                        b. O'Neill et al (2013): A review of previous studies; CS increases the risk of stillbirth by 23%
Note: see Table A-I
Additional References for Appendix A
Bahtiyar, M. O., et al. (2006). Prior cesarean delivery is not associated with an increased risk of
   stillbirth in a subsequent pregnancy: Analysis of US perinatal mortality data, 1995-1997. American
   Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 195(5), 1373-1378.
Colmorn, LB, Petersen, KB, Jakobsson, M, Lindqvist, PG, Klungsoyr, K, Källen, K, et al
   (2015). The Nordic Obstetric Surveillance Study: a study of complete uterine rupture,
   abnormally invasive placenta, peripartum hysterectomy, and severe blood loss at delivery. Acta
   Obstet Gynecol Scand; 94: 734­ 744.
Curtin, S. C., Gregory, K. D., Korst, L. M., and Uddin, S. F. (2015). Maternal Morbidity for Vaginal
   and Cesarean Deliveries, According to Previous Cesarean History: New Data from the Birth
   Certificate, 2013. National Vital Statistics Reports: from the Centers for Disease Control and
   Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, 64(4), 1.
Darmasseelane, K., et al. (2014). Mode of Delivery and Offspring Body Mass Index, Overweight
   and Obesity in Adult Life: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. PLoS ONE, 9(2).
Deneux-Tharaux, C., Carmona, E., Bouvier-Colle, M. H., and Bréart, G. (2006). Postpartum
   maternal mortality and cesarean delivery. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 108(3), 541-548.
Getahun, D., Oyelese, Y., Salihu, H. M., and Ananth, C. V. (2006). Previous cesarean delivery and
   risks of placenta previa and placental abruption. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 107(4), 771-778.
Gurol-Urganci, I., et al. (2013). Impact of Caesarean section on subsequent fertility: a systematic
   review and meta-analysis. Human Reproduction, 28(7), 1943-1952.
Hall, M. H., Campbell, D. M., Fraser, C., and Lemon, J. (1989). Mode of delivery and future fertility.
   BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 96(11), 1297-1303.
Hansen, A. K., Wisborg, K., Uldbjerg, N., and Henriksen, T. B. (2008). Risk of respiratory morbidity
   in term infants delivered by elective caesarean section: cohort study. British Medical Journal,
   336(7635), 85.
Hemminki, E., Shelley, J., and Gissler, M. (2005). Mode of delivery and problems in subsequent
  births: A register-based study from Finland. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 193(1),
  169-177.
Kjerulff, K. H., Zhu, J., Weisman, C. S., and Ananth, C. V. (2013). First birth Caesarean section and
   subsequent fertility: a population-based study in the USA, 2000­2008. Human Reproduction,
   28(12), 3349-3357.
Kristensen, K., and Henriksen, L. (2016). Cesarean section and disease associated with immune
    function. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 137(2), 587-590.
Kuklina, E. V., et al. (2009). Severe Obstetric Morbidity in the United States: 1998­2005. Obstetrics
   and Gynecology, 113(2), 293-299.
Lydon-Rochelle, M., Holt, V. L., Martin, D. P., and Easterling, T. R. (2000). Association between
   method of delivery and maternal rehospitalization. JAMA, 283(18), 2411-2416.
Molina, G., et al. (2015). Relationship Between Cesarean Delivery Rate and Maternal and Neonatal
   Mortality. JAMA, 314(21), 2263-2270.
Moore, H. C., de Klerk, N., Holt, P., Richmond, P. C., and Lehmann, D. (2012). Hospitalisation for
  bronchiolitis in infants is more common after elective caesarean delivery. Archives of Disease in
  Childhood, 97(5), 410.
Neu, J., and Rushing, J. (2011). Cesarean versus vaginal delivery: Long-term infant outcomes and the
   hygiene hypothesis. Clinics in Perinatology, 38(2), 321-331.
O'Neill SM, Kearney PM, Kenny LC, Khashan AS, Henriksen TB, et al. (2013) Caesarean Delivery
   and Subsequent Stillbirth or Miscarriage: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. PLoS ONE 8(1):
   e54588.
Prior, E., et al. (2012). Breastfeeding after cesarean delivery: A systematic review and meta-analysis
    of world literature. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 95(5), 1113-1135.
Roduit, C., et al. (2008). Asthma at 8 years of age in children born by cesarean section. Thorax, 64(2),
   107-113.
Rouse, D. J., and Owen, J. (1999). Prophylactic cesarean delivery for fetal macrosomia diagnosed by
   means of ultrasonography--A Faustian bargain? American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
   181(2), 332-338.
Salam, M. T., et al. (2006). Mode of delivery is associated with asthma and allergy occurrences in
    children. Annals of Epidemiology, 16(5), 341-346.
Sevelsted, A., Stokholm, J., and Bisgaard, H. (2016). Risk of Asthma from Cesarean Delivery
   Depends on Membrane Rupture. The Journal of Pediatrics, (171), 38-42.
Stokholm, J., et al. (2016). Cesarean section changes neonatal gut colonization. Journal of Allergy and
   Clinical Immunology, 138(3), 881-889.
Thavagnanam, S., Fleming, J., Bromley, A., Shields, M. D., and Cardwell, C. R. (2008). A meta-
   analysis of the association between Caesarean section and childhood asthma. Clinical and
   Experimental Allergy, 38(4), 629-633.
Tollånes, M. C., Moster, D., Daltveit, A. K., and Irgens, L. M. (2008). Cesarean section and risk of
    severe childhood asthma: A population-based cohort study. The Journal of Pediatrics, 1(153), 112-
    116.
Villar, J., et al. (2007). Maternal and neonatal individual risks and benefits associated with caesarean
    delivery: Multicentre prospective study. British Medical Journal, 335(7628), 1025-1029.
Appendix B: Interpretation of First Stage, Reduced Form and IV Estimates

Consider the case where individuals (indexed by i) belong to mututally exclusive subgroups. Let Xi
represent a vector of indicators for membership in each of J subgroups, let yi represent an outcome
of interest, let Di represent an endogenous treatment indicator, and let Zi represent an instrumental
variable.
    Suppose we estimate a pooled first stage model for Di that includes Zi and the vector Xi :


                                       Di = 0 + 1 Zi + X Xi + vi .


By standard Frisch-Waugh arguments the OLS estimate of 1 is:

                                              i (Di - D j(i) )(Zi - Z j(i) )
                                  1 =
                                                  i (Zi - Z j(i) )2

where j(i) is i s subgroup, and D j and Z j represent the means of D and Z within subgroup j. Let
N represent the combined sample size and N j the sample size for group j. Then

                       j i j (Di - D j(i) )(Zi - Z j(i) )
              1 =
                           j i j (Zi - Z j(i) )2
                                       1
                           Nj          Nj   i j (Zi - Z j )2        i j (Di - D j(i) )(Zi - Z j(i) )
                  =        N       1
                                        j i j (Zi - Z j(i)     )2        i j (Zi - Z j(i) )2
                       j           N
                           Nj    VZ j
                  =        N     VZ
                                      1 j
                       j


where VZ j is the variance of Z within group j, VZ is the overall variance of Z and 1 j is the first
stage regression coefficient for group j.
    By the same argument if we estimate a pooled reduced form model for yi that includes Zi and
the vector Xi :
                                       yi = 0 + 1 Zi + X Xi + ui .




                                                       1
the OLS estimate of 1 is

                                                      Nj     VZ j
                                     1 =              N      VZ
                                                                  1 j
                                              j



where 1 j is the reduced form coefficient for group j. Finally, the pooled IV estimate of the effect
of D on y using Z as an instrument and controlling for X is:

                                       1
                              1 =
                                       1
                                            Nj        VZ j       1 j    1 j
                                   =        N         VZ         1      1 j
                                        j
                                            Nj        VZ j       1 j
                                   =        N         VZ         1
                                                                        1 j
                                        j



where 1 j = 1 j /1 j is the IV estimate within subgroup j.




                                                  2
Appendix C: Data

a. Overview of PDD/ED/AS/Linked Birth Cohort Data

California OSHPD has created a linked file that combines in-patient discharge records for deliv-
ering mothers and newborns with Vital Statistics (VS) data (i.e., information collected from birth
certificates and death records) and information on in-patient, Emergency Department (ED), and

Ambulatory Surgery Center (ASC) records for each mother in the period from one year before to
one year after the birth, and for each infant in the period up to one year after the birth. We use a
version of this file that has information on live hospital delivered births for the period from 2007
to 2011.
    Appendix D of the data base gives the name, address, zip code, and Hospital Service Areas

(HSA) for each hospital, ED, and ASC in the state. We also use external information from the

Dartmouth Atlas website to assign HSA's and Health Referral Regions (HRR's). We add data from
the US Census Bureau on average income in each zip code.


b. Construction of relative distance instruments

The procedure for constructing a mother's relative distance to high and low c-section hospitalscon-
sists of 3 steps:

   1. We estimate each hospital's risk-adjusted c-section rate among low-risk first births;

   2. We classify hospitals as low (L) or high (H ) c-section hospitals based on their risk-adjusted
      c-section rates from (1);

   3. We calculate each mother's distances to the nearest L and H hospitals, from which we cal-
      culate our main relative distance measure.

In step 1 we fit a logistic regression model to our sample of low-risk first births that includes a
baseline set of case risk factors Xi and indicators for the hospital h(i) at which mother i delivered.


                                                   1
Specifically, using our LRFB sample, we estimate the model:


                                P(Ci = 1|Xi ) = ( + Xi  + h(i) )


where  is the logistic CDF.

   In step 2 we compare hospital h's estimated logit coefficient ^h to the birth-weighted average
                                                                                    -1
hospital coefficient in each Hospital Referral Region (HRR) ¯HRR =  jHRR N j              jHRR N j ^j

(where Nh is the number of low risk first births delivered at hospital h in our analysis sample). We
define a hospital to be a "high c-section hospital" (or H hospital) if ^h  ¯HRR and otherwise a "low

c-section hospital."

   In step 3 we use information on the centroid of each mother's home zip code and on the cen-
troids of the zip codes for each hospital to define the distance from each mother to each hospital.

We then define the distance to the nearest H hospital and the nearest L hospital.




                                                 2
Appendix D: Heterogeneity in the Health Effects of Delivery at High C-Section Hospital
One issue for the interpretation and extrapolation of our findings is the extent of heterogeneity in the
treatment effects associated with delivery at a high c-section hospital.1 To address this, we extend our
instrumental variables setup using a simple control function approach that allows for a random effect
in the impact of H delivery (Garen 1984; Heckman and Vytlacil 1998; Wooldridge 2015). Specifically
suppose that the causal model relating health outcome y i to patient characteristics                      Xi   and type of
hospital   Hi   is:

                                           !! = #" + ##! %! + #$ &! + '! ,
where ##! is a random coefficient and '! is a structural error incorporating the unobserved
determinants of health. We assume that:
                                                                             2)
                              ( [##! |%! , &! , ,! ] = ## + .% /! + .$ (&! - &
                              ( ['! |%! , &! , ,! ] = 4% /!
where u i is the error in the first stage equation (1) for %! . Here ## represents the average treatment

effect (ATE) of delivery at an H hospital and .% /! represents a self-selection effect that arises if
mothers with a stronger preference for H hospitals have larger or smaller treatment effects from
delivering there. A pattern in which .% has the same sign as ## represents positive Roy sorting.
                             2 ) represents potential heterogeneity in the treatment effect with respect
Similarly, the term .$ (&! - &
to (predetermined) maternal and infant characteristics. Finally, the term 4% /! captures any correlation
between latent health and the unobserved component of preferences for an H hospital.
         As shown by Heckman and Vytlacil (1998) and Wooldridge (2015) this model can be estimated
in two steps by first estimating the first stage model for hospital type, obtaining the residual /
                                                                                                 5 ! , and
then estimating a second-step model:
                                                                        2) + 4% /
                                                      5 ! + .$ %! (&! - &
                      !! = #" + ## %! + #$ &! + .% %! /                         5 ! + '!&
This model includes the estimated first stage residual /
                                                       5 ! , an interaction between /
                                                                                    5 ! and %! , and
interactions between %! and the other covariates. Excluding the interaction terms leads to an estimate
for ## that is numerically equivalent to the standard IV estimate. Adding the interaction terms allows
for heterogeneity in the effect of H delivery that can be correlated with either observed characteristics
or unobserved preferences. To account for the fact that the first-stage residual is a generated regressor,


1There is a large and growing literature on heterogeneous treatment effects: see Imbens and Wooldridge (2009) for a
general discussion and Cornelissen et al. (2016) for a recent survey emphasizing heterogeneity in marginal treatment effects.
we conduct inference on the second-step parameters via a block bootstrap, clustered as usual by
mother's zip code.
         Appendix Table VI presents estimated control function models for 7 infant health outcomes
including the incidence of a low 5-minute Apgar score and the main outcomes from Table VI. For
each outcome we present a benchmark model with no interactions (yielding the IV coefficients already
shown in Tables V and VI), and a second model that adds four interactions with %! : one with the
estimated first stage residual, two with observable indicators of infant health ­ birthweight and
gestation ­ and a fourth interaction with the average c-section rate in the HRR (hospital referral
region). For ease of interpretation we standardize the three observable interaction factors.
         Looking across the models in Appendix Table VI we see three interesting patterns. Most
importantly, estimates of the ATEs of H-delivery from models that allow for self-selection and
heterogeneous treatment effects are very close to the LATEs from our baseline IV procedure. Second,
there is almost no evidence of heterogeneity in the effects of H delivery across infants of different
birth weights or gestations. There is more evidence of heterogeneity with respect to local c-section
rates: in HRR's with higher cesarean rates the effects of H delivery on inpatient stays are lower. Third,
there is mixed evidence on the question of whether the unobserved determinants of hospital selection
are positively or negatively correlated with the treatment effect of an H hospital. For inpatient stays
and adverse events in the neonatal period we see larger (more negative) impacts for infants whose
mothers have a stronger preference for H hospitals ­ i.e., Roy sorting. For ED visits and death
however, we see the opposite pattern ­ evidence of negative Roy sorting.2 This conflicting pattern of
evidence may not be too surprising given that the effect of H delivery varies across outcome measures.




2 Chandra and Staiger (2020) also find negative Roy sorting in hospital's policies over use of more intensive AMI
treatments.
 Appendix Table I: Characteristics of High and Low C-section Hospitals


                                                     Hospital Type:
                                             High CS            Low CS
C-section rate (LRFBs):
All                                                0.289         0.220
With no sign of labor                              0.104         0.081
With sign of labor                                 0.186         0.139
Ownership:
For profit                                         0.180         0.086
Private non-profit                                 0.746         0.723
Government                                         0.068         0.140
Academic                                           0.006         0.051
Other Characteristics:
Has NICU                                           0.741         0.858
NICU admit rate                                    0.027         0.042
Volume (births/yr.)                                3,695         3,635
Weekend admit rate                                 0.240         0.262
 Notes: see text for procedure to define H and L hospitals.
    Appendix Table II: Effect of Delivery at High C-Section Hospital on the Joint
           Distribution of Timing of Birth, Mode, and Low Apgar Score

                                                                         IV Estimate of
                                              Mean Rate in            Effect of Delivery at
                                             L Hospitals (%)              H Hospital (%)
                                                  (1)                           (2)

Delivery 1st Day (Any Mode)
 with 5-minute Apgar <7                           0.31                        -0.11
                                                                             (0.24)
 with 5-minute Apgar  7                          49.98                         1.75
                                                                             (2.33)
Delivery 2nd Day or Later (Any Mode)
 with 5-minute Apgar <7                           0.47                        -0.65
                                                                             (0.27)
 with 5-minute Apgar  7                          49.25                       -0.99
                                                                             (2.34)
Vaginal Delivery 1st Day
 with 5-minute Apgar <7                           0.20                        -0.11
                                                                             (0.17)
 with 5-minute Apgar  7                          40.26                       -5.07
                                                                             (1.96)
Vaginal Delivery 2nd Day or Later
 with 5-minute Apgar <7                           0.31                        -0.31
                                                                             (0.21)
 with 5-minute Apgar  7                          37.20                       -5.83
                                                                             (1.93)
Cesarean Delivery 1st Day
 with 5-minute Apgar <7                           0.11                        0.00
                                                                             (0.13)
 with 5-minute Apgar  7                           9.72                        6.82
                                                                             (1.33)
Cesarean Delivery 2nd Day or Later
 with 5-minute Apgar <7                           0.16                        -0.33
                                                                             (0.15)
 with 5-minute Apgar  7                          12.04                        4.84
                                                                             (1.35)
Notes: Sample= 487,643 (timing of birth has some missing values). See notes to Table 5.
Estimates in second column are from same specification as used in Table 5. Standard errors,
clustered at 5 digit zip code level, in parentheses.
Appendix Table III: Effects of Delivery at High C-Section Hospital on Infant Death
                          Logistic and Probit Regressions


                                                  Avg. marginal effect
                               Coefficient on          of rel. dist.
           Specification      relative distance   (percentage points)

                 Logistic          -2.604                -0.338
                                   (1.301)               (0.169)

                  Probit           -0.824                -0.337
                                   (0.399)               (0.164)


          Notes: Analysis sample, low-risk first births. Outcome is
          infant death in first year. Standard errors in parentheses
          clustered at 5-digit ZIP code level. All models include the
          full set of controls described in note to Table 2.
         Appendix Table IV: Comparison to effects on otherwise-low-risk breech first births

                                                                                 Low-risk breech
                                                            Analysis Sample
                                                                                   first births
Outcome Variable                                                   (1)                 (2)

First-Stage Models:
Deliver at high c-section (H) hospital                            1.328               1.706
                                                                 (0.134)             (0.204)
Reduced-Form Models:
Delivered by c-section                                             0.149              -0.064
                                                                 (0.027)             (0.041)
Low 5-minute Apgar score (x100)                                   -1.084              -1.368
                                                                 (0.471)             (2.138)
Any ED visit in year after birth                                   0.117              -0.108
                                                                 (0.049)             (0.135)
ED visit for acute respiratory condition                           0.070              -0.002
                                                                 (0.028)             (0.097)
Inpatient stay in neonatal period                                 -0.042              0.133
                                                                 (0.012)             (0.066)
Inpatient stay in year after birth                                -0.034              0.210
                                                                 (0.021)             (0.083)
6+ days in hospital or death in neonatal period (x100)            -2.803             18.842
                                                                 (1.526)             (7.640)
Death in year after birth (x100)                                  -0.344              1.213
                                                                 (0.161)             (1.692)

Births                                                          491,604              12,749
Notes: Column (1) presents estimates from main of LRFB analysis sample in text. Column (2)
presents estimates from sample of breech births that otherwise meet the definition for low-risk
first births.
                             Appendix Table V: Multi-Channel Estimates of Effects of Delivery at High C-Section Hospital
                                                   First-stage and reduced-form model estimates
                                                      First stage models
                                                          Deliver at:                                                           Reduced-form estimates, 5-channel model


                               High c-    Low (<7) 5-              High infant                       Low (<7) 5-                     Acute       Neonatal      Inpatient      6+ days in
                               section    min. Apgar High infant    inpatient        High infant     min. Apgar                   respiratory    inpatient    visit in first hosp. or neo.    Death
                                hosp.     score hosp. ED use hosp. use hosp.         death hosp.    score (×100) Any ED visit       ED visit        visit         year       death (×100)    (×100)
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)               (5)             (6)         (7)              (8)            (9)           (10)          (11)          (12)
 Rel. dist. to high c-          1.308       -0.184       -0.092       0.180             0.011          -0.780       0.142            0.084         -0.036        -0.024         -1.739       -0.339
 section hosp.                 (0.136)      (0.124)     (0.088)      (0.122)           (0.140)         (0.512)     (0.055)          (0.031)       (0.013)       (0.021)        (1.593)       (0.188)
 Rel. dist. to low 5-min.       0.211        1.170         -0.203           0.071       0.036           1.023         0.006         -0.008        -0.011        -0.018          2.233        -0.083
 Apgar score hosp.             (0.125)      (0.125)        (0.083)         (0.123)     (0.140)         (0.534)       (0.053)        (0.030)       (0.015)       (0.022)        (1.699)       (0.183)

 Rel. dist. to high infant      -0.346       0.292          0.717           -0.196      0.110          -0.223         0.081          0.053         0.014         0.016         -2.551        -0.064
 ED use hosp.                  (0.115)      (0.120)        (0.072)         (0.105)     (0.128)         (0.496)       (0.051)        (0.027)       (0.012)       (0.018)        (1.421)       (0.172)
 Rel. dist. to high infant      0.256        -0.285         0.301           1.843       0.342           0.420        -0.006          0.057         0.046         0.068          2.950        -0.138
 inpatient use hosp.           (0.149)      (0.122)        (0.081)         (0.125)     (0.148)         (0.560)       (0.062)        (0.031)       (0.013)       (0.020)        (1.742)       (0.203)
 Rel. dist. to high infant      -0.409       0.012          -0.026         -0.047       1.415          -0.339         0.081          0.035         0.020         0.039          0.363         0.200
 death hosp.                   (0.138)      (0.141)        (0.086)         (0.131)     (0.153)         (0.512)       (0.057)        (0.032)       (0.012)       (0.022)        (1.675)       (0.201)
Notes: Analysis Sample=491,604 low-risk first births. All models include the full set of controls described in note to Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses clustered by mother's zip code. All
models include controls for hospital confounds as discussed in the text.
   Appendix Table VI: Single- and Multi-Channel Instrumental Variables Estimates of Effects of Delivery at High C-
                                                 Section Hospital

                                                                                                                                   6+ days in hosp.
                              Low 5-minute                            Acute resp. ED         Neonatal           Inpat. visit in      or neonatal
                               Apgar (x100)        Any ED visit            visit           inpatient visit         first year       death (× 100)        Death (× 100)
                               (1)      (2)        (3)     (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)         (9)       (10)     (11)      (12)       (13)     (14)
 Deliver at high c-           -0.816 -0.519       0.088 0.094          0.053 0.058        -0.032 -0.032        -0.026 -0.026       -2.063 -2.049        -0.259 -0.227
 section hospital            (0.362) (0.389)     (0.037) (0.039)      (0.021) (0.021)     (0.009) (0.008)      (0.016) (0.014)     (1.115) (1.081)      (0.120) (0.142)
 Deliver at high                       0.937               0.106                0.089               0.030                0.041               1.311                0.116
 outcome hospital                     (0.416)             (0.067)              (0.036)             (0.007)              (0.011)             (0.917)              (0.165)
Notes: Analysis Sample = 491,604 low-risk first births. All models (OLS and IV) include the full set of controls described in note to Table 2, as well as controls for
hospital confounds, as discussed in the text. Instrumental variables are relative distance to high c-section hospital, relative distance to low 5-minute Apgar hospital
(column 2), relative distance to high infant ED use hospital (columns 4 and 6), relative distance to high infant inpatient use hospital (columns 10 and 12), and
relative distance to high infant death hospital (column 14). Standard errors in parentheses clustered by mother's zip code.
            Appendix Table VII: Generalized Control Function Models for Apgar Scores, Adverse Event in Neonatal Period, and Death

                                                                                                                                                                             6+ days in hospital or
                                           Low (<7) 5-minute         Any ED visit in year       ED visit for acute         Inpatient stay in       Inpatient stay in year     death in neonatal          Death in year after
                                           Apgar score (x100)            after birth          respiratory condition        neonatal period              after birth              period (×100)              birth (×100)
                                             (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)           (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)           (13)        (14)

Delivered at H Hospital                    -0.816      -0.810         0.088       0.083         0.053        0.051        -0.032       -0.031        -0.026      -0.026         -2.121      -2.181        -0.259      -0.255
                                           (0.430)     (0.447)       (0.043)     (0.048)       (0.024)      (0.027)       (0.011)     (0.013)       (0.019)     (0.021)        (1.458)     (1.306)       (0.148)     (0.148)

Delivered at H Hospital                       --        0.107           --        -0.139          --         -0.058          --        -0.009          --        -0.011           --        -1.687          --        0.138
 × 1st stage residual                                  (0.147)                   (0.013)                    (0.008)                   (0.004)                   (0.005)                    (0.533)                   (0.053)


Delivered at H Hospital                       --       -0.022           --        0.000           --         0.000           --        0.001           --        0.002            --       -0.004           --        0.014
 × birthweight (standardized)                          (0.026)                   (0.001)                    (0.001)                   (0.001)                   (0.001)                    (0.093)                   (0.016)

Delivered at H Hospital                       --        0.005           --        0.003           --         0.002           --       -0.001           --       -0.001            --       -0.091           --        0.000
 × gestation (standardized)                            (0.027)                   (0.001)                    (0.001)                   (0.001)                   (0.001)                    (0.087)                   (0.012)

 Delivered at H Hospital                      --        0.046           --        0.000           --         0.001           --        0.003           --        0.007            --        0.094           --        0.005
 × HRR c-section rate (standardized)                   (0.041)                   (0.004)                    (0.003)                   (0.001)                   (0.001)                    (0.116)                   (0.014)

1st stage residual                          0.757       0.695        -0.084      -0.011         -0.046       -0.016        0.034       0.038         0.032       0.037          2.576       3.454         0.269       0.197
                                           (0.432)     (0.471)       (0.043)     (0.049)        (0.023)     (0.027)       (0.011)     (0.012)       (0.019)     (0.021)        (1.443)     (1.285)       (0.150)     (0.155)

Notes: Analysis Sample=491,604 low-risk first births. All models include the full set of controls described in note to Table 2, as well as controls for hospital confounds as discussed in the text. Birthweight and gestation
interaction terms are expressed in (demeaned) standard deviation units. Sample for Apgar scores is 487,643 births with non-missing 5-minute Apgar scores. Standard errors are bootstrapped (200 repetitions) and
clustered at the mother's zip code.
  Appendix Table VIII: Effects of Delivery at High C-Section Hospital on Fertility and
                               Second-Birth Outcomes

                                                                                                                  2SLS Estimate
                                                                           OLS Coefficient                (Scaled per 1st-
                                                                            (Deliver at H, RF Coefficient birth delivery at
                                                 LRFBs          Mean          1st birth)       (x 100)       H-hospital)

                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)               (5)

Any 2nd birth in sample                         491,307         0.197            0.008            -0.046             -0.035
                                                                                (0.002)           (0.029)            (0.022)
Days until 2nd birth                             97,026        814.690           4.047              3.950             3.317
                                                                                (2.147)           (31.738)          (26.538)
C-section at 2nd birth                           97,024         0.276            0.071             0.198              0.166
                                                                                (0.004)           (0.052)            (0.042)
Scheduled c-section at 2nd birth                 97,024         0.249            0.072             0.195              0.164
                                                                                (0.004)           (0.049)            (0.039)
Gestation of 2nd birth (days)                    94,674        275.521          -0.594            -2.737             -2.286
                                                                                (0.095)           (1.436)            (1.152)
Birthweight of 2nd birth (grams)                 97,021       3385.342          -11.059           -72.440           -60.818
                                                                                (3.353)           (50.785)          (42.321)
Fetal or infant death at 2nd birth               97,026         0.005            0.000             0.007              0.006
                                                                                (0.001)           (0.008)            (0.007)
Maternal length of stay at 2nd birth             96,260         2.154            0.158             0.159              0.133
                                                                                (0.011)           (0.139)            (0.118)
Infant length of stay at 2nd birth               97,026         2.185            0.140             0.119              0.100
                                                                                (0.009)           (0.106)            (0.089)
Maternal ED, ASC, or inpatient stays             97,026         0.454            0.008             0.147              0.123
in prenatal period of 2nd birth                                                 (0.007)           (0.097)            (0.083)
Maternal ED, ASC, or inpatient stays             97,026         0.264            0.021             0.082              0.069
 in year after 2nd birth                                                        (0.006)           (0.080)            (0.068)
Second infant ED, ASC, or inpatient              97,026         0.585            0.008             0.083              0.070
 stays in year after birth                                                      (0.009)           (0.147)            (0.123)

Notes: All models (OLS and IV) include the full set of controls described in note to Table 2, in addition to month (e.g. July
2008) indicators. Instrumental variable in all cases is relative distance to high-c-section hospital. Maternal and infant counts
of stays topcoded at 5.
             Appendix Figure I: Sensitivity of Reduced-Form Effects of Relative Distance on Infant Health Outcomes

                     a. ED Visits in Year after Birth                                                           b. Inpatient Readmissions and Death in Year after Birth

                Basic controls                                                                                                                                                                 Basic controls

            Mom's education                                                                                                                                                                    Mom's education

                   Mom's age                                                                                                                                                                   Mom's age

               Insurance type                                                                                                                                                                  Insurance type

                   Mom's race                                                                                                                                                                  Mom's race
            Mom's pre-birth                                                                                                                                                                    Mom's pre-birth
             ED/hospital                                                                                                                                                                        ED/hospital
               Father present                                                                                                                                                                  Father present

 Mom's height/weight/BMI                                                                                                                                                                       Mom's height/weight/BMI

      Birthweight, gestation                                                                                                                                                                   Birthweight, gestation

  Prenatal care timing/freq.                                                                                                                                                                   Prenatal care timing/freq.

   Asthma/diabetes/herpes                                                                                                                                                                      Asthma/diabetes/herpes

                      Smoking                                                                                                                                                                  Smoking

     Zip code characteristics                                                                                                                                                                  Zip code characteristics

        All controls together                                                                                                                                                                  All controls together

                                 0.00             0.05             0.10              0.15             0.20    -0.06       -0.05       -0.04        -0.03       -0.02       -0.01        0.00
                            ED Visit for Any Reason         ED Visit for Acute Resp. Conditions                                         Inpatient Readmissions                 Death x 10

Notes: Figures report estimated reduced form effects on ED visits (panel a) or inpatient readmissions and death (panel b) from models that include basic set of controls described in Table 2 plus
additional controls described on figure axes. "All controls together" estimate at bottom of figure include all control variables simultaneously.
