                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ENDOGENOUS SOCIAL CONNECTIONS IN LEGISLATURES

                                       Marco Battaglini
                                      Eleonora Patacchini
                                       Edoardo Rainone

                                      Working Paper 25988
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25988


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




For useful comments and discussions we thank Coralio Ballester, Vincent Boucher, Antonio
Cabrales, Chih-Sheng Hsieh, Angelo Mele, Pedro CL Souza, Mathieu Taschereau-Domouchel
and seminar participants at the Kellogg School of Business, the Einaudi Institute for Economics
and Finance, the plenary lecture of the 2018 Public Economic Theory conference (PET 2018), the
2018 Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, and the 2019 Cambridge-INET Conference on Networks.
We also thank Neelanjan Datta for excellent research assistance. The views expressed here do not
necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Italy or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marco Battaglini, Eleonora Patacchini, and Edoardo Rainone. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Endogenous Social Connections in Legislatures
Marco Battaglini, Eleonora Patacchini, and Edoardo Rainone
NBER Working Paper No. 25988
June 2019
JEL No. D71,D72

                                         ABSTRACT

We present a model of the U.S. Congress in which social connections among Congress members
are endogenous and matter for their legislative activity. We propose a novel equilibrium concept
for the network formation game that allows for a sharp characterization of equilibrium behavior
and that yields a unique prediction under testable conditions. While the equilibrium is
characterized by a large number of nonlinear equations, we show that the model can be
structurally estimated by an appropriately designed Approximate Bayesian Computation method.
Estimating the model using data from the 109th to 113th U.S. Congresses, we show that social
connections are important for legislators' productivities and we identify some of the key
determinants of social centralities in Congress.

Marco Battaglini                               Edoardo Rainone
Department of Economics                        Banca d'Italia
Uris Hall                                      Rome
Cornell University                             Italy
Ithaca, NY 14850                               edoardo.rainone@bancaditalia.it
and EIEF
and also NBER
battaglini@cornell.edu

Eleonora Patacchini
Department of Economics
Cornell University
430 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
ep454@cornell.edu
1      Introduction
Legislative processes are typically modelled in the political economy literature as bargaining pro-
tocols. The prototypical approach to describe legislative bargaining is the Baron and Ferejohn's
[1989] model, where a randomly selected proposer makes sequential take-it or leave-it offers to the
other legislators until a policy that wins a majority is chosen. In this and other related models,
votes are traded in "markets" where only the monetary size of concessions matters.1 There is no
room for politicians' characteristics, their social connections, or even for political parties. There is,
however, an important body of work in political science that has stressed the importance of taking
into account interpersonal relations and social connections when studying how legislatures work.
The history of the U.S. Congress is indeed rich in examples where voting coalitions are shaped by
social connections formed inside and outside of the legislative chambers.2 While the suggestion
that social connections should be important in the legislative process is intuitive, little formal work
has been done to study them. Can we formally measure their effect on the legislative process? Can
we assess what determines whether a legislator is well connected and what this implies for his/her
legislative effectiveness?
    In answering these questions, the main challenges are that social networks in legislatures (as
is the case in most other social groups) are endogenous and not directly observed by outsiders.
The standard approach in the empirical literature on network effects is not designed for these
environments. The typical approach is to assume that a network is an observable realization from
an unknown data generation process; and that it can be used to estimate key parameters of the
process (for example the cost of link formation and other parameters that matter for the network).
To address the questions listed above we need to allow for environments in which networks are
unobservable: in which, more precisely, only the activities of their members are observable and
usable for estimation. This is challenging because models of network formation, even when they
ignore the implications for their members' activities, are characterized by significant equilibrium
multiplicity and computational complexities.
    In this paper, we propose a new theory of legislative behavior in which both the choice of
forming social links among legislators and their legislative effort are endogenous. The theory has
two stages. In the first stage, legislators target their efforts to form social links with specific
other legislators. The effort required to form social links is costly, and bilateral links between two
legislators may depend on both of the legislators' efforts, according to a given production function.
    1 Weuse the term "market" as an analog of a bargaining protocol that is nothing less than a description of how
the buyer and seller (of a vote) interact. Other models of legislative bargaining will be discussed in the literature
review below. All of these models establish specific market/bargaining protocols in which votes are traded.
   2 We will discuss the political science literature more extensively later in this section.




                                                         2
In the second stage, legislators' effectiveness depends on their legislative efforts and the effectiveness
of the legislators with whom links have been established in the previous stage. The preferences of the
legislators in the linking process may not only depend on the legislators' observable characteristics,
but also on unobservable factors that may be correlated with variables that directly affect the
legislators' effectiveness. We use the theory to structurally estimate social links in the 109th to
113th U.S. Congresses using data on legislators' characteristics and activities.3
    We are able to overcome the complications in solving and estimating the model described above
because of two methodological contributions that may have wider applicability in estimating social
network effects. First, we introduce a new equilibrium concept that we call Network Competitive
Equilibrium.4 The difficulty in solving the game described above is that, by establishing a link, a
legislator generates direct effects on his/her effectiveness, but also a cascade of indirect spillover
effects that make the analysis hard: legislator i's change in effectiveness after linking to j affects
the effectiveness of all the others directly or indirectly linked to i, including j . These complications
are similar to the problems that arise when studying a general equilibrium in an exchange econ-
omy: where a change in an agent's demand has a direct obvious effect on an agent's utility and
a cascade of indirect effects on equilibrium prices, the budget of other agents, and their actions.
In competitive analysis, this problem is solved by assuming that agents are "price takers:" agents
solve their optimization program taking prices as given. Prices, however, must clear the market in
equilibrium. Such analysis is motivated by the fact that, in many exchange economies, each agent
only has a marginal impact on equilibrium prices, thus allowing them to ignore the indirect effects.
Similarly, in our approach, legislators choose their socialization efforts taking the other legislators'
equilibrium effectivenesses as given; these equilibrium effectiveness levels, however, need to be con-
sistent with individual choices. Given this, we show that a Network Competitive Equilibrium can be
characterized by a system of nonlinear equations. Moreover, under empirically testable conditions,
the equilibrium is unique.
    Our second methodological contribution is how we use the analytical characterization of the
equilibrium conditions to estimate the model by Bayesian methods. Because our characterization
makes it impossible to state an analytic likelihood function, we estimate the model by an Approxi-
mate Bayesian Computation method (henceforth, ABC), a computational approach that has proven
   3 Measuring legislators' activities is naturally a complicated task. Thankfully, considerable work has been done

in the political science literature on this front. For our analysis we rely on the index of Legislative Effectiveness
constructed by Volden and Wiseman [2014].
   4 Other approaches used in the literature to model complex endogenous network formation process that can be

used in empirical analysis include modelling networks as the steady states of stochastic best response dynamics, in
which myopic agents select links sequentially; or to adopt cooperative solutions as pairwise stability. We will discuss
these approaches and how they relate to our approach in greater detail below and in Section 3.




                                                          3
useful in population genetics and other applications that require large scale models.5
   Using Monte Carlo simulations, we systematically explore the performance of our estimation
technique by studying environments in which we change the number of nodes, the number of periods
in which behavior is observed, and other characteristics of the network topology. We show that our
approach performs well for networks with at least 200 members, even if the networks are dense and
we only observe outcomes (here, legislators' effectiveness) in a few periods.6
   We then use our methodology to estimate the social network in the U.S. Congress using data
from the 109th to 113th Congresses. We find evidence that social connections affect legislative effec-
tiveness. We estimate that a 1% increase in the social connectedness of a legislator i­a measure of
the effectiveness of the other legislators connected to i that we will define precisely­induces a 0.74%
increase in individual effectiveness. Consistent with the endogeneity of the network, moreover, we
also find that the elasticity of link formation with respect to other legislators' effectiveness levels is
significantly positive.
   The estimation of the social network gives us insight into the determinants of social connec-
tions. Consistent with the existing literature on congressional politics, party affiliation is the most
significant factor determining social connections, with Republicans more linked to Republicans
and Democrats more linked to Democrats. More surprisingly, we find that interpersonal relations
bonded long before Congress's election victory are also a key factor, about one-fourth as large as
party affiliation. This is in line with the evidence that alumni connections predict cosponsorships
and voting behavior in Congress (Cohen and Malloy [2014] and Battaglini and Patacchini [2018]).
We also find that weak links across political lines are important, an observation long suggested in
the sociological and political science literature (see Granovetter [1973] and, more recently, Kirkland
[2011]). More importantly, however, the model allows us to estimate social network effects without
having to rely on a specific, observable adjacency matrix as an approximation of social connections.
Instead, we use a variety of sources of information and let the data tell us what matters. For
example, as we discuss in greater detail in Section 5.2, by using exclusively alumni networks as a
proxy (as done by Cohen and Malloy [2014] or Battaglini and Patacchini [2018]), we ignore the
importance of party affiliation; and by using only cosponsorships (as done by Fowler [2006], for
example), we ignore the importance of alumni connections.
   The underlying assumption in our approach is that agents in our network are marginal and can
therefore take the centralities of the other players as given. This approach seems appropriate for
applications with large networks in which the status of any single agent depends on the linking
decision of many other agents, though it may be a limitation in other environments. An advantage
  5 See   Rubin [1984] and Marjoram et al. [2003] for a discussion of ABC methods and their applications.
  6 Indeed  one period is sufficient, though the estimates improve with three to five periods.



                                                         4
of our approach, however, is that it allows us to obtain sharp and testable predictions for large and
complicated networks.

Related literature As we discussed above, legislative activity typically is modelled as a bar-
gaining protocol in the political economy literature. The classic reference is Baron and Ferejohn
[1989], while alternative bargaining protocols have been presented by Austen-Smith and Banks
[1988], Morelli [1999], Baron and Diermeier [2001], Seidmann et al. [2007], Battaglini [2019], and
others. In these works, there is little space for the legislators' social connections. In extending the
analysis to incorporate social connections, our work relates to two main other strands of literature,
one in political science and one in economics.
    First, our work relates to a recent literature studying the impact of social networks in Congress
on legislative behavior. While scholars in political science have recognized the relevance of social
connections between lawmakers for quite some time, only recently have data availability and ad-
vances in network analysis allowed us to move beyond descriptive analyses.7 Peoples [2008], Masket
[2008], Rogowsky and Sinclair [2012], Cohen and Malloy [2014] and Harmon et al. [2017] have stud-
ied whether social links affect voting behavior. Battaglini and Patacchini [2018] have studied the
impact of the legislators' social connections on PAC's contributions. Closer to our work, Fowler
[2006], Kirkland [2011], and Battaglini et al. [2019] have studied the relationship between legisla-
tors' effectiveness in the U.S. Congress and their social connections. None of these papers, however,
model the process of social linking; they all rely upon specific observable social networks as proxies
for the true social connections among the legislators.8
    The second literature to which our work is connected is the economic literature on the estima-
tion of social networks. The traditional approach in the empirical works on endogenous network
formation is to interpret observable social networks as realizations from unknown data generating
processes, and use them for estimating the processes. The issue of estimating an unobservable
network using other observable economic outcomes has been addressed in the networks literature
only by assuming that social connections are exogenous. The complication here is that the number
of network connections is much higher than the number of economic outcomes that can be used
for the estimation (in our specific application, the legislators' performance in Congress): with n
legislators observed for T sessions, the first is on the order of n2 , the second just of order n · T . De
   7 Earlier work includes Rice [1927, 1928], Routt [1938], Eulau [1962]. See Victor et al. [2016] and Battaglini and

Patacchini [2019] for recent surveys.
   8 The observable social connections that have been used include, among others, the proximity network, in which

two legislators are linked if they sit next to each other in a legislative session or if they have nearby offices; the
cosponsorship network in which two legislators are linked if they have cosponsored each other's bills; and the alumni
network, in which two legislators are linked if they have attended the same educational institution. See Battaglini
and Patacchini [2019] and Victor et al. [2016] for surveys of this literature.



                                                          5
Paula et al. [2018] use high-dimensional estimation techniques to estimate social networks, which
can bypass the dimensionality problem.9 While this and other related approaches are versatile
and can be applied to many environments with minor changes,10 they have two main limitations.
First, they typically require assuming an exogenous linear model of behavior, thus not allowing
for the endogeneity of the network. Second, and more importantly, they require assuming that a
social network is sparse and the vector of outcomes used for the estimation can be observed for
many sessions. These assumptions are problematic for environments such as ours: as we will argue
below, legislative network are generally dense networks that cannot be observed repeatedly because
elections are held every few years.11 Our approach, instead, is to rely on the structure generated by
our endogenous model of link formation to reduce the dimensionality of the estimation; and then to
use the observable outcome from just one or few congresses to structurally estimate the parameters
of the model.
    To our knowledge, we are the first to model the network formation as a "competitive equilibrium"
as described above. Two very different approaches have been adopted to model complex network
formation processes for empirical analysis. The first approach is based on stochastic best response
dynamics, in which myopic agents form random links sequentially, thus forming a Markov chain of
networks. In this approach, an observed network is interpreted as a realization from the stationary
distribution of the Markov process, which is obtained by simulation.12 The second approach is
to study networks that satisfy pairwise stability, a stability concept introduced by Jackson and
Wolinsky [1996]. This approach typically generates a large set of equilibrium predictions and thus
only leads only to partial identification under strong sparsity conditions on the network.13 In Section
3.1, we discuss the relative advantages and limitations of these other approaches in comparison to
our approach, after we have described our model and equilibrium solution in greater details.
    Closer to our approach in modelling network formation is the work by Acemoglu and Azar [2018],
   9 A spatial econometrics model with an unobserved and stochastic network is also proposed by Souza [2014].

Breza et al. [2017] propose a method to estimate social links using aggregated relational data. The properties of
the estimators with missing data have also been studied by Shalizi and Rinaldo [2013], Handcock and Gile [2010],
Koskinen et al [2010], and others. See De Paula [2017] for a comprehensive discussion.
  10 For related approaches, see also Manresa [2016] who, however, only considers exogenous peer effects; and

Battaglini et al. [2018], who follow a graphical lasso approach to identify the network.
  11 Elections for the U.S. Congress are held every two years. While reelection rates are very high (about 90-95% of

Congress members are reelected), the average length of service is about five terms in the U.S. House of Representatives
as of January 2013, and, on average, over 10% of first-term Congress members do not seek reelection (Glassman and
Wilhelm [2017]). It is therefore problematic to assume social networks in Congress persist for more than a few
Congresses.
  12 Using this approach, Christakis et al. [2010], Mele [2017], and Badev [2017] provide microfoundations for the

exponential random graph approach. Jackson and Rogers [2007], Liu et al. [2012], Konig [2016], and Boucher [2018]
have characterized the distribution of networks emerging from alternative sequential models.
  13 Miyauchi [2016], De Paula et al. [2018b], and Sheng [2018] each provide a partial identification analysis of

network formation models based on the cooperative solution concept of pairwise stability under restrictions on the
complexity of network connections. We refer to De Paula [2017] for a comprehensive survey of this literature.



                                                          6
who study the endogenous choices of firm input combinations in a competitive environment.14 In
their model marginal productivities of inputs depend on the entire input/output network, but are
taken as given by firms when chosing suppliers. Contrary to us, they assume that the production
network is observable and therefore do not attempt to estimate it; their focus is on studying its
impact on aggregate productivity in a dynamic model of growth.
    Two other papers in the networks literature deserve special mention. The first is Boucher [2018],
who also uses an Approximate Bayesian Computation approach similar to ours to estimate a model
of endogenous network formation. In contrast to our approach, he aims at estimating the proba-
bility distribution over networks under the assumption that a network realization is observed. The
sequential model of social link formation underlying this work does not have a tractable analytical
characterization of the equilibria, thus it does not give sufficient statistics for the approximation
of the likelihood function. Boucher [2018] suggests a set of summary statistics that allows him to
estimate homophily in a network of high school friendship based on Add Health data. The second
related paper is Canen et al. [2017], who adapts a model by Cabrales et al. [2011] to estimate
unobservable social efforts in the U.S. Congress. In contrast to this paper, the authors assume that
legislators cannot target their socialization efforts to other specific legislators, rather they exert a
generic non-directed level of effort in socializing with all other legislators (Cabrales et al. [2011] call
it a model without "earmarked socialization").15 The analysis, moreover, is based only on the total
number of cosponsored bills by a legislator, that is used as an empirical proxy for social effort; and
on a one-dimensional index of roll call data and floor speeches, that is used as an empirical proxy
for legislative effort.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model of legislative
behavior formation of social connections. Section 3 defines our equilibrium concept, the Network
Competitive Equilibrium, and characterizes it. Section 4 defines the econometric specification of
the model, discusses the estimation method by Approximate Bayesian Computation Method, and
presents a set of simulations to explore the performance of our approach in finite samples and as
we change the environment of the estimation. Section 5 estimates the model using data from the
109th to 113th U.S. Congresses. Section 6 presents a few extensions to the model and discusses the
robustness of the results. Section 7 concludes.
  14 Other recent but less related models of endogenous production networks are presented by Oberfield [2018] and

Taschereau-Dumouchel [2019].
  15 A member of a legislator's party may benefit differently from the social effort, but this is not a choice of the

legislator, it instead depends on an exogenous parameter modulating "partisanship."




                                                         7
2     Model
Consider a Congress comprised of n legislators, where N = {1, ..., n} is the set of legislators.
Each legislator has a pet legislative project that he or she cares to implement. The goal of each
legislator is to maximize their legislative effectiveness, measured by the probability of implementing
the project.16 We assume that legislator i's effectiveness Ei is an increasing function of the effort
directly exerted by i and the legislative effectiveness of all the legislators with whom i is socially
connected. Legislator i's PAC, for example, may have contributed to the reelection campaign of
legislator j , so j may use his or her "weight" to help i. Specifically, we assume the following
"production function" for legislative effectiveness:

                                                                  1-
                                            Ei =  · (si ) (li )        + i                                           (1)


The Cobb-Douglas in (1) captures the effects of legislator i's level of "social connectedness" si and
effort li . We assume that i's social connectedness is


                                                si =            gi,j Ej ,                                            (2)
                                                          j N


where gi,j is a measurement of the social link between i and j . The idea behind (2) is that the
higher is the effectiveness of the legislators socially connected to i, the higher is i's effectiveness;
because of this, the effect of j on i is weighted in (2) by the degree of social connection of i to j .
The second term, i , is a factor idiosyncratic to i that contributes to i's efficacy independently from
his/her connections or effort. We assume it is observed by the players, but not by an econometrician
studying the game. In the analysis below, we assume gi,i = 0, gi,j  [0, g ] with g > 0, i  [, ]
with  > 0,   (0, 1), and li  0, l with l > 0. Moreover, below we will maintain the following
assumption that guarantees Ei  [0, 1):
                               1-
Assumption 1.  · g  · l             +  < 1.

These assumptions on the parameters and functional form are only made for convenience. In Section
6, we discuss how more general functional forms would affect the analysis.
    In this model, legislators' effort levels l = {l1 , ..., ln }, legislative effectiveness E = {E1 , ..., En }
and the social matrix G = (gi,j )i,j N are all endogenous variables. These variables are determined
in a two-stage game. At t = 2, the legislators choose their costly efforts li , taking the social links G
  16 The idea that legislators have independent projects that they pursue to seek reelection is at the core of the theory

of distributive politics (see Fiorina [1978], Weingast [1979], Shepsle and Weingast [1981], Weingast and Marshall [1988]
among others).



                                                           8
as given. The cost of effort is assumed to be represented by a linear function Li (li ) = c · li , where
c is a cost parameter.
   At t = 1, legislators befriend other legislators in order to increase their legislative effectiveness.
At this stage, the legislators simultaneously choose the social links gi,j . Specifically, we assume that
at t = 1, legislator i decides with which other legislator j  N \i he or she wishes to establish a link
gi,j . A link gi,j is established only if j approves it, but it only depends on i's effort. If a social link
from i is approved by j , the cost of establishing it with intensity gi,j is given by:

                                                                               1
                                                                            1+ 
                                                                     gi,j
                                        C (gi,j , i,j ) =                          ,                    (3)
                                                            (1 + )   i,j

where i,j is a variable that captures the degree to which the types of i and j are socially "com-
patible:" the more i and j are socially compatible, the lower is the cost for i to establish a link
with intensity gi,j with j . This cost may be interpreted as, for example, the cost of the time spent
socializing with j or the time that i's staff needs to spend with j 's staff to coordinate actions,
or the cost of the campaign contributions from i's PAC to j 's PAC. The variable i,j is taken as
exogenous in the theoretical analysis and it may comprise a number of factors: whether i and j are
elected in the same district, whether they have the same party affiliation, sex, social, or educational
background (for example if they attended the same educational institutions, etc.). In practice, we
assume that the matrix  = (i,j )i,j is symmetric and that for each legislator i there is a set Mi of
other legislators such that i,j > 0 for j  Mi and zero otherwise. This implies that legislator i is
compatible with at most a subset Mi with cardinality mi = |Mi | of other legislators. We denote
m = maxi mi as the maximal cardinality of the subsets of friends. The variables i,j and Mi will
be discussed in greater detail in Section 2.3, where we develop the empirical analysis of the model.
While  and Mi are exogenous in the theoretical model, in the empirical analysis we will let the
data identify them.
   In the socialization process described above, the ability of i to establish a link with j depends
only on i's effort and on i and j 's types, not on j 's effort. Naturally, it may be that j 's effort plays
a role too. In Section 6.1 we extend the model to allow gi,j to be a function of both i and j 's effort,
along with their types. The analysis is more complicated, but it is not qualitatively different.
   The following assumption guarantees that we will not have a corner solution in which a legislator
chooses li = l for some i  N .17
                                          1/
Assumption 2. l > ((1 - ) /c)

   Note that a simple condition that guarantees both Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 are satisfied
 17 A   formal proof of this fact is provided in the proof of Proposition 1.


                                                             9
is that the parameter controlling the social spillovers  is sufficiently small.
    The type i of a legislator i is defined by all of the variables describing his/her preferences
and social connections, so i = (i , (i,k )kN , Mi ). We denote with  the space of types with
typical element   . A pure strategy for a legislator is described by a socialization strategy
                n-1
g :   [0, g ]         , mapping the legislator's type to a vector of intensities gi = {gi,j }j =i for each of
the n - 1 other legislators; and an effort strategy l : ×G 0, l , mapping the social network and
i's type to an effort level.



3     Equilibrium analysis

3.1    Network competitive equilibrium
The game described in the previous section has a simple structure that allows us to solve it by
backward induction. At t = 2, the legislators choose effort levels taking the social network as
given; at t = 1, legislators choose their social links. As it is often the case in games with network
externalities, however, the analysis is complicated by the fact that each action has, in addition to
a straightforward direct effect, a set of indirect effects. For example, consider the choice at t = 1,
when legislator i chooses the link to j , gi,j : here a change in gi,j has a direct effect on Ei described
by (1); but it may also have a complex set of indirect effects: the change in Ei given G changes
all other Ej s of j s who are connected to i; these changes may affects Ej if i is connected to them,
directly or indirectly.
    To understand our approach, it is useful to note that these complications are not dissimilar to
the complications we have when studying a general equilibrium in an exchange economy in which
a change in an agent's demand has a direct obvious effect on an agent's utility and an indirect
effect on equilibrium prices. The solution in general equilibrium analysis is to assume that agents
are "price takers:" agents solve their optimization program taking prices as given. Prices, however,
must clear the market in equilibrium. Such analysis is motivated by the fact that, in many exchange
economies, each agent has only a marginal impact on equilibrium prices, thus allowing us to ignore
the indirect effects.
    The same approach seems appropriate for the study of network games with many players such as
ours, in which the incentives to establish a link to a node depends only on some measure of centrality
of the node that is a function of the aggregate behavior in the network. In these environments it
is plausible to assume, as in a competitive equilibrium, that the players are "price takers "with
respect to these measures of centrality, in our case the legislators' levels of effectiveness. We can



                                                       10
therefore introduce a Network Competitive Equilibrium (henceforth, NCE) as follows:

Definition 1. Legislators' effort levels l = {l1 , ..., ln }, legislative effectiveness E = {E1 , ..., En } and
the social matrix G = (gi,j )i,j N constitute a Network Competitive Equilibrium (NCE) if:

   · network connections gi = (gi,1 , .., gi,n ) are optimal for i at t=1 given E;

   · effort levels li are optimal for legislator i at t = 2 given E and G = gi         iN
                                                                                            ;

   · the vector of efficacy levels E satisfy the production function (1) given l and G.


   The first two requirements in the definition correspond to the requirement in a competitive equi-
librium that agents optimize given "prices," where the other legislators' effectivenesses corresponds
to prices. The last requirement corresponds to the market clearing condition: here we impose that
the equilibrium expected levels of effectiveness are consistent with each other. It should therefore
be stressed that while the legislators choose G taking E as given, E is endogenous in the same
way as prices are endogenous in a competitive equilibrium. While the concept is introduced in
the context of this model, it seems the idea of a NCE should have a more general applicability to
network formation in many other environments. We will explore some properties of this equilibrium
definition below.
   Before turning to the equilibrium characterization, it is useful to compare our approach with
the other approaches that have been adopted to model network formation for empirical analysis. A
key aspects of our NCE is the simplification of the strategic interaction implied by the assumption
that agents take the other players' effectiveness as given when choosing their social connections.
Underlying this approach is the implicit assumption that agents are "small" and thus have (or
perceive) only a marginal effect on the effectiveness of other players. This assumption does not
seem too demanding in large and complex networks such as congressional networks. Consider, for
example, Figure 16, plotting our estimated network and other observed networks often used to study
social networks in Congress (such as the cosponsorship and committee networks).18 It is apparent
that no nodes (or very few) are in a position to exert a dominant effect on social interactions; and,
more importantly, that if we change an individual agent's connections, we would not change the
overall network very much.
   The other two approaches to model endogenous networks used in the literature­stochastic best
response dynamics and pairwise stability­also adopt very significant simplifications of the strategic
interactions between agents. In the first approach, based on stochastic best response dynamics,
  18 The cosponsorship network has been used to study social connections in the U.S. Congress by Fowler [2006],

Kirkland [2011], Parigi and Sartori [2014] among others. The committee network has been used by Porter et al.
[2005].


                                                      11
agents are myopic and form random links sequentially. This approach, moreover, does not lead to
an analytical characterization of an equilibrium (except under simplifying assumptions in specific
examples). The equilibrium stationary distribution is obtained by simulating the underlying Markov
process.19 The underlying Markov process typically induces a unique stationary distribution of
networks, but this distribution depends on the exogenous distribution of the random shocks that
affect the agents' preferences. The second approach focuses on networks that satisfy pairwise
stability, a cooperative solution concept. This approach typically leaves a large set of equilibrium
predictions and thus only partial identification under strong sparsity conditions on the network.20
   While the NCE can conceptually be applied to any networks, its applicability is probably not
appropriate for simple environments with few links, where it is probably the case that players are
well aware of indirect effects (just as the idea of a competitive equilibrium can conceptually be
applied even to a one agent Robinson Crusoe economy, but probably it should not). Whether the
simplification in the NCE is an acceptable compromise it is ultimately an empirical question that
has to do with the ability of the model to fit the data better than alternative approaches. We will
argue in Section 5 that this is the case for our congressional network.
   In the next two subsections we characterize the NCE of our game, starting from the choice of
effort at t = 2.


3.2     The choice of effort at t = 2
Substituting in the solution to the maximization of (4) into (1), we obtain that the equilibrium
levels of legislative effectiveness for a type i  N are given by:

                                                       1-
                                          (1 - )                 n
                               Ei =                         ·           gi,j Ej + i .                         (4)
                                              c                  j =1



These equations can be expressed in matrix form as:


                                               [I -  · G] · E =                                               (5)

                              1-
where  =  ((1 - ) /c)          
                                   and  is the vector (i )iN .
   If we had an exogenous G, condition (4) would have a straightforward interpretation: assuming
the invertibility of the matrix on the left hand side of (5), a legislator's effectiveness coincides
  19 For empirical analysis based on this approach, see Christakis et al. [2010], Konig [2016], Mele [2017], Badev

[2017] and Boucher [2018], among others.
  20 For empirical studies following this approach, see Miyauchi [2016], De Paula et al. [2018], and Sheng [2018],

among others.


                                                       12
with his weighted Bonacich centrality in G, with weights given by the natural "effectiveness of each
legislator" i and the discount factor  .21 However, the interpretation of E as "weighted Bonacichs"
is no longer correct because G is endogenous.


3.3       The formation of the network at t = 1
At t = 1, the legislators choose their social links to maximize the expected utility at stage t = 2,
net of the cost of establishing the links. The expected continuation utility at t = 1 of a type i is
easily determined by substituting the optimal effort levels and Ei (G,) in (4):

                                                            n
                                       U i (G, ) =                 gi,j Ej (G, ) + i .                                   (6)
                                                            j =1


Legislator i will choose the links gi = (gi,1 , ..., gi,n ) that maximize (6) with the constraint that if
gi,j > 0, then the link is not vetoed by j . It is, however, easy to see that no legislator j would
find it optimal to veto a link from i. The establishment of a link gi,j increases the effectiveness of
i and of any other legislator who has a direct or indirect link to i: so if j does not have a direct or
an indirect link that points to i, then j is indifferent; if j has a direct or indirect link to i, then j
strictly prefers that i establishes a link with him/her.22 It follows that legislator i chooses his links
solving:
                                                                                            1
                                                                                         1+ 
                                       n                                         gi,j
                          max                   · gi,j Ej (G, ) -                                .                       (7)
                            gi         j =1                       (1 + )         i,j

       Combining the solution of (7) with (5), we have:

Proposition 1. A Network Competitive Equilibrium (NCE) exists and it is characterized by a
vector E  and a matrix G that solve the system:

                                                                 
                                      Ei      = ·               gi,l El + i                                              (8)
                                                        lN
                                                       1+                          
                                 and gi,j      (i,j )        Ej           ( = for gi,j  g)                               (9)


for any i, j  N .
                                           
       In an interior solution, i.e. when gi,j  g for all i, j , the two conditions collapse to the system
  21  The standard definition of the Bonacich centrality with discount factor  is E = [I -  · G]-1 1 (See Bonacich
[1987]). The weighted Bonacich with weights A is defined as E = [I -  · G]-1 A (See Ballester et al. [2006]).
  22 In Section 6.1 we will extend the analysis to consider the case in which g
                                                                                i,j depends on both i's and j 's investments.




                                                             13
in n equations and n variables:

                                                          1+                       1+
                                       Ei =  ( )                       (i,l El )        + i                     (10)
                                                                  lN


   The legislators' effectivenesses are no longer representable by a linear system of equations as in
the familiar "Bonacich" representation of (5). The intuition for this phenomenon is simple. When
the network is exogenous, Ei is a linear function of Ej , with a factor of proportionality given by gi,j .
                                                                                                                    
When gi,j is endogenous, however, i finds it optimal to choose gi,j that is proportional to (Ej ) .
                                                                                                               1+
The true link between Ei and Ej , therefore, is no longer linear: Ei will be a function of (Ej )                    .
   To interpret (8) and (10), it is useful to note that the elasticity of a link gi,j with respect to the
effectiveness of the associated target legislator j is                 gi,j ,Ej   = .23 As   0, the endogenous links
become completely inelastic with respect to effectiveness, and indeed we have gi,j  i,j . In this
case, we are back to the standard Bonacich representation of effectiveness, assuming that [I -  · ]
is invertible:

Example 1. As   0, there is a unique equilibrium in which effectiveness coincides with the
                                                    -1
Bonacich centralities: E = [I -  · ]                     · , where  is the n × n matrix with generic term i,j .

   When  > 0, instead, changes in the equilibrium effectiveness imply changes in the links. The
higher is , the more links polarize around the most effective legislators. To see the implications
of a positive , let   . In this case, from the first order condition, we obtain that gi,j = g if
Ej i,j - 1  0 and zero otherwise. Consider a symmetric environment in which legislators are
symmetric (so i =  for all i) and located in a ring such that i,j = 1 for j  {i - 1, i + 1} and
zero otherwise. We say that there is no connectivity if gi,j = 0 for all i, j  N and that there is full
connectivity if gi,j = g if i,j > 0. We have:

Example 2. As   , in a ring there is a unique pure strategy equilibrium with no connectivity
if  < 1/( ); a unique pure strategy equilibrium with full connectivity if   (1 - 2g ) /( ); and
both equilibria coexist if   [(1 - 2g ) /( ), 1/( )].

   The network structure described in Example 1, where links are inelastic to the level of effec-
tiveness of the legislators (i.e.  = 0) and thus exogenous, is very different than the structure
in Example 2. While the network formation decision is continuous in the first case it shows an
"explosive behavior" in the second (as a function of , at least).
   In the following, we will assume that we do not have corner solutions with gi,j = g and so the
equilibrium network is characterized by (10). This property is implied by the following assumption
 23 The   elasticity is defined as              = (gi,j /Ej ) · (Ej /gi,j ).
                                     gi,j ,Ej




                                                                 14
on the fundamentals:
                                  1+
Assumption 2. g > ( )                  .

    Under Assumptions 1 and 2, it is easy to state a sufficient condition for the existence of a unique
equilibrium for  sufficiently small. Define  = maxi,j N i,j . We have:
                                                            1/(1+)
Proposition 2. For  <         1
                              
                                  1/ (1 + )  m                       , there is a unique equilibrium G = (gi,j
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                               )i,j N ,
E  = (Ei
       
         )iN .

    It should be noted that the condition in Proposition 2 is only sufficient, not necessary. For
example, the symmetric example presented above with arbitrarily large  obviously violates this
condition but still admits a unique equilibrium under the conditions specified above.



4     Estimation

4.1     Model specification
                            ¯ Congresses (r = {1, ..., r}), each comprised of n Congress members
Assume we observe data from r
and associated with an endogenous and unobserved network Gr = {gi,j,r }. Each legislator i in
Congress r is characterized by a level of legislative effectiveness Ei,r and a vector of characteristics.
We assume there are l observable characteristics and denote it as Xi,r = (Xi,r,1 , ..., Xi,r,l ). We also
assume that there is an observed adjacency matrix linking legislators that may be relevant in the
formation of the true network G and denote it with Hr = (hi,j,r )i,j N . In the following, Hr will be
the alumni network, in which hi,j,r = 1 if i and j have attended the same educational institution
in overlapping periods, and hi,j,r = 0 otherwise.24 We will discuss these variables in greater detail
in the next section.25
    Propositions 1 shows that, in equilibrium, effectiveness solves (10). To bring this system of
equations to the data, we assume that i,r = (Xi,r )  + r +                    i,r ,   where  is a vector of coefficients,
r is a Congress fixed effect and           i,r   is a random variable. We therefore have:

                                           1+                         1+
                        Ei,r =  ( )                       (i,l,r El,r )     + Xi,r  + r +        i,r                (11)
                                                     lr
  24 This network has been shown to be relevant as a proxy of social connectedness in Congress by Cohen and Malloy

[2014], Battaglini and Patacchini [2018], and Battaglini et al. [2019]. While we will not assume it to be relevant,
we will use it as input of the analysis as described below.
  25 We omit the index for the Congress in h
                                              i,j because in the following analysis the exogenous adjacency matrix will
not depend on r. In general, it might also depend on r.




                                                               15
    In (11), the terms i,j,r , measuring how costly it is for i to form a link with j , are modeled as
random realizations from a logistic function:

                                                               i,j,r                       1-i,j,r
                                                    ei,j,r                    1
                          P (i,j,r |i,j,r ) =                                                                      (12)
                                                  1 + ei,j,r              1 + ei,j,r

with:
                                  i,j,r =  + hi,j,r +              g (Xi,r,l , Xj,r,l )l                           (13)
                                                               l

In (13)  is a constant;  and l are parameters to be estimated; and g (·, ·) is a distance function.
The parameter i,j,r depends on the position of i and j on a known adjacency matrix (for example
whether they attended the same school in the same period); and on the distance between i and j in
terms of observable characteristics as measured by g (·, ·). The specification in (13) therefore allows
the cost of forming a link to be random but also to depend on the affinity of the legislators, thus
capturing the possibility of homophily.26
    In estimating our model, there are three parameters that are of special interest: , , and .
The parameter  measures the importance of the social spillovers as is typical of the literature
on network effects (see, for example, Calv`
                                          o-Armengol et al. [2009]). As discussed above,  is the
elasticity of the link formation with respect to the equilibrium level of effectiveness of the other
legislators. This parameter is key to test of whether the endogeneity of the network formation is
a significant factor in shaping the legislators' effectiveness. Because the model with an exogenous
network (i.e. with  = 0) is nested in the more general model, we can test if allowing G to be
endogenous improves the fit of the model. Finally,  measures the elasticity of Ei = Ei - i with
respect to social connectedness and effort. The variable Ei can be interpreted as the endogenous
component of i's effectiveness, generated by social connections.


4.2     Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC)
To understand our estimation approach, it is first useful to start from the standard estimation
approach in Bayesian econometrics. The Metropolis-Hasting algorithm (see Metropolis et al. [1953],
Hastings [1970]) is as follows:

 A1. Starting from an initial vector of parameters  , propose a move to  according to a transition
  26 The functional form assigned to g (·, ·) in our empirical application is the absolute value of differences between

individual characteristics, which captures homophilic or heterophilic behavior. The logistic function is one of the most
popular in dyadic link formation (see for example Graham [2017]). Alternative functional forms and specifications
(even not binding i,j,r to be binary) can be used. The estimation method proposed in the next section does not
impose particular limitations on these choices.



                                                          16
     kernel q (   ).
                             p(E| ) ( )q (  )
 A2. Calculate h = min 1,     p(E| ) ( )q (  )    , where p (E | ) is the probability of observing E
     given  in the model.

 A3. Move to  with probability h, else remain at  ; go to the first step.

   Under suitable regularity conditions, the limiting stationary distribution of the chain described
above is equal to the conditional distribution p ( |E ). This approach, however, is impossible in our
model because an explicit formula for the likelihood function p (E | ) is not available. This problem
is not uncommon in complex environments such as ours and it is indeed typical in genetics and
evolutionary biology (see Fu and Li [1997] and Weiss and Haeseler [1998] and Plagnol and Tavare
[2004] for instance). Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) methods allow us to bypass the
evaluation of the likelihood function via simulations. Marjoram et al. [2003] has proposed the
following algorithm to recover p ( |E ):

 B1. Starting from an initial vector of parameters  , propose a move to  according to a transition
     kernel q (   ).

 B2. Generate E using the model with parameters  .

 B3. If  (E , E) <  , proceed to the next step otherwise return to the first step. Here, E is the
     observed vector,  (E , E) is a norm between E and E, and  is a tolerance parameter.
                              ( )q (  )
 B4. Calculate h = min 1,     ( )q (  )    .

 B5. Move to  with probability h, else remain at  ; go to the first step.

   This algorithm generates a Markov chain that has a limiting stationary distribution equal to
the posterior Pr ( | (E , E ) <  ). The true conditional distribution p ( |E ), therefore, coincides
with the limit lim 0 Pr ( | (E , E ) <  ).
   When, as in our case, E is high dimensional, two problems may arise. First, for practical
purposes it may be necessary to replace  (E , E) <  in step B3 with  ( (E ) ,  (E)) <  , where
 (E) is a vector of summary statistics of E. However, this reduces the information that is used
because it is hard to identify a set of sufficient statistics (see Robert et al. [2011]). Second, the
algorithm may be slow when the evaluation in step B2 is computationally onerous. We can, however,
bypass both of these problems. First, the characterization of Proposition 1 allows us to drastically
reduce the dimensionality of the problem, which is fully characterized by a system of "only" n
equations (despite the endogenous network being of dimension n2 ). This allows us to directly

                                                 17
use the observed vector E, rather than a set of statistics of it. Second, the explicit equilibrium
condition in (11) allows us to bypass the need of solving the nonlinear system of n equations by
simply evaluating how well the the proposed vector of parameters solves them in correspondence
to the observed vector E. Define the vector:


                                   z (E, ) = E -  -   1+ ·  · D (E,)

                                                                                                  1+              1+
where E = (E1 , ..., En ) is the observed vector of empirical efficacies, D (x,) = ((x1 )              , ..., (xn )     )
                                                                    1+
and  is a n × n matrix with i, j element equal to (i,j )                 . Let  (z (E, )) be the norm of this
vector. Our modified algorithm is:

 C1. Starting from an initial vector of parameters  , propose a move to  according to a transition
      kernel q (   ).

 C2. If  (z (E, )) <  , proceed to the next step; otherwise return to the first step.
                                  ( )q (  )
 C3. Calculate h = min 1,         ( )q (  )       .

 C4. Move to  with probability h, else remain at  ; go to the first step.

The properties of this algorithm are characterized in the following proposition.

Proposition 3. The stationary distribution of the Markov process described by Algorithm C is
Pr ( |D ), where D = { | (z (E,  ))   }.

    It follows from Proposition 3 that, under the assumption that the model is well specified,
Pr ( |E ) = lim 0 Pr ( |D ). That is, the true conditional distribution of the parameters, given
the evidence E , coincides with the limit of the stationary distribution as we reduce the tolerance
parameter  to zero. The details of how our ABC algorithm is implemented in practice are described
in the Appendix (Section 8.6).
    We conclude this section with a comment on identification of the model in our Bayesian anal-
ysis. Provided that it is proper, the posterior Pr ( |D ) is always well defined and it incorporates
all information in E given the model (Lindley [1971], Kaas et al. [1998]). The interpretation of
this posterior is, moreover, straightforward. Bayes rule allows to use the observations to update
the probabilities of the events associated to the sigma algebra of the minimal sufficient parameter
space.27 If the parameter space in the Bayesian model is not minimal, the conditional probabilities
  27 A Bayesian model can be seen as a statistical model on which the parameter space A is endowed with a probability

measure on A, A, where A is the  -field of A. The parameter space A is sufficient if it is sufficient to describe the
sampling process. The minimal sufficient parameter A is the intersection of all the sufficient parameter A. See
Florens et al. [1990] for a reference.


                                                         18
on events associated to their finer sigma algebra are naturally updated relying on their prior prob-
abilities. A parameter is therefore not identified in Bayesian theory only if its prior distribution
is not revised through the information brought by the data, so that the conditional posterior and
conditional prior distribution are the same (Florens and Simoni [2011]). In the next section we show
with simulations that the Bayesian procedure described above provides accurate estimates of all
parameter for the type of datasets that we use in the empirical application in Section 5. Regarding
the empirical analysis of Section 5, Figures A.2 - A.4 in the supplementary online Appendix show
that there is significant updating of information in the chains, which result in posterior that are
markedly different from the priors.


4.3       Monte Carlo Simulations
In this section, we use simulations to investigate the performance of our estimation approach. We
first propose two examples to illustrate its ability to recover the underlying structural parameters
and key features of the network topology. We then systematically study how the performance of
our approach changes as we change important features of the setting, such as the sparsity of the
networks, their size, the number of periods for which we observe the outcomes, and the elasticity
of network formation, among others.


4.3.1     Two benchmarks

A real network There are a number of parameters determining the shape of the social network
in our model that need to be chosen in any simulation. An important ingredient is the observed
adjacency matrix that enters in the cost function (3), i.e. the observed factors affecting the cost
of establishing a link from legislator i to legislator j . In our first set of simulations, we use a real
network as a basis to simulate H = {hi,j }. Specifically, we generate H using the alumni network,
the same network that we will use in in our empirical application. For the 111th Congress, we
randomly select n = 200 legislators and set the observed adjacency networks hi,j = 1 if i and j
graduated from the same school within four years and zero otherwise.28
 28 The   111th Congress is chosen at random as an example. Similar findings are obtained with other Congresses.




                                                        19
                                  Figure 1: REAL NETWORK ESTIMATION
                                            - GOODNESS OF FIT -




                                                       (a) Estimated




                                                          (b) True

NOTE. Panels (a) and (b) represent the estimated and true network respectively. The true network is generated using
equations (26)-(27) and data from the alumni network. The connections of 200 politicians from the 111th Congress extracted
at random are considered. The 111th Congress is randomly selected. Results are robust to different draws. The DGP is
described in detail in Section 8.5. The estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of
the MCMC. The first of c ¯ = 5 networks is visually represented using the force-directed layout algorithm with five iterations.
The algorithm uses attractive forces between adjacent nodes and repulsive forces between distant nodes in the network. See
Fruchterman and Reingold [1991] for more details. The size of the nodes is proportional to their degree. Three random
nodes are drawn and highlighted with circles.




    We use a given set of parameters (, , l , , , ), randomly generated characteristics X , and
H as inputs in (12) and (13) to compute i,j and extract the true network G = {gi,j } from (9). The


                                                              20
true network G, along with realizations of the other random variables X , are then used in (8) to
generate the observed vector of effectiveness E. We simulate a situation in which five Congresses
are observed, which corresponds to simulating five vectors E. The parameters (, , l , , , )
are chosen so that the resulting network matches the average values of the following moments in
the cosponsorship networks of the Congresses in our sample (from the 109th to the 113th): the
diameter, the average distance of the politicians' cosponsorship network, and the betweenness of
the committee network (in which two legislators are linked if they belong to the same committee).29
Panel (b) of Figure 1 illustrates a simulated network. The estimation procedure consists of using
the simulated E, H , and X to estimate (, , l , , , ), and thus the unobserved G. Because we
know the true (, , l , , , ) in these exercises, we can evaluate the performance of the estimation
technique.
    To illustrate the performance of the network estimation, in Figure 1 we show a graphical com-
parison of the real network (Panel (b)) versus the estimated network (Panel (a)) for one of the five
simulations (results for the remaining four simulated networks are similar). The pictures show that
the estimated and original networks are, naturally, not identical but remarkably similar in terms of
topological structure.30 Dyads, triads and dense clusters are well represented in the estimated net-
work, and nodes appear in their true topological position. To highlight the topological similarities,
we highlight three specific nodes, one in the center, one in the periphery, and one in the extreme
periphery. Their respective positions in the real network are preserved in the estimated network.
More formal evidence of the goodness of fit of our estimation method is provided by the ROC curve
for the true positive rate of estimated links in Figure A.1.31 Again, the picture shows that almost
all of the links are correctly predicted.




  29 The details of how we have calibrated the remaining parameters and other details regarding the implementation

are presented in Section 8.5 in the Appendix.
  30 In our model, a network depends on deterministic factors and random components affecting the cost of forming

a link i,j , see Section 4.1 and Appendix 8.5 for the details of the implementation. The network illustrated in Figure
1 is a random realization from the calibrated model using the estimated parameters. The results are, however,
representative as similar qualitative results are obtained independently from the draws.
  31 The ROC curve plots the true positive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR) at various threshold

settings. It can also be interpreted as a plot of the power as a function of the Type I error of the decision rule. The
closer the curve is to the upper right contour of the box, the better is the estimation.


                                                          21
                                  Figure 2: NODE-LEVEL STATISTICS
                              - ESTIMATED VS TRUE REAL NETWORK -




                          (a) Betweenness                                    (b) Eigenvalue




                            (c) Closeness                                    (d) Clustering




                            (e) Indegree                                      (f) Outdegree

NOTE. X-axis: estimated value of node-level statistic. Y-axis: true value of node-level statistic. The true network is
generated using equations (26)-(27) and data from the alumni network. The connections of 200 politicians from the 111th
Congress extracted at random are considered. The 111th Congress is randomly selected. The DGP is described in detail in
Section 8.5. The estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC. The first
of c
   ¯ = 5 networks is considered. See Newman [2010] for the definition of network measures.



                                                          22
    As further evidence of the good performance of the method, in Figure 2 we plot the values of
individual network statistics for each node (betweenness, eigenvalue, closeness, clustering, and in-
and out-degree).32 Each point corresponds to a node of the network, with the estimated network
statistic on the X-axis, the real network statistic on the Y-axis, and the bisector drawn in red. The
plots reveal that the data points lie close to the red line, again showing the ability of the ABC
procedure to precisely estimate the position of each node in the network. Finally, Table 1 shows
aggregate network statistics in the simulated and true networks (density, assortativity, diameter,
average distance, closeness, betweenness, degree, and clustering). Perhaps unsurprising at this
stage, the table confirms that the estimated values are quite similar to the real ones.

The circular network Our second benchmark is a simulation in which hi,j is a "circular network"
in which i is linked to agents i + j for j  zi , where zi is an independent realization from a uniform
distribution U (0, z                             ¯ = 8.33 ,
                   ¯) for each legislator i with z                34
                                                                       While this setup is less realistic than the
previous, it will prove useful in the next subsection for the comparative statics exercise because it
allows us to easily change its features (size, sparsity, etc.). As in the previous section, here too we
generate a network G and r = 5 observations with n = 200 legislators in each. A similar analysis
as in the previous section is presented in Figures 3 and 4. Results are very similar and lead to the
same conclusions.


4.3.2      Sensitivity Analysis

Using the "circular network" discussed above as a benchmark, we now explore the performance of
our method as we change key features of the environment, namely: the number of legislators n; the
number of observations over time r; the sparsity of the network, as measured by z ; the elasticity of
link formation ; and other important aspects of the network topological structure.

Network size We have simulated networks for n = 25, 50, 100, 200, and 400 nodes. Figure 5 shows
a box plot where each box represents the difference between the real and the estimated parameter.35
  32 See Newman [2010] for a formal definition of these centrality measures.
  33 We  label this experiment the circular network because when zi = 1 for all i, the resulting network is circular.
The model we use is indeed a generalization of a simple circle that allows for a random number of connections.
  34 The variable z¯ defines network sparsity. We have also repeated our simulation experiment using other distribu-
tions for zi (different from uniform). The results are not sensitive to different specifications. We do not report these
further results for brevity. They remain available upon request. We will show the sensitivity of our methodology to
network sparsity in Figure 10 and 11.
  35 The boxplot is constructed using the ergodic distribution generated by the Markov chain after a burning period

of 10,000 iterations. We normalize the realizations by subtracting the true values from each of them, thus centering
the distributions of all parameters at zero.




                                                          23
                 Figure 5: ESTIMATION BIAS FOR DIFFERENT NETWORK SIZES
                                      - PARAMETERS -




                            (a)                                                           (b) 




                             (c)                                                          (d) 

NOTE. X-axis: network size. Y-axis: distribution of the differences between estimated and true values in the MCMC after
a burning period of 10,000 iterations. The estimated values are taken from the posterior distribution. The true values are
fixed and generated using equations (26)-(27). The connections are generated from a circular network, as defined in Section
4.3.1. The DGP is described in detail in Section 8.5. The bottom and top edges of the boxes indicate the 25th and 75th
percentiles of the distribution, respectively, and the central red mark indicates the median. The whiskers extend to the most
extreme data points within 1.5 times the interquartile range. Values more than 1.5 times the interquartile range away from
the top or bottom of the box (outliers) are plotted individually using the `+' symbol.




    The graphs show that, for each parameter, the distance from the true value and its dispersion
converges to zero as n increases. It is interesting to observe that n = 200 is already sufficient to have
distances highly concentrated around zero. Figure 6 presents a boxplot where each box represents
the difference between the real and the estimated node-level statistics. Here too the graphs show
that the distributions concentrate around zero as n increases.36 Figure 7 shows the ROC curves
   36 We use the last simulated network to construct the measures. Given that the posterior of estimated parameters

is highly concentrated around the true value, this network is very close to one constructed using estimates of each
parameter and it is faster to compute. The centralities are normalized by subtracting their value in the true network.
See Newman [2010] for the definition of the network centrality measures.




                                                             24
for each network size considered. The picture reveals a very high probability of detection of true
links and a low probability of false positives for network sizes as small as 50 nodes. This simulation
exercise provides ample evidence on the ability of our methodology to estimate social interactions
in environments similar to the environment of our empirical investigation, where we will deal with
five Congresses of about 400 politicians.

Number of observations We now vary the number of observations r from 1 to 10 while keeping
the number of nodes in the network constant at 200. Figures 8 and 9 have the same structure as
Figures 5 and 6. They report the distribution of the estimation bias along the Markov chain in
the estimated parameters, and the node-level characteristics when r varies. The plots show a clear
reduction in the mean and variance of the distribution as we increase r. The important point here
is that just two observations are sufficient to obtain estimates with a negligible bias; and a single
observation (i.e. r = 1) is sufficient for obtaining a good match of the key centrality measures. This
is an important difference with respect to the literature attempting to estimate sparse networks
using repeated observations with Lasso techniques. While these approaches do not require a formal
model of endogenous network formation and attempt to directly estimate the network links (rather
than the parameters of a model of network formation), they require repeated observations from the
same network (easily over 20 times) to obtain reliable estimates.

Network sparsity An important feature in the estimation of network models is the sparseness
of connections between nodes (see De Paula et al. [2018] and Manresa [2016]). As hinted before,
our simulation framework allows us to change network sparsity by varying the density of Z . A
simple way to do this is to change z
                                   ¯, the maximum number of links that a node can have. In our
benchmark model, z
                 ¯ is equal to 8. We now set it to 4, 20, 40 and 100, while keeping constant all the
other parameters.37 As before, for this simulation exercise too we report the bias in the estimation
of the parameters and of node-level statistics in Figures 10 and 11. These figures show that network
sparsity is not a necessary condition for the estimation of our model, since the concentration of bias
around zero does not appear to be related to network density.




  37 Given that z is drawn from a uniform distribution, increasing the maximum by one unit implies a shift of the
                 i
mean of one half. We have also repeated our simulation experiment using other distributions for zi (different from
uniform). The results are not sensitive to different specifications. We do not report these further results for brevity.
They remain available upon request.


                                                          25
                Figure 6: ESTIMATION BIAS FOR DIFFERENT NETWORK SIZES
                                - NODE-LEVEL STATISTICS -




                          (a) Indegree                                            (b) Outdegree




                        (c) Betweenness                                            (d) Closeness




                        (e) Eigenvector                                           (f) Clustering

NOTE. X-axis: network size. Y-axis: distribution of the differences between estimated and true values. See Newman
[2010] for the definition of network measures. The true network is generated using equations (26)-(27). The connections
are generated from a circular network, as defined in Section 4.3.1. The DGP is described in detail in Section 8.5. The
estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC. Eigenvector centrality is not
reported for the 25 nodes sample because the adjacency matrix has degenerate eigenvalues (i.e. with multiplicity greater
than one). The bottom and top edges of the boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution, respectively,
and the central red mark indicates the median. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points within 1.5 times the
interquartile range. Values more than 1.5 times the interquartile range away from the top or bottom of the box (outliers)
are plotted individually using the `+' symbol.




                                                            26
The elasticity of network formation A key parameter of our theoretical model is , which
captures the cost of linking among agents. When  = 0 the elasticity of network formation is zero
and so model (10) is linear in i,j , as in standard spatial autoregressive models if i,j is assumed to
be the exogenous network. When  > 0, and thus the elasticity of the network formation is positive,
the model diverges from standard linear spatial autoregressive models because the social spillovers
are nonlinear. We perform a simulation experiment to understand whether the performance of our
estimation methodology varies when  changes. We set  = 1, 2, 3, and 4. Figure 12 and Figure
13 present, respectively, the distribution of the estimation bias for the parameters and node-level
network statistics for each value of . The boxplots reveal no systematic pattern across values of
, and that the distributions are mainly concentrated around zero for all values of , with similar
dispersion. These results thus indicate that performance of our methodology does not hinge on a
particular value of .

Network topology To conclude, we show the performance of our methodology under different
network topologies. Figure 14 displays the true adjacency matrix, the associated estimated matrix
using our methodology, and their difference when the true network is simulated under different
rules. We consider a high density network (Panel a)), a low density network (Panel b)), a network
structure coming from a highly nonlinear model (Panel c)), a reverse circular network (Panel d)),
and the alumni network (Panel (e)).38 Remarkably, the estimated linking structure closely follows
the changes of the true network.



5     Evidence from the U.S. Congress

5.1     Data description
We measure each Congress member's legislative performance using the Legislative Effectiveness
Scores (LESs) for members of the U.S. House of Representatives, developed by Volden and Wiseman
[2014]. Each member's score is based on how many bills each legislator introduces, as well as
how many of those bills receive action in the committees, are approved at the committee level,
receive action of the floor of the House, pass the House, and ultimately become law. Data are
available online from the Legislative Effectiveness Project (http://www.thelawmakers.org).39 We
  38 The high, medium and low density networks are circular networks with respectively z = 200, z = 20 and z = 8.

The network structure with the highly nonlinear model is the circular network with z = 8 and  = 4. The reverse
circular model is like the circular model but now i is linked to agents i - j for j  zi , where zi is an independent
realization from a uniform distribution U (0, z
                                              ¯) for each legislator i with z
                                                                            ¯ = 8. The alumni network is described in
Section 4.1.
  39 Volden et al. [2013] have used this data to explore the legislative effectiveness of women for the 93rd - 110th

Congresses. A similar index, Health ILESs, was proposed by Volden and Wiseman [2011] to examine which House


                                                         27
use information from five recent election cycles: the 109th Congress (election cycle 2004) to the
113th Congress (election cycle 2012).
    Consistent with existing theories of congressional politics, Volden and Wiseman [2014] argue that
legislative effectiveness is a function of innate abilities, a cultivated set of skills, and institutional
positions. The Legislative Effectiveness Project thus provides data on the observed legislators'
characteristics that are theoretically important for lawmaking effectiveness. They identify nine
factors that are important for legislative effectiveness. We briefly discuss them here because we
include them as controls in our analysis.
    The first one is the number of years served as a member of the Congress (seniority). As
legislators spend more time in Congress, they are expected to become better and more effective
at lawmaking. Consistent with the acquisition of skills over time, the second factor is previous
legislative experience. Legislators who have previously served in the state legislatures may be more
effective than legislators without similar experiences.40 The next three factors (party influence,
committee influence, and legislative leadership) capture the effect of institutional positions on the
legislative process. Majority party members, committee chairs, members of the most powerful
committees (Appropriation, Budget, Rules, and Ways and Means), and party leaders hold positions
that are naturally associated with greater legislative effectiveness.41
    The sixth factor captures ideological considerations. The Legislative Effectiveness Project data
is merged with the http://voteview.com project data. It provides data on legislators' ideological
stance, as measured by the absolute value of the first dimension of the dw-nominate score created
by McCarty et al. [1997]. A number of legislative politics studies suggest a negative correlation
between this variable and legislative success, reflecting the idea that moderate policies obtain a
larger consensus among the members of the House (see, e.g. Krehbiel [1992], Wiseman and Wright
[2008]).
    The seventh factor captures the demographic characteristics of under-represented members in
Congress. The experiences of women and ethnic minority legislators in terms of effective lawmaking
are different from the average member of Congress, although the existing literature has not reached
a consensus about the sign and the sources of these differences (Jeydel and Taylor [2003]; Volden
and Wiseman [2014]; Volden et al. [2013]).
members have been most successful at advancing health care bills for the 93rd to 110th Congresses.
   40 Previous legislative experience is captured using a dummy taking value one whether a legislator has previously

served in their state legislature, and zero otherwise, and its interaction with the state's level of professionalism as
measured by the index constructed by Squire [1992].
   41 This is true in general, with some exceptions. Volden and Wiseman [2014] document that the high level of effort

required by the members of these committees results in a number of endorsed bills which is lower than that of the
average House member, thus making the relationship with their LES scores negative. Minority party leaders are less
likely to have their bills pass the House relative to other members of their party.




                                                          28
    The eighth factor is the size of the congressional delegation, which counts the number of districts
in the state congressional delegation (and thus the number of Congress members in the House from
the same state). Legislators coming from larger congressional delegations may be more effective
because they can find coalition partners among the members of their delegations. In contrast, the
presence of more legislators interested in the same issues (the interests of the state) may result in
a lower number of bills advanced in the legislative process for each legislator.
    The ninth factor is captured by the degree of electoral competition, as measured by the legislators'
margin of victory (i.e. the percentage of total votes that separated the Congress member from the
second-place finisher in the previous election). If voters value politicians' legislative effectiveness,
then one would expect a positive relationship between legislators' levels of effectiveness and their
margins of victory. The existence and sign of this relationship, however, is still a matter of debate. In
fact, it is plausible to expect a negative correlation if electorally vulnerable legislators expend more
energy to foster their agenda and increase support among voters. Alternatively, one may think
that vulnerable legislators spend their energy on campaigning, while legislators in safe districts
commit more time to the lawmaking process (see, e.g. Padro I Miquel and Snyder [2006], Volden
and Wiseman [2014]).
    Our analysis considers all of the legislator characteristics indicated in the Legislative Effective-
ness Project. The control set Xr in model (11) includes the number of years spent in Congress
and its squared term, margin of victory and its squared term, dw-ideology, the size of the state
congressional delegation, party, chairmanship, majority and minority party leadership, whether the
representative is a member of the majority party, whether the representative is a member of the
most powerful committees, previous legislative experience, gender, and race. Basic member charac-
teristics, (party, gender, ethnicity, and seniority) are also included in the network formation model
(12)-(13).42 To construct the alumni network, we extract information on the educational institu-
tions attended by the Congress members using the Biographical Directory of the United States
Congress, which is available online (http://bioguide.Congress.gov/ biosearch/biosearch.asp).43 In
our baseline version, we assume that a tie exists between two Congress members if they graduated
from the same institution within four years of each other. Because many legislators hold a primary
and a secondary degree (typically a JD or an MBA), this construction gives us a rich network of
direct and indirect links. Additional details on the construction of the alumni network can be found
in Battaglini and Patacchini [2018]. Table A.1 in the Appendix provides a detailed description of
  42 We do not include the full set of controls in order to decrease the number of parameters to be estimated, thus

easing the computational burden of the bayesian estimation techniques.
  43 We use high schools and academic institutions attended for both undergraduate and graduate degrees. In dealing

with multiple campuses, we match each satellite campus as a separate university (e.g., University of California at
Los Angeles, San Diego, and Berkeley are treated as separate universities). We match specialized schools (e.g., law
schools) to the larger university.


                                                        29
the variables used in this study, together with summary statistics for our sample.


5.2     Empirical Findings
Using the procedure described in the previous sections, we now describe the estimation of model
(11)-(13) using data from the 109th Congress (election cycle 2004) to the 113th Congress (election
cycle 2012). Table 2 and Table 3 present the median value of the posterior distributions of the key
parameters. Table 2 focuses on , , and , and the i contributing to i . Column (1) of Table 3
shows the median values of the parameters governing the network formation:  , , and µ. These
tables also report the probability of observing a value greater than zero (p-value at zero) on each
parameter's estimated posterior distribution. A p-value equal to one indicates that the support of
the entire distribution is strictly greater than zero, whereas a p-value equal to zero means that the
support of the entire distribution is less than or equal to zero. The posterior distributions of all of
the key parameters of the model and the convergence of the respective Markov chains are presented
in Figures A1-A4 in the supplementary online Appendix.

The size of the social spillovers. We start by discussing the key parameters concerning the
size of the social spillover and their impact on effectiveness: , , and . All of these parameters are
found to be positive and statistically significant. The positive and statistically significant value of
 measures the social multiplier in the model. The presence of social spillovers is further confirmed
by a significantly positive , which measures the elasticity of Ei = Ei - i with respect to social
connectedness and effort (social spillovers would be irrelevant if  were zero). A 1% increase in the
social connectedness of i, as measured by si in (1), induces a 0.74% increase in net effectiveness Ei .
Regarding , recall that  =        gi,j ,Ej ,   where   gi,j ,Ej   is the elasticity of gi,j with respect to Ej . When
 = 0, the analysis reduces to that which simply assumes a spatial autoregressive model in which
social connections are approximated by the alumni network. The fact that  is significantly greater
than zero highlights the importance of the fact that the network is endogenous: ceteris paribus,
an increase in the effectiveness of j by 1% leads to a median increase in the connection of another
legislator i to j (i.e. gi,j ) of 0.07%.
   Table 2 also presents the estimates of the legislators' individual characteristics directly affecting
their effectiveness, i.e. the i s in i s. The effects are in line with the existing theories of congressional
politics, discussed in the previous section. Specifically, consistent with the idea that Congress
members in positions of leadership are more effective, we find a significantly positive effect of being
Chair and being Leader. Having served in State legislatures with higher levels of professionalism is
also associated with greater legislative effectiveness in Congress, in line with the idea that relevant


                                                            30
skills in politics are acquired through professional experience. For seniority and the margin of
victory, we detect nonlinear effects. For seniority, we find a convex effect with diminishing returns for
low levels of seniority and positive returns for higher levels. Higher seniority is therefore associated
with greater effectiveness, but only after a few years of experience. This is in line with recent
evidence on U.S. Senators that freshmen have a lower effectiveness than the average Congress
member (Volden and Wiseman, [2018]). The impact of the margin of victory is positive but concave,
suggesting that electorally-safe members are more effective, but that the relative impact of electoral
safety on legislative effectiveness exhibits decreasing returns. This is again totally in line with
the evidence in Volden and Wiseman [2018], even though in their regression results with data
on U.S. Senators, the estimates are not statistically significant. Being a woman is associated
with lower effectiveness, suggesting that the more integrative, collaborative, and consensual female
approach to lawmaking may hinder womens' effectiveness (Jeydel and Taylor, [2003]). Non-white
representatives, on the other hand, appear associated with a higher LES score, consistent with the
idea that they are better organized in advocating policies, counting on natural coalitions of members
in support of their legislation through groups such as the congressional Black Caucus (Volden and
Wiseman, [2014]).
   The findings discussed above should be contrasted with two benchmarks. First, the OLS es-
timate in which we ignore network effects. This is the estimate typical of the previous literature
that has focused on the individual characteristics determining effectiveness while ignoring social
spillovers. Second, a similar analysis imposing no social spillovers, but using the ABC method-
ology. This second estimation is interesting mostly as a robustness check because it should (and
indeed it does) give us the same qualitative results as the OLS analysis. Table 4 collects the esti-
mates. The first two columns report the results, respectively, from a standard OLS and the ABC
estimator for the model (11) without social interactions, that is, when  is constrained to be equal
to zero (and hence the effects of  and  are also zero). The last column reports the estimates from
Table 2, when network effects are allowed. Observe that when , , and  are greater than zero,
the marginal effect of the k -th covariate in model (11) is not just k , because k directly affects
Ek which in turn affects all the remaining E-k , which may affect Ek . An implication of this is
that while the OLS model leads to a common estimate for the effect of a covariate, in the model
with endogenous nonlinear network effects, the marginal effects are necessarily heterogeneous across
individuals because they depend on the individual's position in the network. Another implication
is that the k s should be expected to underestimate the true effect of the associated variable when
we consider the social multiplier effect (see, e.g. LeSage, [2014] and Liu et al. [2017]).
   We can formally test whether the model fit improves with the addition of network effects relative
to a linear regression in which effectiveness is explained just by using the legislators' individual


                                                   31
characteristics (i.e i ). To this goal, note that the linear regression model is nested in our model
for  = 0, we can therefore use a standard partial F-test.44 Results are presented in Column (3) of
Table 4. The F-test rejects the hypothesis that the model with  = 0 does not provide a significantly
better fit than the model with  = 0 (F value 29.111, p < 0.0000).

The social network. Column (1) of Table 3 provides an insight on the characteristics that matter
for social connectedness in the U.S. Congress.45 As apparent from Table 3, we find that belonging
to the same party has the highest impact on the cost of forming a link. Remarkably, however, the
effect of having a link in the alumni network is about one-fourth the size of party affiliation. This
is in line with previous studies documenting that alumni connections are important predictors of
social interactions, including voting behavior and cosponsorships (see Cohen and Malloy [2014],
Battaglini and Patacchini [2019], among others).
    Using the estimates of Table 3, we can simulate the unobserved social network and use the simu-
lation to study its characteristics. Figure 15 depicts the estimated network for the 111th Congress,
simulated using the coefficients of Tables 2 and 3.46 Three features of the social network uncovered
by our analysis are worth highlighting. The first feature is the importance of party affiliation. In
Panel (a) we color the nodes denoting Democratic (respectively, Republican) politicians in blue
(resp., red). It is clear that Democrats have a higher propensity to link with fellow Democrats,
and the same is true for Republicans. This is a feature that we would have underestimated by
using as proxies for the true social network other observable adjacency matrices commonly used
to study congressional behavior (such as the alumni network or the cosponsorship network) that
do not exhibit such polarization. Figure 16 compares the estimated network, the alumni network,
the committee network, and the cosponsorship network when coloring nodes by party affiliation.
The picture reveals that the estimated network has a much better ability to capture polarization
compared to the other networks.
  44 Let RRS define the residual sum of squares of the unrestricted model [Column (3)] and p the number of
               1                                                                                  1
parameters. Let RRS2 the residual sum of squares of the restricted model [Column (2)], and p2 the number of
parameters. The partial F-test statistic F = [(RRS1 - RRS2 )/p1 - p2 ] /(RRS1 )/n - p1 will have an F distribution
with (p1 - p2 , n - p1 ) degrees of freedom.
  45 Column (2) provides similar information in a modified model in which we also allow for unobservable covariates.

It will be discussed in detail in Section 6.4.
  46 We use force-directed layout (Fruchterman and Reingold [1991]), which pushes away from the cloud's center

nodes with many links that are not connected among them. Qualitatively similar results are obtained with other
Congresses, we omit the analysis of these cases here for brevity.




                                                        32
                           Figure 16: ESTIMATED VS OBSERVED NETWORKS




                         (a) Estimated                                                  (b) Alumni




                       (c) Cosponsorship                                              (d) Committee

NOTE. The estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC for the 111th
Congress. The color represents the party of the politician. Pink nodes are Republicans. The networks are represented
with force-directed layout with five iterations (Fruchterman and Reingold [1991]). It uses attractive forces between adjacent
nodes and repulsive forces between distant nodes. For better visualization, the size of the nodes is equal to the (log) of their
degree plus 2. The alumni network is defined in Section 4.1. The ijth element of the committee network entry is equal to
the number of congressional committees in which both i and j sit. Cosponsorship activity is measured by directional links
equal to one if j has cosponsored at least one bill proposed by i and zero otherwise. The direct networks (cosponsorship and
estimated) are transformed to indirect unweighted networks to have a clean comparison with the others. Given the direct
network D = {dij }, its indirect unweighted counterpart is U = {uij }, where uij = 1 if dij or dji is different from zero, and
zero otherwise.




    For the second feature, consider Panel (b) of Figure 15, where the color of the links is propor-
tional to the value of their respective gi,j . We see that, besides the high intensity of intraparty


                                                              33
connections that we have just highlighted, legislators also develop weaker interparty connections.
This is interesting because it confirms a theory that developing "weak ties" with an heterogeneous
set of agents (especially, in the case of Congress, with different political ideologies) is essential to
advance bills through the legislative process (see Granovetter [1973] and especially, for the U.S.
Congress, Kirkland [2011]). An advantage of our approach is that it does not only provide a binary
measure of connection, but also the intensive margin, which allows us to identify the strength of
interactions.
    The third feature we would like to highlight is an asymmetry between Democrats and Republi-
cans: the Democratic cloud is more dispersed in terms of the node's connectivity than the Republi-
can cloud, which features many members with few connections between each others. Democrats are
also consistently more effective. This asymmetry reflects the fact that Democrats were the majority
party in the 111th Congress, which clearly explains the higher average level of effectiveness.47
    We conclude this section with a final note on the identification of the gi,j s. One may ask
whether the network estimation would be biased if common unobserved shocks affect the legislators'
effectiveness. This, however, can not be the case because the entries of the adjacency matrix are
not estimated by relying exclusively on pairwise covariances between legislators' effectiveness. In
the baseline model of Section 4.1, they are also functions of observable characteristics, orthogonal
to unobserved shocks. As a result, an unobserved common shock hitting, say, politician i's and j 's
effectiveness does not affect the likelihood of estimating the link between them. It may do so only
if it affects both the effectiveness and the likelihood of forming a link between legislators. In section
6.4 we extend our model to control for this issue, showing that the estimates are not affected by
this type of concern.



6     Discussions and extensions

6.1     Two sided links
In the previous analysis we assumed that links are one-sided: legislator i controlled gi,j (that is, a
                                                                                     1
                                                                                  1+ 
                                                                           gi,j
link that allows i to benefit from j ) directly, at a cost        (1+)     i,j           . In this section, we extend
the analysis to allow for the possibility that links are two-sided. We now assume that a link i,j
depends not only on the effort exerted by i versus j , denoted i,j , but also on the effort exerted by
  47 Another interesting feature is that most of the effective politicians tend to also have a higher number of connec-

tions, as shown in Panel (d).




                                                          34
                                                                                        1
                                                                                     1+ 
                                                                               j,i
j versus i, denoted j,i . The cost of effort remains                   (1+)    i,j          , the link is now:

                                                                     1-
                                                        gi,j = i,j · j,i                                                     (14)


If  = 1, then we are in the previous case, and if  < 1, then a link is the result of effort by both i
and j : if j chooses i,j = 0, for example, than i can not establish a link with j .
   Under (14), i's problem finds  i solving:

                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                      1+ 
                              n
                                                        1-                                    i,j
                  max                  ·     i,j    ·   j,i   · Ej (G, ) -                                    .              (15)
                   i          j =1                                         (1 + )             i,j


From i and j 's first order conditions we have:

                                      1-                                             1-
                              j,i            1+
                                                      
                                                              1
                                                                              i,j           
                                                                                            1+
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         1
                                            i,j Ej = i,j ,                                j,i Ei = j,i
                              i,j                                             j,i

which gives us:

                                                                           1
                                                 i,j          Ej       2(1-)+1/
                                                     =                                                                       (16)
                                                 j,i          Ei
                                                      (1-)                                                       (1-)

                        1+                  Ei      2(1-)+1/
                                                                                        1+               Ej    2(1-)+1/
        i,j = ( )       i,j   (Ej )                               , j,i = ( )           i,j   (Ei )
                                            Ej                                                           Ei

And therefore:

                                                                 (1-)
                                                                                                      (1-)
                                                                                                               1-
                         
                       1+                               Ei    2(1-)+1/
                                                                           (Ei )            Ej      2(1-)+1/
            gi,j = ( ) i,j · (Ej )                                                                                           (17)
                                                        Ej                                  Ei


   Combining the solution of (14) with (5), we have:

Proposition 4. In an interior solution with gi,j < g , a NCE is characterized by a vector E  and
a matrix G where E  solve the system:

                                                                                                                  1-      
                                                                (1-)                                    (1-)
                                                          
                      1+                                Ei    2(1-)+1/
                                                                                              El      2(1-)+1/
Ei =·             ( ) i,j · (El )                                              (Ei )                                   El  + i
                                                                                                                          
             lN                                         El                                    Ei

                                                                                                                             (18)


                                                                  35
for i, j  N and G = (gi,j
                      
                          )i,j N is given by (17).

    Note that for  = 1, this expression is identical to (10). An advantage of (18) is that it would
allow us to estimate to what extent two-sided links are important in the data.


6.2     Alternative functional forms
For the empirical analysis presented above, we need to assume some specific functional forms for
the "production function" of effectiveness and the cost functions. From a theoretical point of view,
most of the choices made are not strictly necessary, in the sense that changing them would not
prevent the empirical estimation. It is however clear that the details of the analysis depend on
them. To illustrate this point, we consider a variant of the previous model in which:

                                                                   1-
                                          Ei = Ai · (si ) (li )         + i                                      (19)


Under (19), legislator i's characteristics do not only affect Ei additively, through i , they also affect
it multiplicatively through Ai . In practice, in (19) we are allowing the spillover effect  to depend
on the legislators' characteristics, i.e. i =  · Ai .
    Following the same steps as in Section 3, where we incorporate the optimal level of effort in
(19), we obtain that in stage 2, when G is given, effectiveness are given by:48


                                          E = (I -  · (A, ) · G)-1                                               (20)
                                                                                          1
where (A, ) is a diagonal matrix with ith diagonal element equal to Ai . Condition (20) gener-
alizes (5) by avoiding to impose that the social spillover is the same for all legislators: some may
benefit more or less than others. In (20) the social spillover depends on the legislators characteristics
affecting Ai . This generalization gives us additional flexibility in fitting the model.
    Similarly as we did in Section 4.1, we now can specify Ai = (Xi,r ) 1 + 2 , where 1 is a vector
of coefficients to be estimated and 2 a fixed effect.49 Solving for the optimal social connections in
the first stage as in Section 3.3, in an interior solution we have:

                                                              1+
                                                                                    1+
                           Ei =  · [ ] [(Xi,r ) 1 + 2 ]        
                                                                   ·        [i,j Ej ]    + i                     (21)
                                                                        j

   48 In (20) we are assuming that the linking technology is one sided as described in Section 2 for simplicity. There

is no problem in generalizing the result using the "two sided links" technology described in Section 6.1.
   49 Naturally, we can include also random terms, as  in Section 4.1.
                                                       i




                                                         36
                        1    
                                  1+ 
with gi,j =  · Ai               · i,j Ej . We can then use (21) in step C2 of our algorithm exactly as
described in Section 4.2.


6.3     Negative spillovers
In the model presented above, i can only gain if j 's effectiveness increases: if i and j are compatible
(i.e. i,j > 0), then i can establish a link with j and benefit from j 's effectiveness. If i and j are
not compatible (say they have very different ideologies and they dislike each other), then i cannot
establish a link with j , but j can not hurt i.50 There may be situations in which i does not want
j 's effectiveness to be high, because j may actively use his effectiveness to contrast i. In this case,
gi,j < 0 independently from what i does. To allow for this possibility, we can introduce a variable
i,j = 1 if i and j are enemies and zero otherwise. We can then modify the model assuming that
if i,j > 0, then i,j = 0, so that if i can form a link with j then j is not an enemy; but if i,j = 0,
then i,j can be 0 or 1. The link is now (1 - i,j )gi,j - Z i,j , so that if j is an enemy, then the
effect of j 's effectiveness on i is -Z . We can then estimate the parameters determining i,j in the
model as a function of the party affiliation and other homophily measures.


6.4     Unobserved Factors
In our model, we deal with the endogeneity of the network by explicitly modeling its formation.
Still, there may be correlated unobservable factors affecting both the cost of forming a link i,j,r
and the effectiveness Ei,r s. Suppose that an unobserved characteristic of node i in network r, r,i ,
matters for the network formation process. Then we can extend model (13) in the following way:51


                            i,j,r =  + hi,j,r +                g (Xr,li , Xr,lj )l + m(r,i , r,j ),                   (22)
                                                           l


where m(·, ·) is a distance function and  is a parameter. We allow the outcome error term                       r,i   to be
                                            L        l                52
correlated with r,i , with        r,i   =   l=1   µl r,i   + ur,i .        In any step of the ABC algorithm (described
  50 Indeed, i can benefit indirectly from j 's effectiveness if there is a chain of connections such that, for example, j

"helps" k who helps l who helps i.
  51 The model can be further extended to a vector of unobservable characteristics and to multiple observed adjacency

matrices.
  52 We define m( ,  ) = I (   )I (   ), where I (.) is an indicator function and  is a threshold that we
                    i j         i          j                                                      
set equal to the variance of  . When the threshold is crossed, m(.) switches to one. We set L = 5. ui,r is extracted
from a normal distribution with zero mean and variance equal to u . Other functional forms can be used. For
example, we could assume m(r,i , r,j ) = r,i + r,j to capture higher individual propensity to link (see Graham
[2017]); or m(r,i , r,j ) = r,i r,j to include multiplicative effects. We experimented with other functional forms,
distance definitions, thresholds, and L. Results remain qualitatively unchanged.




                                                                 37
in Section 8.6),   r,i   is thus generated as a function of r,i and µ = (µ1 , ..., µL ), which are estimated
as the rest of the model's parameters.
    The results associated to this extension of the empirical model are shown in column 2 of Table
3 for the network formation model (equation (22)) and in Table A.2 in the supplementary online
                                                                                      L        l
Appendix for the outcome equation (equation (11) augmented with             r,i   =   l=1   µl r,i + ur,i ). In the
first column of Table A2, we report our baseline estimates of Table 4, Column (3), for comparison.
The evidence on the positive and statistically significant estimates of ,  and  holds true.
    By allowing for unobserved variables that are correlated with the legislators' effectiveness to
affect the choice of social links, our approach is along the lines of Hsieh and Lee [2014], Boucher et
al. [2019], and Goldsmith-Pinkham and Imbens [2013]. Our analysis, however, differs in two sig-
nificant ways. First, in our model the true network is unobservable­only the fundamental variables
determining the network formation are observable. Second, and most importantly, the network
endogeneity is explicitly modeled. This is what gives us the nonlinear representation in (8).



7     Conclusions
We have presented a model of endogenous formation of social connections in the U.S. Congress to
study the determinants of legislators' effectiveness. In the model, legislators first invest in their
social connections with other legislators, then they exert effort to achieve their favorite legisla-
tive projects, taking the connections as given. The ability of legislators to achieve their goals in
Congress­their legislative effectiveness­depends on the social connections that they have previously
established, the effectiveness of the other legislators with whom they are socially connected, their
efforts, and their characteristics. Using data from the 109th to 113th U.S. Congresses, we have
structurally estimated the model to gain insight on the legislators social network and its effect on
the legislators effectiveness.
    Two methodological contributions are at the core of our analysis. First, we introduce a new equi-
librium concept that we call the Competitive Network Equilibrium. Drawing an analogy with the
approach in competitive analysis to study "price taker" consumers, we assume that legislators take
as given the expected effectiveness of other legislators when investing in their social connections. As
prices in a competitive equilibrium, however, the vector of effectiveness needs to satisfy equilibrium
conditions, i.e. to be consistent with the individual optimizing behavior of the legislators. The sec-
ond contribution consists in the estimation technique, which is based on approximate computation
methods (ABC), an approach to draw Bayesian inference without an analytic likelihood function.
    Our analysis suggests that social connections in the U.S. Congress are an important factor in



                                                       38
determining legislative effectiveness, thus confirming an idea that has been long informally discussed
in journalistic and historical accounts of how Congress works. Perhaps more importantly, the
estimation of the social network gives us an insight into the determinants of social connections.
Not surprisingly, party affiliation is the most significant factor determining social connections,
with Republicans more linked to Republicans and Democrats more linked to Democrats. More
surprisingly, we find that alumni connections are also a key factor, about one-fourth as large as
party affiliation. We also find that weak links across the political lines are important, an observation
long suggested in the sociological and political science literature (see Granovetter [1973] and more
recently Kirkland [2011]). The model, moreover, allows us to estimate social network effects using
only information on outcomes. This is an improvement over the existing practice, where some
observable adjacency matrix is used as a proxy for social connections. As we have discussed in
Section 5.2, by exclusively using alumni networks as a proxy, we ignore the importance of party
affiliation, and by using only cosponsorship, we ignore the importance of alumni connections.
   We have discussed in Section 6 a few extensions of the model and the estimation techniques.
More generally, we believe the approach used in this work can more broadly be applied to study
social networks in other environments where social connections are endogenous and unobservable,
and only a vector of outcomes (in our application the vector of legislators' effectiveness) is available
for the estimation.




                                                  39
References
 [1] Acemoglu D. and P. Azar (2018), "Endogenous production networks," Working paper.

 [2] Austen-Smith, D., and J. Banks (1988): "Elections, Coalitions, and Legislative Outcomes,"
    American Political Science Review, 82(2), 405-422.

 [3] Badev, A. (2017): "Discrete Games in Endogenous Networks: Equilibria and Policy,"Available
    at arXiv:1705.03137v1.

 [4] Ballester, C., A. Calv´
                           o-Armengol, and Y. Zenou (2006): "Who's Who in networks. Wanted:
    The Key Player," Econometrica, 74(5), 1403-1417.

 [5] Baron, D., and D. Diermeier (2001): "Elections, Governments, and Parliaments Under Pro-
    portional Representation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 933-967.

 [6] Baron, D., and J. Ferejohn (1989): "Bargaining in Legislatures," American Political Science
    Review, 83(4), 1181-1206.

 [7] Battaglini, M. (2019): "Coalition Formation in Legislative Bargaining," Discussion paper,
    National Bureau of Economic Research.

 [8] Battaglini, M., F.W. Crawford, E. Patacchini, and S. Peng (2018): "Inferring Networks from
    Outcomes," Working paper.

 [9] Battaglini, M., V. Leone Sciabolazza, and E. Patacchini (2019): "Effectiveness of Connected
    Legislators," American Journal of Political Science, (forthcoming).

[10] Battaglini, M., and E. Patacchini (2018): "Influencing Connected Legislators," Journal of
    Political Economy, 126(6), 2277-2322

[11] Battaglini, M., and E. Patacchini (2019): "Social Networks in Policy Making," Annual Review
    of Economics (forthcoming).

[12] Bonacich, P. (1987): "Power and Centrality: A Family of Measures," American Journal of
    Sociology, 92(5), 1170-1182.

[13] Boucher, V. (2018): "Equilibrium Homophily in Networks," Working paper.

[14] Boucher, V., C.S. Hsieh and L.F. Lee (2019): "Specification and Estimation of Network Forma-
    tion and Network Interaction Models with the Exponential Probability Distribution," Working
    paper.


                                               40
[15] Breza, E., A.G. Chandrasekhar, T.H. McCormick, and M. Pan (2017): "Using Aggregated
    Relational Data to Feasibly Identify Network Structure Without Network Data," Discussion
    paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

[16] Cabrales, A., A. Calv`
                          o-Armengol, and Y. Zenou (2011): "Social Interactions and spillovers,"
    Games and Economic Behavior, 72(2), 339-360.

[17] Calv`
         o-Armengol A., E. Patacchini, and Y. Zenou (2009): "Peer Effects and Social Networks
    in Education," The Review of Economic Studies, 76(4), 1239-1267.

[18] Canen, N., M.O. Jackson, and F. Trebbi (2017): "Endogenous Networks and Legislative Ac-
    tivity," Available at SSRN 2823338.

[19] Christakis, N.A., J.H. Fowler, G.W. Imbens, and K. Kalyanaraman (2010): "An Empirical
    Model for Strategic Network Formation, " Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

[20] Cohen, L., and C. Malloy (2014): "Friends in High Places," American Economic Journal:
    Economic Policy, 6(3), 63-91.

[21] De Paula, A. (2017): "Econometrics of Network Models," Advances in Economics and Econo-
    metrics: Theory and Applications, Eleventh World Congress (Econometric Society Mono-
    graphs), Cambridge University Press.

[22] De Paula, A., I. Rasul, and P. Souza (2018): "Recovering Social Networks from Panel Data:
    Identification, Simulations, and an Application," Working paper.

[23] De Paula, A., S. Richards-Shubik, and E. Tamer (2018b): "Identifying Preferences in Networks
    with Bounded Degree," Econometrica, 86(1), 263-288.

[24] Eulau, H. (1962): "Comparative Political Analysis: A Methodological Note," Midwest Journal
    of Political Science, 6(4), 397-407.

[25] Fiorina, M.P. (1978): "Legislative Facilitation of Government Growth: Universalism and Reci-
    procity Practices in Majority Rule Institutions," California Institute of Technology Working
    paper.

[26] Florens, J.P., M. Mouchart and J.M. Rolin (1990): "Elements of Bayesian Statistics," Rout-
    ledge.

[27] Florens, J.P., A. Simoni (2011): ""Bayesian Identification and Partial Identification", Working
    paper.

                                                41
[28] Fowler, J.H. (2006): "Connecting the Congress: A study of Cosponsorship Networks," Political
    Analysis, 14(4), 456-487.

[29] Fruchterman, T.M., and E.M. Reingold (1991): "Graph Drawing by Force-Directed Place-
    ment," Software: Practice and Experience, 21(11), 1129-1164.

[30] Fu, Y.X., and W.H. Li (1997): "Estimating the Age of the Common Ancestor of a Sample of
    DNA Sequences," Molecular Biology and Evolution, 14(2), 195-199.

[31] Glassman, M., and A. Wilhelm (2017): "Congressional Careers: Service Tenure and Patterns
    of Member Service, 1789-2017," Congressional Research Service Report n. 7-5700.

[32] Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., and G.W. Imbens (2013): "Social Networks and the Identification of
    Peer Effects,"Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 31(3), 253-264.

[33] Graham, B. S. (2017) "An econometric model of network formation with degree heterogene-
    ity,"Econometrica 85 (4), 1033-1063.

[34] Granovetter M.S. (1973): "The Strength of Weak Ties," American Journal of Sociology, 78(6):
    1360-1380.

[35] Handcock, M.S., and K.J. Gile (2010): "Modeling Social Networks from Sampled Data," The
    Annals of Applied Statistics 4(1), 5-25.

[36] Harmon, N., R. Fisman, and E. Kamenica (2017): "Peer Effects in Legislative Voting," Amer-
    ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics (forthcoming).

[37] Hastings, W.K. (1970): "Monte Carlo Sampling Methods Using Markov Chains and Their
    Applications," Biometrika 57(1), 97-109.

[38] Hsieh, C.S., and L.F. Lee (2014): "A Social Interactions Model with Endogenous Friendship
    Formation and Selectivity," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 31(2), 301-319.

[39] Jackson, M., and B. Rogers (2007): "Meeting Strangers and Friends of Friends: How Random
    Are Social Networks?" American Economic Review, 97(3), 890-915.

[40] Jackson M., and A. Wolinsky (1996): "A Strategic Model of Social and Economic Networks,"
    Journal of Economic Theory, 71(1), 44-74.

[41] Jeydel, A., and A.J. Taylor (2003): "Are Women Legislators Less Effective? Evidence from
    the U.S. House in the 103rd-105th Congress," Political Research Quarterly, 56(1), 19-27.



                                                42
[42] Kass, R.E., B. Carlin, A. Gelman, R. Neal (1998): "Markov chain Monte Carlo in practice: A
    roundtable discussion,"The American Statistician, 52, 93-100.

[43] Kass, R.E., and L. Wasserman (1996): "The Selection of Prior Distributions by Formal
    Rules,"Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(435), 1343-1370.

[44] Kelejian, H.H., and I.R. Prucha (2010): "Specification and Estimation of Spatial Autoregressive
    Models with Autoregressive and Heteroskedastic Disturbances, " Journal of Econometrics,
    157(1), 53-67.

[45] Kirkland, J.H. (2011): "The Relational Determinants of Legislative Success: Strong and Weak
    Ties Between Legislators," Journal of Politics, 73(3), 887-898.

[46] Konig, M.D. (2016): "The Formation of Networks with Local Spillovers and Limited Observ-
    ability," Theoretical Economics, 11(3), 813-863.

[47] Koskinen, J.H., G. Robins, and P.Pattison (2010): "Analyzing Exponential Random Graph (p-
    star) Models with Missing Data Using Bayesian Data Augmentation," Statistical Methodology,
    7(3), 366-384.

[48] Krehbiel, K. (1992): Information and Legislative Organization, University of Michigan Press.

[49] Lancaster, T. (2004): An Introduction to Modern Bayesian Econometrics, Oxford: Blackwell.

[50] LeSage, J.P. (2014): "What Regional Scientists Need to Know About Spatial Econometrics,"
    Review of Regional Studies, 44(1), 13-32.

[51] Lindley D.V. (1971): "Bayesian statistics: a review" Philadelphia, SIAM.

[52] Liu, X., E. Patacchini, Y. Zenou, and L. Lee (2012): "Criminal Networks: Who is the Key
    Player?" CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8772.

[53] Liu, X., E. Patacchini, and E. Rainone (2017): "Peer Effects in Bedtime Decisions Among
    Adolescents: A Social Network Model with Sampled Data," The Econometrics Journal, 20(3),
    S103-S125.

[54] Manresa, E. (2016): "Estimating the Structure of Social Interactions Using Panel Data,"
    Working paper.

[55] Marjoram, P., J. Molitor, V. Plagnol, and S. Tavare (2003): "Markov Chain Monte Carlo
    Without Likelihoods," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(26), 15324-15328.



                                                43
[56] Masket, S. (2008): "Where You Sit Is Where You Stand: The Impact of Seating Proximity on
    Legislative Cue-Taking," Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 3(3), 301-311.

[57] McCarty, N.M., K.T. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (1997): Income Redistribution and the Realign-
    ment of American Politics, AEI Press.

[58] Mele, A. (2017): "A Structural Model of Dense Network Formation," Econometrica, 85(3),
    825-850.

[59] Metropolis, N., A.W. Rosenbluth, M.N. Rosenbluth, A.H. Teller, and E. Teller (1953): "Equa-
    tion of State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines," The Journal of Chemical Physics,
    21(6), 1087-1092.

[60] Miyauchi, Y. (2016): "Structural Estimation of Pairwise Stable Networks with Nonnegative
    Externality," Journal of Econometrics, 195(2), 224-235.

[61] Morelli, M. (1999): "Demand Competition and Policy Compromise in Legislative Bargaining,"
    American Political Science Review, 93(4), 809-820.

[62] Newman, M. (2010): "Networks: An Introduction, " Oxford University Press.

[63] Oberfield, E. (2018): "A Theory of Input-Output Architecture," Econometrica, 86, 559-589.

[64] Padro I Miquel, G., and J.M. Snyder Jr. (2006): "Legislative Effectiveness and Legislative
    Careers," Legislative Studies Quarterly, 31(3), 347-381.

[65] Parigi, P., and L. Sartori (2014): "The Political Party as a Network of Cleavages: Disclosing
    the Inner Structure of Italian Political Parties in the Seventies," Social Networks, 36(1), 54-65.

[66] Peoples, C.D. (2008): "Interlegislator Relations and Policy Making: A Sociological Study of
    Roll-Call Voting in a State Legislature," Sociological Forum, 23(3), 455-480.

[67] Plagnol, V., and S. Tavare (2004): in Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Monte
    Carlo and Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods in Scientific Computing, ed. Niederreiter, H. (Springer,
    Heidelberg).

[68] Porter, M.A., P.J. Mucha, M.E.J. Newman, and C.M. Warmbrand (2005): "A Network Analy-
    sis of Committees in the U.S. House of Representatives," Proceedings of the National Academy
    of Sciences, 102 (20), 7057-7062.

[69] Rendon, S.R. (2013): "Fixed and Random Effects in Classical and Bayesian Regression, "
    Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 75(3), 460-476.

                                                 44
[70] Rice, S.A. (1927): "The Identification of Blocs in Small Political Bodies," American Political
    Science Review, 21(3), 619-627.

[71] Rice, S.A. (1928): "Quantitative Methods in Politics," Journal of the American Statistical
    Association, 33(201), 126-130.

[72] Robert C.P., J. Cornuet, J. Marin, and N.S. Pillai (2011): "Lack of Confidence in Approxi-
    mate Bayesian Computation Model Choice," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
    108(37): 15112-15117.

[73] Roberts, G.O., A. Gelman, and W.R. Gilks (1997): "Weak Convergence and Optimal Scaling
    of Random Walk Metropolis Algorithms," The Annals of Applied Probability, 7(1), 110-120.

[74] Roberts, G.O., and J.S. Rosenthal (2001): "Optimal Scaling for Various Metropolis-Hastings
    Algorithms," Statistical Science, 16(4), 351-367.

[75] Roberts, G.O., and J.S. Rosenthal (2009): "Examples of Adaptive MCMC," Journal of Com-
    putational and Graphical Statistics, 18(2), 349-367.

[76] Rogowski, J.C., and B. Sinclair (2012): "Estimating the Causal Effects of Social Interaction
    with Endogenous Networks," Political Analysis, 20(3), 316-328.

[77] Routt, G.C. (1938): "Interpersonal Relationships and the Legislative Process," The Annals of
    the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 195(1), 129-136.

[78] Rubin, D.B. (1984): "Bayesianly Justifiable and Relevant Frequency Calculations for the Ap-
    plied Statistician," The Annals of Statistics, 12(4), 1151-1172.

[79] Seidmann D., E. Winter, and E. Pavlov (2007): "The Formateurs' Role in Government For-
    mation," Economic Theory, 31(3), 427-445.

[80] Shalizi, C.R., and A. Rinaldo (2013): "Consistency Under Sampling of Exponential Random
    Graph Models," The Annals of Statistics, 41(2), 508-535.

[81] Sheng, S. (2018): "A Structural Econometric Analysis of Network Formation," Working paper.

[82] Shepsle, K.A., and B.R. Weingast (1981): "Political Preferences for the Pork Barrel: A Gen-
    eralization." American Journal of Political Science, 25(1), 96-111.

[83] Smith, T.E., and J.P. LeSage (2004): "A Bayesian Probit Model with Spatial Dependencies,"
    Spatial and Spatiotemporal Econometrics, Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 127-160.



                                                45
[84] Souza, P. (2014): "Estimating Network Effects Without Network Data," Working paper.

[85] Squire, P. (1992): "Legislative Professionalization and Membership Diversity in State Legisla-
    tures," Legislative Studies Quarterly, 17(1), 69-79.

[86] Taschereau-Dumouchel, M. (2019), "Cascades and Fluctuations in an Economy with an En-
    dogenous Production Network," Working paper.

[87] Victor, J.N., A.H. Montgomery, and M. Lubell (2016): The Oxford Handbook of Political
    Networks, Oxford University Press.

[88] Volden, C., and A.E. Wiseman (2011): "Breaking Gridlock: The Determinants of Health Policy
    Change in Congress," Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 36(2), 227-264.

[89] Volden, C., and A.E. Wiseman (2014): Legislative Effectiveness in the United States Congress:
    The Lawmakers, Cambridge University Press.

[90] Volden, C., and A.E. Wiseman (2018): "Legislative Effectiveness in the United States Senate,"
    Journal of Politics, 80(2), 731-735.

[91] Volden, C., A.E. Wiseman, and D.E. Wittmer (2013): "When Are Women More Effective
    Lawmakers Than Men?," American Journal of Political Science, 57(2), 326-341.

[92] Weingast, B. (1979): "A Rational Choice Perspective on Congressional Norms," American
    Journal of Political Science, 23(2), 245-262.

[93] Weingast, B., and W. Marshall (1988): "The Industrial Organization of Congress; or, Why
    Legislatures, Like Firms, Are Not Organized as Markets," Journal of Political Economy, 96(1),
    132-163.

[94] Weiss, G., and A. von Haeseler (1998): "Inference of Population History Using a Likelihood
    Approach," Genetics, 149(3), 1539-1546.

[95] Wiseman, A.E., and Wright, J.R. (2008): "The Legislative Median and Partisan Policy,"
    Journal of Theoretical Politics, 20(1), 5-29.




                                                    46
8         Appendix

8.1       Proof of Proposition 1
Let gi,l and gi,j be the links chosen by agent i with agents l and j . Agent i chooses the links solving
(7) under the constraint that gi,j  [0, g ] for all j  N . It is easy to see that, given (Ej (G, ))j N ,
problem (7) is concave in gi = (gi,1 , ..., gi,n ) and, therefore, it has a unique solution whose necessary
                                                  1+                 
and sufficient condition is: gi,j  (i,j )                Ej             , satisfied as an equality in an interior solution.
Combining this with the necessary and sufficient condition (5) at t = 2, we have that an equilibrium
(G , E ) is characterized by the system in n · n equations in n · n variables (the n variables Ej
                                                                                                
                                                                                                  s
                            
and the n(n - 1) variables gi,j for i  N and j  N \{i}) described in (8) and (9) (given that the
elements in the diagonal of G are all zero).53


8.2       Proof of Proposition 2
                                              n                  n                              1+                      1+
Define the mapping T (x) from [0, 1]                  to [0, 1]      as Ti (x) =  ( )                     lN   (i,l xl )     + i for
                                              n
i = 1, ..., n. For any two x, y  [0, 1] , we can write:

                                                                            1+           1+              1+
                   T (x) - T (y)     =                            (i,l )             (xl )    - (yl )
                                                           lN
                                                  i
                                                       1+                                           1+             1+
                                                                                  1i,l >0 · (xl )        - (yl )
                                                                         lN
                                                             i
                                                       1+                                       1+             1+
                                                                              1i,l >0 · (xl )        - (yl )
                                                                         lN
                                                             i
                                                       1+                                          1+              1+
                                     =                                            1i,l >0 · (xl )        - (yl )
                                                                  lN          i
                                                         1+                         1+          1+
                                       m                                    (xl )        - (yl )
                                                                       lN


where a - b =            l   |al - bl | for any a, b  [0, 1]n : the first inequality follows from the fact that
i,l is either zero or it is lower than , the second inequality follows from the triangle inequality
(i.e. |    xl |      |xl |), the second equality from the fact that we can invert the order of summation,
and the last inequality from the fact that each agent l has at most m compatible j legislators who
  53 Since we are assuming that the diagonal values                                    
                                                          i,i i are zeros, the values gi,i are also all zero. This implies
                                                                                    for i = j and the n values E  for
that, effectively, the number of free variables is n · n: the n(n - 1) values of gi,j                                j
i = 1, ..n.




                                                                  47
can establish a link. We can now write:

                                                           1+                 1+              1+
                     T (x) - T (y)       m                            (xl )        - (yl )
                                                                 lN
                                                                 1+
                                        (1 + )  m                     · x-y


where the second inequality follows from the fact that for any xl , yl  [0, 1], we have:

                                                     x                                   x
                       x1+
                        l
                              1+
                           - yl         =                (1 + ) t dt  (1 + )                 dt
                                                 y                                   y
                                        =      (1 + ) |xl - yl |

                                                                              1                    1/(1+)
It follows that T (x) is a contraction with a unique fixed-point if  <        
                                                                                   1/ (1 + )  m             .


8.3    Proof of the result in Example 2
First, consider an equilibrium with no connections.             A necessary and sufficient condition for its
existence is that a legislator, expecting no connections by the other players, finds it optimal to
establish no connections as well. In this equilibrium, the effectiveness of an agent j is . Agent i
finds it optimal not to link to j = i + 1 or i - 1 if  - 1  0, that is if   1/( ). Conversely,
assume all legislators except i are fully connected. Then the equilibrium effectiveness of an agent
             
j is E =   1-2g .   Legislator i finds it optimal to connect to j if  1-2g - 1  0, that is  
(1 - 2g ) / ( ).


8.4    Proof of Proposition 3
The stationary distribution associated with Algorithm C is defined by the fixed-point:

                                                               
                                     F ( ) =         Q (x   ) F (x)dx                                           (23)
                                                x


where Q (x   ) is the transition probability of Algorithm C . We need to prove that f ( |D ) is
the unique fixed-point of (23). Let  be the vector of parameters to estimate and let D be defined
as in Section 4.2. We have:


                           Q (   ) = q (   ) Pr(D | ) · h(,  )




                                                          48
There are now two cases to consider. Assume first that:

                                          ( ) q (   )
                                                      1                                            (24)
                                          ( ) q (   )

We can then write for any  =  :



                                                                      ( ) q (   )
          f ( |D ) Q (   )         = f ( |D ) · q (   ) · Pr(D | ) ·
                                                                      ( ) q (   )
                                     Pr(D | ) ( )                          ( )
                                   =               · q (   ) · Pr(D | ) ·
                                        Pr (D )                            ( )
                                     Pr(D | ) ( )
                                   =                 · q (   ) · Pr(D | )
                                        Pr (D )
                                   = f ( |D ) · q (   ) · Pr(D | )
                                   = f ( |D ) · Q (   )

                                                                     ( )q (  )
where in the last stage we used the fact that if (24) holds, then    ( )q (  )   > 1 and thus h( ,  ) =
1.
     Assume now that (24) does not hold. We have for any  =  :


       f ( |D ) Q (   )         = f ( |D ) · q (   ) · Pr(D | )
                                  Pr(D | ) ( )
                                =                · q (   ) · Pr(D | )
                                     Pr (D )
                                  Pr(D | ) ( )                           ( ) q (   )
                                =                  · q (   ) · Pr(D | )
                                      Pr (D )                            ( ) q (   )
                                = f ( |D ) · q (   ) · Pr(D | ) · h( ,  )
                                = f ( |D ) · Q (   )


     From these two cases we conclude that:


                          f ( |D ) Q (   ) = f ( |D ) · Q (   )                                    (25)




                                                   49
If we integrate both sides of (25) by  we have:


                            f ( |D )    = f ( |D )            Q (  x) dx
                                                          x

                                        =          Q (x   ) f (x |D ) dx
                                              x


which proves that f ( |D ) is a fixed-point of (23) and a stationary distribution of the process. To
see that f ( |D ) is unique, note that Q (x   ) defines an irreducible Markov chain on D in
which all states in D are recurrent and it thus admits a unique stationary distribution.


8.5    Setup of the Simulations in Section 4.3
We conduct Monte Carlo simulations generating the dependent variable from the following variant
of model (11):
                              Ei =   1+            (i,j Ej )1+ + Xi +   i                      (26)
                                            j =i

Here Xi is a unidimensional random variable generated from a normal distribution N (0, x ) and
i,j is generated from (12) where:
                                        i,j = v ( + hi,j ).                                    (27)

For hi,j we consider the two frameworks described in Section 4.3. In the real world model, we set
hi,j equal to the alumni network described in Section 5.1, in the baseline "circular model," we set
z
¯ = n/w = 200/25 = 8. This number is selected in order to have a degree close to the alumni
network (about 0.04, see Table A.3). In Section 4.3.2 we also change z
                                                                     ¯ and show the insensitivity
of our results to it. For both models, we set x = 1,  = 1,  = 0.5,  = 2,  = 0.1 and  = 0.5.
The linking parameters are set as  = -1,  = 2 and v = 7. The parameters (, , l , , , )
are chosen so that the resulting network matches the average values of the following moments in
the cosponsorship networks of the Congresses in our sample (from the 109th to the 113th): the
diameter, the average distance of the politicians' cosponsorship network, and the betweenness of
the committee network (in which two legislators are linked if they belong to the same committee).
See Table 1 and Table A.3. All of the results discussed in Section 4.3 are robust to alternative
configurations of the parameters.


8.6    Approximate Bayesian Computation
In this section we detail the features of our ABC algorithm.


                                                    50
Prior Distributions We adopt the following prior distributions for the parameters in model (11)-
(13):
                          T N{0,} (0 , 0 ),        (, , )  NKl +2 (0 , 0 )

                          T N{0,1} (0 , 0 ),               U [-, ]

                            i,r  N (0, 0 )             2  T N{0,} (0 , 0 )

                             NK (0 , B0 )                r  N (0,  )

                              N (0 , 0 )                  µ  N (0, µ0 )

where U [·] , T N{a,b} (·) and N (·) are, respectively, the uniform, truncated normal (with a and b as
lower and upper bounds), and normal distributions. For our key parameter of interest measuring
the social externality, , we adopt a uniform (uninformative) prior centered at zero, as suggested
in Smith and LeSage [2004] for spatial autoregressive models. Following Hsieh and Lee [2014], we
adopt standard normal priors for the parameters of covariates in the outcome and link formation
equations (i.e.  , , ), and for i,r and µ (if the model includes the unobservables as described
in Section 6.3). The normal allows us to incorporate prior information regarding the variance-
covariance matrix of the covariates' parameters in a natural way. As both the Cobb-Douglass
coefficient  and the endogenous network parameter  are constrained to be non-negative, we use
truncated normal distributions. The truncated normal prior of  assumes values between zero and
one. The truncated normal prior of  is only constrained to be positive.
   We set the hyperparamethers as follows. For the parameters for which we have no prior in-
formation, we chose neutral values: 0 and 0 are set equal to zero; 0 and 0 are set equal to
0.5; 0 (i.e., the variance of the prior for  ) is set equal to one; 0 is set equal to zero;  is set at
0.5; 0 is a diagonal matrix with 0.5 on its diagonal elements;  is set equal to 0.5. For other
parameters we used available information to inform the prior as suggested by Kass and Wasserman
[1996]: K is the number of controls in the outcome equation; Kl is the number of controls in the
link formation equation; 0 is set equal to the OLS point estimate obtained by regressing the con-
trols on the outcome controlling for Congress fixed effects, and B0 is set equal to the correspondent
variance covariance matrix; 0 is set equal to the logit point estimates obtained by regressing the
pairwise controls on the cosponsorship network entries, and 0 is the correspondent variance co-
variance matrix. Hyperparameters in the prior distribution for the fixed effects  s are given and
fixed, differently from random effects (see Lancaster, [2004]; Rendon, [2013]).
   Under the assumption that the social network G is observable and exogenous, conditions are
generally imposed to guarantee an invertibility condition of G (see Kelejian and Prucha, [2010]),
which in turn are sufficient for the existence of a unique equilibrium (see Calv`
                                                                                o-Armengol et al.


                                                 51
[2009]). The analogous condition in our theory of endogenous network formation is given by Propo-
sition 2, stating a sufficient condition for the existence of a unique equilibrium. We therefore focus
on a parameter space satisfying the condition of Proposition 2 that guarantees the existence of a
unique equilibrium. To this goal, we extract values of , , , , ,  and i,r only if they satisfy
                                                                         1/(1+)
Proposition 2, i.e. when  < (1/) · 1/ (1 + )  m                                   . Observe that , ,  and i,r are
included in the formula because their values shape  and m.
   We should emphasize that the results are not sensitive to these assumptions about the prior
distributions. The posterior distributions are reported in the supplementary online Appendix in
Figures A.2-A.4.

Sampling Algorithm The initial state of the Markov chain


                         (1) = [(1) , (1) ,  (1) ,  (1) ,  (1) ,  (1) , (1) , µ(1) , (1) ,  (1) ,  (1) ]


is set with all values equal to zero, except for  (1) ,  (1) , and (1) :  (1) is set equal to the OLS
point estimate obtained by regressing the controls on the outcome controlling for Congress fixed
effects;  (1) , and (1) are set equal to the logit point estimates obtained by regressing the pairwise
controls on the cosponsorship network entries.54 To draw new values for each parameter (i ) at
iteration t, we use a normal kernel, with mean equal to the current value and variance set at a
parameter-specific tuning parameter c:
                                                         N (i,t , c).                                           (28)

The decision rule for acceptance or rejection is described in Algorithm C (steps C 3 and C 4) in
Section 4.2. Each step of the algorithm is run for each parameter, conditioning on the previous
draws of the other parameters. Once every parameter has been updated, the algorithm moves to
the next iteration.
   To make the acceptance rate of the parameters' proposals as close as possible to 0.44 (which is
optimal for one-dimensional proposals, see Roberts et al., [1997]; Roberts and Rosenthal, [2001]),
we determine c with the following adaptive Metropolis-Within-Gibbs algorithm (see Roberts and
Rosenthal, [2009]).55 In the first phase, we allow c to change at each iteration t: ct is decreased
by a half percentage point if the algorithm presents an acceptance rate inferior to 20% in drawing
new values; and is increased by half percentage point if the algorithm presents an acceptance rate
 54 The   algorithm is robust to different starting values.
 55 Our   results are robust to the use of different adaptive algorithms, which are not reported for brevity.




                                                              52
superior to 80% in drawing new value. Namely:


                               if tA,i /t  0.2            then ct+1 = ct /1.005,

                               if tA,i /t  0.8            then ct+1 = ct × 1.005,                              (29)

                               if 0.2  tA,i /t  0.8       then ct+1 = ct ,


where tA,i is the number of accepted draws at iteration t. The sequence ct converges after iteration
10,000 to a level c . In the second phase, the parameter is set at its convergence level c . This
mechanism guarantees a bounded acceptance rate and convergence to optimal tuning. Figure A.6
in the supplementary online Appendix reports the acceptance rate (tA,i /t), i.e. the probability of
moving from i to i , for each of our parameters over the M CM C iterations. We can see that
rates converge to values ranging from 20 to 35 percent, showing good mixing properties.
    Our algorithm relies on the choice of the tolerance , i.e. the maximum acceptable distance
between the simulated data from real data. Here too we proceed with a two step procedure. In
step 1, we allow our algorithm to explore the tolerance space in the first 10,000 iterations. In step
2, we then fix     equal to the first quartile of the observed tolerance distribution. Specifically, for
the first 10, 000 iterations we substitute step C 2 with:

 C2' If  (z (E,  )) <  (z (E,  )), proceed to the next step otherwise return to the first step.

    In this way the algorithm moves to regions of the parameter space where the distance from the
real data is lower. Figure A.5 shows the rapid convergence of the distance between the simulated
and the real data.56 We use the Manhattan norm distance, (z (E,  )) = ||z (E,  )||1 =                   |zi (E,  )|.
The results do not change significantly using different norms.




  56 Observe that the distance does not strictly decrease in the first 10,000 observations because the random compo-

nent is generated at any iteration, thus the distance may increase if we keep the parameters constant.


                                                        53
Tables

         Table 1: NETWORK-LEVEL STATISTICS
          - ESTIMATED VS TRUE NETWORKS -


                                 Estimated      True
             Density               0.0694      0.0583
             Assortativity        26.7911     21.4879
             Diameter              6.0000      6.0000
             Average distance      2.8238     3.0403
             Closeness            0.4066       0.3786
             Betweenness           0.1206     0.0923
             Degree                0.1684      0.1441
             Clustering            0.7113      0.6558

               NOTE. The true network is gener-
               ated using equations (26)-(27). The
               DGP is described in detail in Section
               8.5. The estimated network is de-
               rived using the parameters' estimates
               at the last iteration of the MCMC.
               See Newman [2010] for the definition
               of network measures.




                                54
    Table 2: MAIN ESTIMATION RESULTS

Dependent variable: legislative effectiveness

                                               ABC
                                            Endogenous
                                           network effects

                                                0.0263 ***
                                                 [1.0000]
                                                0.7807 ***
                                                 [1.0000]
                                                0.0741 ***
                                                 [1.0000]

Party                                       -0.0116 ***
                                              [0.0000]
Gender                                      -0.0020 ***
                                              [0.0000]
Non white                                    0.0042 ***
                                              [1.0000]
Seniority                                   -0.0015 ***
                                              [0.0000]
Seniorty2                                    0.0002 ***
                                              [1.0000]
DW ideology                                 -0.0268 ***
                                              [0.0000]
Margin of victory                            0.0319 ***
                                              [1.0000]
Margin of victory2                          -0.0319 ***
                                              [0.0000]
Committee chair                             0.1789 ***
                                              [1.0000]
Powerful committee                          -0.0037 ***
                                              [0.0000]
Delegation size                                -0.0001
                                              [0.1240]
Leader                                      0.0040 ***
                                              [1.0000]
State legislative experience                -0.0058 ***
                                              [0.0000]
State legislative experience *               0.0300 ***
State legislative professionalism             [1.0000]

Congress fixed effects                             Yes

Partial F test [no network effects]              29.111
p-value                                          0.0000
N. Obs.                                           2,176

NOTE. Estimates of parameters in equation (11). The me-
dian of the posterior distribution estimated with the ABC al-
gorithm is reported for each coefficient. The empirical p-value
of zero on the estimated posterior is reported in brackets. A
precise definition of control variables can be found in Table
A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5
and 1 percent levels, based on empirical p-values.




                               55
     Table 3: ESTIMATION RESULTS - LINK FORMATION

Dependent variable: probability of forming a link

                                  ABC                           ABC
                         Endogenous network effects    Endogenous network effects
                                                          with unobservables
                                    (1)                           (2)

Alumni network                   0.9325 ***                     0.9652 ***
                                  [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
Constant                        -4.6279 ***                     -4.9112 ***
                                  [0.0000]                        [0.0000]
Seniority                       0.5206 ***                      0.4297 ***
                                  [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
Leader                             0.0200                        -0.0387 **
                                  [0.7474]                        [0.0339]
Gender                          -0.6530 ***                        0.1593
                                  [0.0000]                        [0.8849]
Non white                        1.1445 ***                     1.5384 ***
                                  [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
Party                           4.2029 ***                      3.7434 ***
                                  [1.0000]                        [1.0000]

Unobservables                                                    -0.0127
                                                                 [0.2209]

Congress fixed effects              Yes                             Yes
N. Obs.                            2,176                           2,176

 NOTE. Estimates of parameters in equation (13). The median of the posterior
 distribution estimated with the ABC algorithm is reported for each coefficient.
 The empirical p-value of zero on the estimated posterior is reported in brack-
 ets. A precise definition of control variables can be found in Table A.1. *, **,
 *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, based on
 empirical p-values.




                                          56
                 Table 4: MAIN ESTIMATION RESULTS
              -WITH AND WITHOUT NETWORK EFFECTS-

Dependent variable: Legislative Effectiveness
                                             OLS               ABC                   ABC
                                                         No network effects      Network effects
                                              (1)               (2)                   (3)



                                               -                  -                0.0263 ***
                                                                                    [1.0000]
                                               -                  -                0.7807 ***
                                                                                    [1.0000]
                                               -                  -                0.0741 ***
                                                                                    [1.0000]

Party                                    -0.0173 ***         -0.0171 ***           -0.0116 ***
                                            [0.0000]           [0.0000]              [0.0000]
Gender                                       0.0013              0.0034            -0.0020 ***
                                            [0.6338]           [0.7575]              [0.0000]
Non white                                   -0.0026             -0.0002             0.0042 ***
                                            [0.2830]           [0.4855]              [1.0000]
Seniority                                 -0.0020 **         -0.0027 ***           -0.0015 ***
                                            [0.0190]           [0.0000]              [0.0000]
Seniorty2                                 0.0003 ***          0.0002 ***            0.0002 ***
                                            [1.0000]           [1.0000]              [1.0000]
DW ideology                              -0.0208 ***         -0.0302 ***           -0.0268 ***
                                            [0.0080]           [0.0000]              [0.0000]
Margin of victory                          0.0383 **          0.0409 ***            0.0319 ***
                                            [0.9726]           [1.0000]              [1.0000]
Margin of victory2                         -0.0259 *         -0.0457 ***           -0.0319 ***
                                            [0.0875]           [0.0000]              [0.0000]
Committee chair                          0.1822 ***           0.1790 ***            0.1789 ***
                                            [1.0000]           [1.0000]              [1.0000]
Powerful committee                       -0.0090 ***            -0.0041            -0.0037 ***
                                            [0.0040]           [0.1351]              [0.0000]
Delegation size                            -0.0002 *          -0.0002 **              -0.0001
                                            [0.0601]           [0.0440]              [0.1240]
Leader                                       0.0082           0.0067 ***            0.0040 ***
                                            [0.8930]           [1.0000]              [1.0000]
State legislative experience                -0.0032             -0.0018            -0.0058 ***
                                            [0.2661]           [0.1255]              [0.0000]
State legislative experience *             0.0248 **          0.0344 ***            0.0300 ***
State legislative professionalism           [0.9508]           [1.0000]              [1.0000]

Congress fixed effects                       Yes                 Yes                   Yes

Partial F test [no network effects]                                                  29.111
p-value                                                                              0.0000
N. Obs.                                     2,176               2,176                2,176

   NOTE. Estimates of parameters in equation (11). ABC estimated coefficients are re-
   ported in columns (2)-(3). The median of the posterior distribution estimated with the
   ABC algorithm is reported for each coefficient. The empirical p-value of zero on the
   estimated posterior is reported in brackets. OLS estimated coefficients are reported in
   column (1). For comparison the p-value of zero on a normal distribution with mean
   equal to the OLS point estimate and variance equal to the estimated variance of each
   coefficient is reported in brackets. A precise definition of control variables can be found
   in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels,
   based on empirical p-values.




                                               57
Figures

                              Figure 3: CIRCULAR NETWORK ESTIMATION
                                          - GOODNESS OF FIT -




                                                       (a) Estimated




                                                          (b) True

NOTE. Panel (a) and (b) represent the estimated and true network respectively. The true network is generated using
equations (26)-(27). The connections are generated from a circular network, as defined in Section 4.3.1. The DGP is
described in detail in Section 8.5. The estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of
the MCMC. The first of c ¯ = 5 networks is visually represented using the force-directed layout algorithm with five iterations.
The algorithm uses attractive forces between adjacent nodes and repulsive forces between distant nodes in the network. See
Fruchterman and Reingold [1991] for more details. The size of the nodes is proportional to their degree. Three random
nodes are drawn and highlighted with circles.

                                                              58
                                 Figure 4: NODE-LEVEL STATISTICS
                           - ESTIMATED VS TRUE CIRCULAR NETWORK -




                           (a) Betweenness                                     (b) Eigenvalue




                             (c) Closeness                                     (d) Clustering




                             (e) Indegree                                      (f) Outdegree

NOTE. X-axis: estimated value of node-level statistic. Y-axis: true value of node-level statistic. The true network is
generated using equations (26)-(27) and data from the alumni network. The connections are generated from a circular
network, as defined in Section 4.3.1. The DGP is described in detail in Section 8.5. The estimated network is derived using
the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC. The first of c ¯ = 5 networks is considered. See Newman [2010]
for the definition of network measures.



                                                            59
                                           Figure 7: GOODNESS OF FIT




NOTE. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC curve is a plot that illustrates the diagnostic ability of a
binary classifier system as its discrimination threshold is varied. Y-axis: the true positive rate (TPR) at various thresholds.
X-axis: the false positive rate (FPR) at various thresholds. For each threshold, the ROC curve reveals two ratios, the true
positive rate TP/(TP + FN) and the false positive rate FP/(FP + TN), where TP is the number of true positives, FP
is the number of false positives, TN is the the number of true negatives, and FN is the number of false negatives. The
estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC. The first of c    ¯ = 5 networks
is represented.




                                                              60
          Figure 8: ESTIMATION BIAS FOR DIFFERENT NUMBERS OF REPEATED
                       OBSERVATIONS OF VECTOR E - PARAMETERS




                            (a)                                                        (b) 




                             (c)                                                       (d) 

NOTE. X-axis: number of repeated observations of vector E . Y-axis: distribution of the differences between estimated and
true values in the MCMC after a burning period of 10,000 iterations. The estimated values are taken from the posterior
distribution. The true values are fixed and generated using equations (26)-(27). The connections are generated from a
circular network, as defined in Section 4.3.1. The DGP is described in detail in Section 8.5. The bottom and top edges of
the boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution, respectively, and the central red mark indicates the
median. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points within 1.5 times the interquartile range. Values more than
1.5 times the interquartile range away from the top or bottom of the box (outliers) are plotted individually using the `+'
symbol.




                                                           61
          Figure 9: ESTIMATION BIAS FOR DIFFERENT NUMBERS OF REPEATED
                 OBSERVATIONS OF VECTOR E - NODE-LEVEL STATISTICS




                           (a) Indegree                                           (b) Outdegree




                        (c) Betweenness                                            (d) Closeness




                        (e) Eigenvector                                            (f) Clustering

NOTE. X-axis: number of repeated observations of vector E . Y-axis: distribution of the differences between estimated and
true values. See Newman [2010] for the definition of network measures. The true network is generated using equations
(26)-(27). The connections are generated from a circular network, as defined in Section 4.3.1. The DGP is described in
detail in Section 8.5. The estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC.
Eigenvector centrality is not reported for the 25 nodes sample because the adjacency matrix has degenerate eigenvalues (i.e.
with multiplicity greater than one). The bottom and top edges of the boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles of the
distribution, respectively, and the central red mark indicates the median. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data
points within 1.5 times the interquartile range. Values more than 1.5 times the interquartile range away from the top or
bottom of the box (outliers) are plotted individually using the `+' symbol.




                                                            62
            Figure 10: ESTIMATION BIAS FOR DIFFERENT NETWORK DENSITIES
                                    - PARAMETERS -




                                 (a)                                                 (b) 




                                 (c)                                                 (d) 

NOTE. X-axis: network density is the maximum number of possible connections with other nodes (¯     z ). Y-axis: distribution
of the differences between estimated and true values in the MCMC after a burning period of 10,000 iterations. The estimated
values are taken from the posterior distribution. The true values are fixed and generated using equations (26)-(27). The
connections are generated from a circular network, as defined in Section 4.3.1. The DGP is described in detail in Section
8.5. The bottom and top edges of the boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution, respectively, and
the central red mark indicates the median. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points within 1.5 times the
interquartile range. Values more than 1.5 times the interquartile range away from the top or bottom of the box (outliers)
are plotted individually using the `+' symbol.




                                                             63
            Figure 11: ESTIMATION BIAS FOR DIFFERENT NETWORK DENSITIES
                               - NODE-LEVEL STATISTICS -




                           (a) Indegree                                            (b) Outdegree




                        (c) Betweenness                                             (d) Closeness




                         (e) Eigenvector                                            (f) Clustering

NOTE. X-axis: network density is the maximum number of possible connections with other nodes (¯     z ). Y-axis: distribution
of the differences between estimated and true values. See Newman [2010] for the definition of network measures. The true
network is generated using equations (26)-(27). The connections are generated from a circular network, as defined in Section
4.3.1. The DGP is described in detail in Section 8.5. The estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the
last iteration of the MCMC. Eigenvector centrality is not reported for the 25 nodes sample because the adjacency matrix has
degenerate eigenvalues (i.e. with multiplicity greater than one). The bottom and top edges of the boxes indicate the 25th
and 75th percentiles of the distribution, respectively, and the central red mark indicates the median. The whiskers extend
to the most extreme data points within 1.5 times the interquartile range. Values more than 1.5 times the interquartile range
away from the top or bottom of the box (outliers) are plotted individually using the `+' symbol.




                                                             64
                           Figure 12: ESTIMATION BIAS FOR DIFFERENT 
                                           - PARAMETERS -




                                 (a)                                                (b) 




                                 (c)                                               (d) 

NOTE. X-axis: . Y-axis: distribution of the differences between estimated and true values in the MCMC after a burning
period of 10,000 iterations. The estimated values are taken from the posterior distribution. The true values are fixed and
generated using equations (26)-(27). The connections are generated from a circular network, as defined in Section 4.3.1.
The DGP is described in detail in Section 8.5. The bottom and top edges of the boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles
of the distribution, respectively, and the central red mark indicates the median. The whiskers extend to the most extreme
data points within 1.5 times the interquartile range. Values more than 1.5 times the interquartile range away from the top
or bottom of the box (outliers) are plotted individually using the `+' symbol.




                                                            65
                           Figure 13: ESTIMATION BIAS FOR DIFFERENT 
                                      - NODE-LEVEL STATISTICS -




                          (a) Indegree                                            (b) Outdegree




                        (c) Betweenness                                            (d) Closeness




                        (e) Eigenvector                                           (f) Clustering

NOTE. X-axis: . Y-axis: distribution of the differences between estimated and true values. See Newman [2010] for the
definition of network measures. The true network is generated using equations (26)-(27). The connections are generated
from a circular network, as defined in Section 4.3.1. The DGP is described in detail in Section 8.5. The estimated network
is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC. Eigenvector centrality is not reported for the
25 nodes sample because the adjacency matrix has degenerate eigenvalues (i.e. with multiplicity greater than one). The
bottom and top edges of the boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution, respectively, and the central
red mark indicates the median. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points within 1.5 times the interquartile
range. Values more than 1.5 times the interquartile range away from the top or bottom of the box (outliers) are plotted
individually using the `+' symbol.




                                                            66
         Figure 14: ESTIMATED VS TRUE NETWORKS - DIFFERENT TOPOLOGIES -




                     (a) High density (¯
                                       z = 100)                           (b) Medium density (¯
                                                                                              z = 20)




                           (c) High  = 4                           (d) Low density (¯
                                                                                    z = 8) and reverse circle




                                                    (e) Alumni network

NOTE. Adjacency matrices of true versus estimated networks (with blue dots) and their difference (with red dots).
The true network is generated using equations (26)-(27) The DGP is described in detail in Section 8.5. The estimated network
is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC. The first of c    ¯ = 5 networks is represented.
The true networks in panels (a), (b), and (c) are generated with circular connections, as described in Section 4.3.1. The
reverse linking network (in panel (d)) is obtained by reverting the algorithm described in Section 4.3.1, i.e. selecting links
for i starting from i - 1 to i + 1 (i excluded) with a pace of -1. In the alumni network (panel (e)), the connections of 200
politicians from the 111th Congress extracted at random are considered. The 111th Congress is randomly selected.
                                                             67
                                       Figure 15: ESTIMATED NETWORK




                           (a) Party                                           (b) Connections' strength




                        (c) Effectiveness                                      (d) Degree vs effectiveness

NOTE. The estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC for the 111th
Congress. In panel (a) the color represents the party of the politician. Pink nodes are Republicans. In panel (b) the color
of links is proportional to gij , the strenght of the connection between the two politicians. In panel (c) the color of each
node is proportional to effectiveness, more pink nodes are more effective politicians. In panel (d) each point is a politician.
The x-axis represents the (log) degree, the y-axis represents the (log) effectiveness. The estimated network is represented
with force-directed layout with five iterations. It uses attractive forces between adjacent nodes and repulsive forces between
distant nodes. For better visualization, the size of the nodes is equal to the (log) of their degree plus 2.




                                                              68
            Supplementary Online Appendix

    Endogenous Social Connections in Legislatures

                                                 Marco Battaglini
                                              Cornell University and EIEF
                                                 battaglini@cornell.edu



                                               Eleonora Patacchini
                                                   Cornell University
                                                   ep454@cornell.edu


                                                 Edoardo Rainone
                                                     Bank of Italy
                                            edoardo.rainone@bancaditalia.it.




A.1       Appendix Tables and Figures

                                     Table A.1: SUMMARY STATISTICS


Variable name                                                  Variable definition                              Mean       St. Dev
Party                               Dummy variable taking value of one if the Congress member is a Democrat.    0.5060     0.5019
Gender                              Dummy variable taking value of one if the Congress member is female.        0.1723     0.3778
                                    Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of Congress is African-
Non white                                                                                                       0.1388     0.3458
                                    American or Hispanic, and zero otherwise.
Seniority                           Maximum consecutive years in Congress.                                      5.7863      4.4388
Seniorty2                           Maximum consecutive years in Congress, squared.                             53.1751    80.3864
                                    Distance to the center in terms of ideology measured using the absolute
DW ideology                         value of the first dimension of the DW-nominate score created by McCarty    0.5004     0.2236
                                    et al. [1997].
Margin of victory                   Margin of victory in the last election.                                     0.3526     0.2488
Margin of victory2                  Margin of victory in the last election, squared.                            0.1862     0.2494
Committee chair                     Dummy variable taking value of one if the Congress member is a Chair of     0.0455     0.2084
                                    at least one committee.
                                    Dummy variable taking value of one if the Congress member is a member
Powerful committee                  of a powerful committee (Appropriations, Budget, Rules and Ways and         0.2544     0.6355
                                    Means).
Delegation size                     Number of seats assigned to Congress members state.                         19.0988    15.4628
                                    Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of Congress is a member
Leader                                                                                                          0.0496     0.2172
                                    of the party leadership, as reported by the Almanac of American Politics.
                                    Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of Congress served as
State legislative experience                                                                                    0.6260     0.6946
                                    a state legislator.
State legislative professionalism   States level of professionalism [Squire, 1992].                             0.1210     0.1779
N. Obs.                                                                                                                2,176

              Source: Legislative Effectiveness Project (http://www.thelawmakers.org), Volden and Wiseman [2014].




                                                           1
                     Figure A.1: NETWORK ESTIMATION - GOODNESS OF FIT




                                                      (a) Real network




                                                    (b) Circular network

NOTE. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC curve is a plot that illustrates the diagnostic ability of a
binary classifier system as its discrimination threshold is varied. Y-axis: the true positive rate (TPR) at various thresholds.
X-axis: the false positive rate (FPR) at various thresholds. For each threshold, the ROC curve reveals two ratios, the true
positive rate TP/(TP + FN) and the false positive rate FP/(FP + TN), where TP is the number of true positives, FP
is the number of false positives, TN is the the number of true negatives and FN is the number of false negatives. The
estimated network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC. The first of c    ¯ = 5 networks
is represented.




                                                              2
        Table A.2: ESTIMATION RESULTS WITH UNOBSERVABLES

Dependent variable: Legislative Effectiveness
                                              ABC                             ABC
                                     Endogenous network effects      Endogenous network effects
                                                                        with unobservables
                                                    (1)                         (2)

                                              0.0263 ***                      0.1237 ***
                                               [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
                                              0.7807 ***                      0.4576 ***
                                               [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
                                              0.0741 ***                      0.0231 ***
                                               [1.0000]                        [1.0000]

Party                                        -0.0116 ***                     -0.0086 ***
                                               [0.0000]                        [0.0000]
Gender                                       -0.0020 ***                      0.0035 ***
                                               [0.0000]                        [1.0000]
Non White                                    0.0042 ***                       0.0038 ***
                                               [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
Seniority                                    -0.0015 ***                     -0.0012 ***
                                               [0.0000]                        [0.0000]
Seniorty2                                     0.0002 ***                      0.0002 ***
                                               [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
DW ideology                                  -0.0268 ***                     -0.0293 ***
                                               [0.0000]                        [0.0000]
Margin                                        0.0319 ***                      0.0402 ***
                                               [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
Margin2                                      -0.0319 ***                     -0.0304 ***
                                               [0.0000]                        [0.0000]
Committee Chair                               0.1789 ***                      0.1809 ***
                                               [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
Powerful Committee                           -0.0037 ***                     -0.0053 ***
                                               [0.0000]                        [0.0000]
Delegation size                                 -0.0001                       -0.0001 **
                                               [0.1240]                        [0.0160]
Leader                                        0.0040 ***                      0.0111 ***
                                               [1.0000]                        [1.0000]
State Legislative Experience                 -0.0058 ***                     -0.0027 ***
                                               [0.0000]                        [0.0000]
State Legislative Experience *                0.0300 ***                      0.0304 ***
State Legislative Professionalism              [1.0000]                        [1.0000]

µ1                                                   -                       -0.0012 ***
                                                                               [0.0000]
µ2                                                   -                       0.0002 ***
                                                                               [1.0000]
µ3                                                   -                       -0.0027 ***
                                                                               [0.0000]
µ4                                                   -                       0.0304 ***
                                                                               [1.0000]
µ5                                                                           0.0111 ***
                                                                               [1.0000]

Congress fixed effects                           Yes                              Yes
N. Obs.                                         2,176                            2,176

NOTE. Estimates of parameters in equation (11). The median of the posterior distribution
estimated with the ABC algorithm is reported for each coefficient. The empirical p-value of
zero on the estimated posterior is reported in brackets. A precise definition of control variables
can be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
levels, based on empirical p-values. Each parameter µ corresponds to the relative power of as
                              5      l
 is generated with i,r =      l=1 µl i,r .




                                                3
                       Figure A.2: ESTIMATED POSTERIOR DISTRIBUTIONS
                                     - CONTROL VARIABLES -




                                                            4
NOTE. X-axis: parameter value, Y-axis: kernel density. The solid line represents the posterior, the dashed line the prior.
                       Figure A.3: ESTIMATED POSTERIOR DISTRIBUTIONS
                                      - TARGET VARIABLES -




                 (a)                                     (b)                                      (c) 

NOTE. X-axis: parameter value, Y-axis: kernel density. The solid line represents the posterior, the dashed line the prior.




                                                            5
                       Figure A.4: ESTIMATED POSTERIOR DISTRIBUTIONS
                                       - LINK FORMATION -




NOTE. X-axis: parameter value, Y-axis: kernel density. The solid line represents the posterior, the dashed line the prior.




                                                            6
Figure A.5: DISTANCE BETWEEN SIMULATED AND REAL DATA AT EACH ITERATION




               NOTE. X-axis: MCMC iteration, Y-axis: distance value at each iteration.




              Figure A.6: ACCEPTANCE RATE AT EACH ITERATION




         NOTE. X-axis: MCMC iteration, Y-axis: frequency of acceptance: moving from  to  .




                                                 7
A.2      A Comparison between the Estimated and Observed Networks
Here we present a comparison of the estimated network with other known and observable structures
of interactions among politicians used in the literature to approximate political interconnectedness.
Table A.3 reports some network-level statistics computed for the estimated network G and the
cosponsorship, the committee, and the alumni networks. It appears that the density in our esti-
mated network is lower than the density of the cosponsorship and committee networks and higher
than that of the alumni network, which are known for being too dense and too sparse, respectively.57
The estimated network has closeness, clustering, and betweenness close to the cosponsorship net-
work. The degree is more similar to the alumni network, while the assortativity is closer to the
committee network. The level of assortativity, however, is significantly higher than in the other
networks, suggesting a better ability to capture the fact that highly connected politicians are more
likely to be connected among themselves. Clustering is also significantly higher than the other
networks, plausibly better capturing the important role of political cliques. Betweenness and de-
gree are significantly lower than the other networks, reflecting an estimated lower level of political
intermediation and social connections.
    To further analyze how different is the estimated network from the actual ones, we report
the densities of degree, closeness, clustering, and eigenvector centralities in Figure A.7-A.9 for the
different networks. Interestingly, the density of the eigenvector centralities shows that our estimated
network presents a marked bimodal distribution, which reveals the ability of our methodology to
discriminate between more central and less central players. On the contrary, the seemingly normal
distribution of centralities for the cosponsorship network seems compatible with a higher degree of
randomness in the data generating process. The density of the closeness centrality of the estimated
network is similar to the cosponsorship and committee networks, while it is concentrated on higher
values than the one for the alumni network, reflecting the excessive sparseness of the connections in
the alumni network. In terms of clustering and degree, the estimated network presents a smoother
distribution than other networks, specifically with a higher number of nodes showing higher values
of clustering and with more links than the alumni network.
    Table A.4 more formally compares the estimated network with the cosponsorship, committee,
and alumni networks. The table reports the mean across nodes for each network statistic, the T-
statistics for equality of means, and its associated p-value. It also reports the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test statistic for the equality of the probability distributions. The results show that, while we cannot
  57 A common complaint with the cosponsorship network is that cosponsorships are affected by many factors that do

not necessarily reflect social closeness between legislators. On the contrary, the alumni network uses only a limited
source of information to draw social connections. See Battaglini and Patacchini [2019] for a discussion and survey of
the literature.




                                                         8
reject the hypothesis that the mean values of the centrality measures are the same in the estimated
and actual networks in many cases, when looking at their distributions the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
statistic always rejects the hypothesis that the empirical distribution of the centrality measure from
our estimated network comes from the same distribution of any of the popular networks considered.




                                                  9
        Table A.3: COMPARISON WITH OTHER NETWORKS
                 - NETWORK-LEVEL STATISTICS -

                                     NETWORKS
                    ESTIMATED        COSPONSORSHIP           COMMITTEE         ALUMNI
                        (1)               (2)                   (3)              (4)

Density                 0.0809              0.1069              0.2109           0.0036
Assortativity          66.4410              20.3642             47.4155          7.5099
Diameter                  Inf                  Inf                 Inf             Inf
Average distance          Inf                  Inf                 Inf             Inf
Closeness               0.1403               0.1533              0.5768          0.0216
Betweenness             0.0001               0.0004              0.0694          0.0255
Degree                  0.0304               0.0904              0.2262          0.0400
Clustering              0.7163               0.6561              0.6150          0.5410

NOTE. The direct networks (cosponsorship and estimated) are transformed to indirect
unweighted networks to have a clean comparison with the others. Given the direct
network D = {dij }, its indirect unweighted counterpart is U = {uij }, where uij = 1
if dij or dji is different from zero, and zero otherwise. The network statistics are
compared on a pooled network of five Congresses. See Newman [2010] for the definition
of network statistics. The alumni network is defined in Section 4.1. See Battaglini and
Patacchini [2019] for a description of the cosponsorship network. The ijth element of
the committee network entry is equal to the number of Congressional committees in
which both i and j sit.




                                           10
    Table A.4: NETWORK DIFFERENCES - STATISTICAL TESTS


                 Estimated       Mean        T stat     p-value    Kolmogorov      p-value
                   Mean                                             Smirnov

Cosponsorship
Indegree          118.1162      153.8747    -0.3919     0.6523        0.4465       0.0000
Clustering         0.7036        0.6816      0.2282     0.4098        0.2323       0.0000
Betweenness        0.0017        0.0015      0.1155     0.4540        0.2847       0.0000
Closeness          0.6220        0.6705     -0.4032     0.6565        0.4784       0.0000
Bonacich           0.0401        0.0458     -0.1827     0.5725        0.4305       0.0000

Committee
Indegree          172.4920      92.3554      1.9085     0.0285        0.8109       0.0000
Clustering         0.7036        0.7115     -0.0376     0.5150        0.3781       0.0000
Betweenness        0.0017        0.0021     -0.1002     0.5399        0.3622       0.0000
Closeness          0.6969       0.5768       1.5566     0.0601        0.8360       0.0000
Bonacich           0.0401       0.0393       0.0226     0.4910        0.2642       0.0000

Alumni
Indegree          172.4920       1.5626      6.2572     0.0000        1.0000       0.0000
Clustering         0.7036        0.1575      1.6721     0.0476        0.8588       0.0000
Betweenness        0.0017        0.0009      0.2264     0.4105        0.8018       0.0000
Closeness          0.6969        0.0216     14.3031     0.0000        1.0000       0.0000
Bonacich           0.0401        0.0109      0.5195     0.3018        0.9089       0.0000

NOTE. Node-level statistics are considered. See Newman [2010] for the definition of
network statistics. The first four columns test differences in means, the last two columns
test the difference between the two distributions. The alumni network is defined in
Section 4.1. Cosponsorship activity is measured by directional links equal to one if j has
cosponsored at least one bill proposed by i and zero otherwise. The ijth element of the
Committee network entry is equal to the number of Congressional committees in which
both i and j sit. The direct networks (cosponsorship and estimated) are transformed
to indirect unweighted networks to have a clean comparison with the others. Given
the direct network D = {dij }, its indirect unweighted counterpart is U = {uij }, where
uij = 1 if dij or dji is different from zero, and zero otherwise.




                                           11
                      Figure A.7: ESTIMATED VS COSPONSORSHIP NETWORK
                             - DENSITIES OF NODE-LEVEL STATISTICS -




       (a) Eigenvector                  (b) Closeness                  (c) Clustering                   (d) Degree



                        Figure A.8: ESTIMATED VS COMMITTEE NETWORKS
                             - DENSITIES OF NODE-LEVEL STATISTICS -




       (a) Eigenvector                  (b) Closeness                  (c) Clustering                   (d) Degree



                            Figure A.9: ESTIMATED VS ALUMNI NETWORKS
                              - DENSITIES OF NODE-LEVEL STATISTICS -




       (a) Eigenvector                  (b) Closeness                  (c) Clustering                   (d) Degree

NOTE. Kernel density estimate of node-level network measures. For each measure, the estimated network (in black) is
compared with the observed network (in red). See Newman [2010] for the definition of each measure. The estimated
network is derived using the parameter estimates at the last iteration of the MCMC for the 111th Congress. The alumni
network is defined in Section 4.1. The ijth element of the committee network entry is equal to the number of congressional
committees in which both i and j sit. Cosponsorship activity is measured by directional links equal to one if j has cosponsored
at least one bill proposed by i and zero otherwise. The direct networks (cosponsorship and estimated) are transformed to
indirect unweighted networks to have a clean comparison with the others. Given the direct network D = {dij }, its indirect
unweighted counterpart is U = {uij }, where uij = 1 if dij or dji is different from zero, and zero otherwise.




                                                              12
