                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SCHOOL DESEGREGATION AND BLACK TEACHER EMPLOYMENT

                                        Owen Thompson

                                       Working Paper 25990
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25990


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




I am very grateful to Elizabeth Cascio, Ben Denckla, Nora Gordon and Sarah Reber for making
student desegregation and Title I funding data available, and to Mark Colas, Jason Fletcher, John
Heywood and seminar participants at Emory University, Middlebury College, Montana State
University, the University of Oregon, the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee, Williams College
and the 2018 NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. My interest in this topic was
motivated in part by an episode of Malcolm Gladwell's Revisionist History podcast, to whom I
am also grateful. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Owen Thompson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
School Desegregation and Black Teacher Employment
Owen Thompson
NBER Working Paper No. 25990
June 2019
JEL No. I24,J23,J7

                                          ABSTRACT

Prior to the racial integration of schools in the southern United States, predominantly African
American schools were staffed almost exclusively by African American teachers as well, and
teaching constituted an extraordinarily large share of professional employment among southern
blacks. The large-scale desegregation of southern schools occurring after passage of the 1964
Civil Rights Act represented a potential threat to this employment base, and this paper estimates
how student integration affected black teacher employment. Using newly assembled archival data
from 781 southern school districts observed between 1964 and 1972, I estimate that a school
district transitioning from fully segregated to fully integrated education, which approximates the
experience of the modal southern district in this period, led to a 31.8% reduction in black teacher
employment. A series of tests indicate that these employment reductions were not due to school
district self-selection into desegregation or unobserved district characteristics associated with
desegregation. Additional analyses estimate changes in the occupational distribution by race in
the 1960 and 1970 Decennial Censuses and indicate that displaced southern black teachers either
entered lower skill occupations within the South or migrated out of the region to continue
teaching, and that southern school districts compensated for reduced black teacher employment
by employing fewer total teachers and by increasing their recruitment of white teachers,
especially less experienced white teachers and white male teachers.


Owen Thompson
Department of Economics
Williams College
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
ot3@williams.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25990
1      Introduction
From Reconstruction through the mid-1960s, the vast majority of schools in the southern United States were

segregated on the basis of race.          One feature of the segregated southern school systems from this period

was that schools enrolling African American students were staed almost exclusively by African American

teachers as well. This practice was largely unique to the South, and in other regions predominantly black

schools were often staed by white teachers, with these regional dierences reecting the broader set of

southern segregationist institutions designed to minimize social and professional contact between African

Americans and whites (Foster 1997).


In conjunction with the exclusion of African Americans from nearly all other high-skill occupations in the

South, the practice of stang black schools with black teachers led teaching to constitute an extraordinarily

important component of middle-class southern black employment in this period. As of 1960, 45% of southern

African Americans who had completed any post-secondary education reported teacher as their occupation,

with no other occupation reaching a 5% employment share in this population.
                                                                                           1


In the years following passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act (CRA), the southern system of de-jure school

segregation was rapidly dismantled. In the fall of 1964 - notably a full decade after the landmark Brown vs.

Board of Education ruling declared segregated schools unconstitutional - fewer than 5% of African American

students in the eleven states of the former Confederacy were attending school with whites, but by the fall of

1970 this gure had grown to over 90% (Cascio et al. 2008, 2010). This fundamental reorganization of the

southern public education system was a potential threat to the employment of black teachers. In principle

student desegregation could have been achieved with minimal negative employment eects for black teachers

by simultaneously integrating faculties, but in practice there was substantial uncertainty as to how many

of the black teachers previously employed at segregated schools would be absorbed into newly integrated

institutions.


The historical record contains numerous reports of black teachers being overtly red as a result of post-CRA

student desegregation. For instance a 1965 letter from a southern superintendent to the principal of a black

school reads Schools will be integrated beginning with the 1965-1966 school year in order to comply with

the Civil Rights Law...and I must request you inform your teachers that [their] positions will be terminated

on May 25 (US Oce of Education 1965).                   Likewise, a trade publication from this period noted in its

August 1965 issue that The increased desegregation this fall under the new Civil Rights legislation will

cause the dismissal of teachers no longer needed because of consolidated schools or classrooms. Estimates

of the number of Negro teachers aected ranged from about 400 to 5,000 (Southern Education Report

1965). Reports of layos among black teachers were suciently widespread that in remarks at the National

Education Association annual conference, President Lyndon Johnson promised to direct the Commissioner

of Education to pay special attention, in reviewing desegregation plans, to guard against any pattern of

dismissal based on race (National Education Association 1965).


While this anecdotal evidence makes it clear that at least some black teaching positions were eliminated

following integration, it is not well understood whether the desegregation process itself systematically re-

duced the employment of black teachers, or how large any such negative employment eects were. Student

    1 Author's   calculations using Ruggles (2015). The most common non-teaching occupations among college educated southern
blacks in 1960 were private household workers (4.0%), clerical workers (3.9%), proprietors (2.6%) and nurses (2.1%). Despite
the colloquialism that educated African Americans in the Jim Crow South could either teach or preach just 1.7% of college
educated southern blacks reported clergy as their occupation in 1960, and virtually all were men.




                                                               2
desegregation occurred during a period of rapidly changing social and economic policy in a variety of areas

that could have plausibly aected black teacher employment levels, and to a substantive extent individual

school districts self-selected into particular integration paths by deciding how quickly and completely they

complied with federal mandates. These factors make it dicult to reliably infer causal eects from simple

associations between student integration and black teacher employment.


Furthermore, little is known about the broader educational and labor market impacts of integration-induced

reductions in black teacher employment.     The consequences of eliminating signicant numbers of African

American held teaching positions are potentially far-reaching, and include spillovers into other occupations

and regions where displaced southern black teachers may have sought employment, as well as changes in the

operations and white teacher recruitment practices of thousands of school districts.


To help address these outstanding questions, the current paper estimates the eect of student desegregation

on the employment of black teachers in a manner that accounts for unobserved school district characteristics

and non-random district selection into integration, and also quanties various secondary consequences of

reduced black teacher employment in the South during this period.         Drawing on multiple archival data

sources, I assemble information on student desegregation levels and the racial composition of teaching stas

for 781 southern school districts observed between 1964 and 1972. I then estimate dierence-in-dierence style

specications that model black teacher employment as a function of student desegregation, while accounting

for time-invariant district characteristics, general year eects, and various district-year specic factors.


The primary nding is that the post-CRA desegregation process caused systematic and qualitatively large

reductions in the employment of African American teachers in the South. My preferred estimates nd that

transitioning from fully segregated to fully integrated education, which approximates the experience of the

modal southern school district during the study period, reduced black teacher employment by an average

of 31.8%. A series of tests indicate that these reductions were a causal result of the student desegregation

process itself: Student desegregation in future years is uncorrelated with current black teacher employment

levels, the ndings are robust to the inclusion of district-specic linear time trends, and the results are

similar after controlling for district-year specic funding from federal, state and local sources.    Observed

heterogeneous treatment eects with respect to various baseline district characteristics are also consistent

with a causal interpretation.


To better understand the full consequences of these employment reductions, I take advantage of the fact that

student desegregation occurred primarily between the 1960 and 1970 Decennial Censuses and analyze the

race-specic distributions of employment outcomes before and after desegregation. These analyses indicate

that approximately one half of the southern blacks who would have held teaching positions in the absence

of desegregation entered lower skill professions within the South, while the other half migrated out of the

region to continue or pursue teaching.   There is no evidence that displaced southern black teachers were

able to readily enter other forms of professional employment within the region. I also use Census data to

provide some evidence that any earnings impacts of reduced teaching employment among high-skill southern

blacks were small. Additional results suggest that southern school districts both increased their recruitment

of white teachers after eliminating large numbers of black held teaching positions, and also reduced their

overall (all race) teacher employment levels, with these overall teacher employment reductions facilitated by

white student enrollment declines and operational eciencies from operating unied school systems. Among

newly recruited white teachers, there was a notable decrease in their average age and experience level, and

a notable increase in the proportion who were men.



                                                      3
Before proceeding, one aspect of interpreting the analysis presented below warrants clarication. While the

paper nds that student integration reduced the employment of African American teachers, this does not

imply that such reductions were a necessary or inevitable result of integration. Indeed, evidence from the

historical record discussed below strongly indicates that the displacement of black teachers was a conscious

policy choice made by the relevant school administrators, boards of education, state ocials, and even federal

level courts and policy makers. The presented estimates therefore correspond to the employment impacts

of desegregation as implemented in practice, and it seems likely that student integration could have been

achieved without disproportionately adverse impacts on black teacher employment had this been deemed a

priority.




2      Background
Historical Context

Prior to 1954 schools throughout the southern United States maintained explicit and legally required segre-

gation of students by race. In 1954 the US Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka

Kansas that racially segregated schools violated the Equal Protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

However, while a subsequent 1955 case (Brown II ) ordered segregated districts to integrate with all de-

liberate speed the Brown rulings lacked strong enforcement mechanisms and meaningful compliance only

occurred in border states such as Oklahoma, Missouri, Kentucky, West Virginia, Maryland, Delaware and

Washington DC.


Available evidence indicates that the student integration occurring in border states during this period caused

substantial reductions in black teacher employment, and legal protections for displaced black teachers were

virtually non-existent. In a critical test case, a suit was brought by 11 black teachers dismissed after the

integration-induced closure of the sole black school in Moberly, Missouri.                   All 125 white teachers in the

district were retained, some of whom were manifestly less qualied than the dismissed black teachers.                    A

District Court judge refused to reinstate the black teachers, with the ruling upheld by the 8th Circuit Court

of Appeals and an appeal declined by the Supreme Court, and the Moberly precedent was subsequently

used to dismiss virtually all legal cases involving black teacher employment reductions for the next decade.
                                                                                                                         2

Calculations by a researcher at the National Education Association estimated that at least 3,000 black

teachers were dismissed in the Border Region between 1954 and 1964 (Ethridge 1979) .


Despite the clear presence of black teacher dismissals in the immediate post-Brown period, the aggregate

employment impacts of these initial desegregation eorts were ultimately limited by the fact that southern

black students and teachers were heavily concentrated in the 11 states of the former Confederacy, where only

token integration occurred prior to the 1964 implementation of the CRA. In contrast to the Brown rulings,

the CRA authorized the US attorney general to bring suits directly against districts failing to desegregate,

and allowed federal agencies to withhold funds from non-compliant school districts, a threat which took on

new importance after passage of the 1965 Elementary and Secondary Education Act greatly expanded federal

educational funding. As noted above, these policy changes led to the virtual elimination of de-jure student

segregation in the South by the early 1970s, but in doing so raised the potential for larger scale reductions

in black teacher employment than those experienced in the post-Brown period.

    2 Brooks   v. School District of Moberly, Missouri. See accounts in Ethridge (1979) and Fultz (2004).




                                                                 4
While the legislative language and enforcement mechanisms detailed in the CRA were very clear and eective

with respect to student desegregation, they were far more ambiguous with respect to teacher employment

practices or the desegregation of teaching faculties. Indeed the Act's critical Title VI, which empowered fed-

eral agencies to withhold funds to non-compliant local governments, also had language stating that Nothing

contained in this Title shall be construed to authorize action...with respect to any employment practice and

some southern school districts argued that this precluded the termination of federal funds due to district

practices related to the demotions, ring or non-hiring of black teachers.


The rst set of Title VI compliance guidelines issued by the Department of Health, Education and Welfare

(HEW) in April 1965, which provided school districts with the conditions they needed to meet in order

to receive federal education funds, were also very weak with respect to desegregating teaching faculties or

protecting black teachers from unjust dismissals. A regional trade journal noted in 1965 that faculty deseg-

regation is...a problem on which federal ocials have allowed a great deal of leeway (Southern Education

Report 1965), while Oreld (1969) describes the guidelines as merely paying lip service to the need for

equitable faculty hiring and stang policies. In a striking statement of federal indierence towards black

teachers during this initial phase of CRA enforcement, an HEW attorney told the Washington Post in 1965

that in a war there must be some casualties, and perhaps the black teachers will be the casualties in the

ght for equal education of black students (Washington Post, September 21 1965).                      Court rulings in this

period were also generally unsupportive of black teachers red as part of the student desegregation process,

with a federal judge commenting in a 1965 suit brought by three dismissed black teachers in Arkansas that

the Fourteenth Amendment...is not a teacher tenure law (Detweiler 1969).


The positions of the federal government and courts on issues of faculty desegregation and employment pro-

tections for black teachers did strengthen through the late 1960s and early 1970s. The 1966 HEW compliance

guidelines required districts to begin integrating their teaching stas, on the grounds that segregated facul-

ties restricted the rights of students to receive an education free of racial consideration (Southern Education

Report 1966; Fultz 2004), although specic numerical requirements were not detailed and Cascio et al.

(2010) nd that the 1966 guidelines led to only token levels of faculty desegregation.                   A signicant 1970

legal decision, Singleton v. Jackson Municipal School District, required districts to apply an objective and

reasonably nondiscriminatory standard in teacher employment practices and established concrete guidelines

for achieving this, and similar guidelines were adopted by HEW in 1971 (Ethridge 1979; Fultz 2004).
                                                                                                                      3 Un-

fortunately, the analysis reported below indicates that large-scale reductions in black teacher employment

had already occurred by the early 1970s, when these stronger federal protections were put into place.


It is also noteworthy that many of the institutions which could have potentially provided employment protec-

tions for black teachers during the desegregation process had been intentionally weakened during the period

of massive resistance that followed the Brown rulings. Likely the most important such institutions were

state teacher tenure laws, with a trade publication reporting in 1955 that in the 18 months following the

Brown ruling Alabama, Florida, Tennessee, South Carolina, North Carolina, Kentucky and Virginia had all

made eorts to modify the state tenure laws applicable to black teachers (Southern School News 1955), and

a 1965 report noted that where tenure laws do exist, they are dierentially eective in safeguarding employ-

ment rights of Negro teachers (US Oce of Education 1965). Several southern states went even further,

by abolishing state constitutional requirements for public education, modifying compulsory attendance laws,

   3 Specically,   the Singleton ruling established the so-called Singleton Ratio requiring that the ratio of black and white
teachers in any individual school must be substantially the same as in the district overall.




                                                               5
passing laws revoking the license of any teacher belonging to the NAACP, or closing school districts that

were under federal orders to integrate (Fultz 2004; Tillman 2004).


Teacher's unions were also largely passive in representing the interests of black teachers until relatively late

in the desegregation process. The main national teachers union, the National Education Association (NEA),

declined to even approve any resolution supporting the Brown ruling until 1961, and did not desegregate

its own southern aliate organizations until 1966 (Schultz 1970). Ironically, the integration of the NEA led

to the dissolution of African American teacher's unions in the South, which had been organized under the

umbrella American Teachers Association, leaving black educators without a dedicated organizational voice

during the height of the integration and displacement process (Fultz 2004).


On balance, the historical record can be described as indicating that throughout the southern desegregation

process, African American teachers faced erce antagonism and resistance from relevant state and local

policy makers, received only modest and belated assistance from federal ocials and courts, who were focused

strongly on southern African American students, and received minimal support from legal and organizational

institutions with the potential ability to protect their interests.          These institutional features reduced the

chances that student desegregation would be implemented in a manner that substantially considered its

impacts on black teachers.


Existing Literature

School desegregation is the subject of a large interdisciplinary literature, with reviews provided by Rivkin

& Welch (2006) and Reardon & Owens (2014). Existing empirical research has primarily focused on overall

desegregation trends and dierences in desegregation patterns across school districts (e.g. Logan et al. 2004;

Clotfelter 2011; Cascio et al. 2008, 2010); on the extent to which integration was followed by white enrollment

declines, or white ight (e.g. Welch 1987; Rivkin 1994; Reber 2005; Baum-Snlow & Lutz 2011; Boustan

2012); and on how exposure to desegregated schools impacted the academic, labor market and crime related

outcomes of students (e.g. Guryan 2004; Vigdor & Ludwig 2008; Reber 2010; Johnson 2011; Billings et al.

2013). Overall, research on these topics indicate that segregation levels declined rapidly between 1965 and

1980 before stabilizing or moderately increasing thereafter; that desegregation led to signicant declines in

white enrollments, especially in large urban districts; and that attending desegregated schools improved the

outcomes of African American students.


Relative to evaluations of desegregation's impacts on students, there has been very little work on integration's

eects on teacher labor markets in general or on black teachers specically. The only research I am aware of

that directly evaluates post-CRA desegregation activity and black teacher employment is an early study by

Ethridge (1979), which contains a table projecting the number of black teaching positions that would have

existed in southern states as of 1972 in the absence of desegregation, then comparing these projections with

the actual number of black teachers employed.
                                                      4 Ethridge (1979) concludes that 31,584 teaching positions

[have] been lost by black teachers...as a result of desegregation.


Research on more recent desegregation eorts and teacher labor markets includes Oakley et al. (2009), who

examine Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) undergoing court-ordered desegregation between 1970 and

2000.   Using Decennial Census data aggregated to the MSA level (in many cases spanning several school

  4 While   the method for projecting the number of black teaching positions are not described in detail, they appear to be
calculated as the total number of black students in 1972 divided by the overall student-teacher ratio, and therefore give the
number of black teachers that would have been needed if black teachers were employed in constant proportion to black student
enrollments.




                                                             6
districts), the authors nd that the desegregation of elementary schools reduced black teacher employment

in southern MSAs, but increased black teacher employment in non-Southern MSAs. Additionally, Jackson

(2009) studies changes in teacher characteristics following the 2002 termination of race-based busing in the

Charlotte-Mecklenburg school district, which led to sharp increases in black student shares in some schools,

and nds that high quality teachers were more likely to leave schools experiencing a policy-induced increase

in the number of black students, suggesting important eects of student demographic composition on teacher

sorting in a contemporary context of increasing segregation.


I complement these studies by implementing a research design that accounts for potential district selection

into integration, by using newly assembled school-level data for a large sample of southern districts, and by

focusing specically on the South in the post-CRA period, the historical context with the most intensive

desegregation activity and highest baseline levels of black teacher employment. The current paper is also

novel in investigating the secondary impacts of black teacher employment reductions, such as what happened

to African American teachers displaced during integration, and how school districts compensated for their

decision to reduce black teacher employment levels.




3      Theoretical Framework
Before turning to estimation, I develop a simple theoretical model of school district's race-specic teacher

employment decisions to help guide the empirical analysis. Two key features of the local political economy

during the study period are relevant for modeling these employment choices.


First, although the Voting Rights Act of 1965 greatly reduced barriers to African American political participa-

tion and strongly aected state education nancing (Cascio & Washington 2013), actual black representation

on elected school boards was vanishingly small well into the 1970s (Joint Center for Political Studies 1977).

Given this, I model black teacher employment choices from the perspective of white school boards and

administrators with segregationist preferences.


Second, many dimensions of school district decision making in this period were heavily restricted by the

legal environment. Most importantly, within ve years of the CRA's implementation, districts were unable

to maintain student segregation, or at a minimum faced exceedingly high costs for doing so.                               Conversely,

prior to Brown, state laws actually required school districts to maintain complete student segregation. Given

this, I consider the student desegregation level as being dictated to school districts, rather than itself being

a choice variable as in the theoretical models from Margo (1990) or Cascio et al. (2010). Additionally, as

early as the 1950s successful litigation campaigns by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund had largely eliminated

the ability of school districts to vary class sizes or teacher salaries by race (Card & Krueger 1992a, 1992b;

Carruthers & Wanamaker 2017), and I therefore treat these factors as parameters rather than choice variable

as well.
           5


Given these considerations, I model school districts as choosing the racial composition of their teacher labor

force in order to minimize a loss-function that is increasing in cross-racial pairings of students and teachers.
                                                                                                                                      6

    5 While    teacher pay and class sizes were close to parity by 1964, it is important to note that this was not fully and universally
true. For instance Reber (2010) nds a signicant increase in per-pupil funding between 1965 and 1970 in the schools attended
by black students in Louisiana, while Card & Krueger (1992a) nd that class sizes in segregated black schools were still
approximately 10% larger than those in segregated white schools as of 1964.
    6 Districts   can equivalently be viewed as maximizing a utility function that is increasing in own-race teacher pairings.




                                                                     7
This approach reects an assumption that in the absence of full student segregation, segregationist school

ocials still preferred for white students to be taught by white teachers, and for black students to be taught

by black teachers.      Letting    ExposureW
                                           B        denote the fraction of a district's student-teacher pairings that

consist of white students and black teachers, and similarly letting                 ExposureB
                                                                                            W      denote the rate of pairing

black students with white teachers, districts minimize the following:




                                         Loss = 1 ExposureW             B
                                                          B + 2 ExposureW .                                                    (1)



Note that while districts are assumed to have a distaste for all cross-racial exposures, this function allows

districts to place dierent weight on avoiding exposure of white students to black teachers than on avoiding

exposure of black students to white teachers. In practice it is highly likely that the former typically took

precedent, so that for most districts       1 > 2 .

Under full student segregation, cross-racial student-teacher pairings would only need to occur to the extent

that there were deviations between the racial compositions of teachers and students: If the share of white

students was greater than the share of white teachers, then the excess white students would need to be

assigned to black teachers, and conversely if the share of black students was greater than the share of black

teachers. Therefore, under full student segregation, school districts could minimize Equation 1 (at a value

of zero) simply by setting black and white teacher shares equal to black and white student shares. Such a

solution conforms closely to observed pre-integration empirical patterns: Among the districts analyzed in

this paper, the simple correlation between black student share and black teacher share in 1964 was .988.


In contrast, under the type of full student integration that prevailed by the early 1970s, cross-racial exposures

would depend on the overall racial composition of students and teachers, rather than being fully avoidable

by eliminating deviations between the racial compositions of students and teachers.                        In particular, let       
and       respectively denote the share of a school district's student body that is white and black, and let W

and B respectively denote the share of a school district's teaching sta that is white and black. With fully

integrated students, the fraction of student-teacher pairings consisting of a white student and a black teacher
              W
(ExposureB ) is simply     B , while the fraction of student-teacher pairings consisting of a                black student and

a white teacher
                             B                  7
                    (ExposureW ) is simply W . In this case Equation 1 can be written as




                                                   Loss = 1 (B ) + 2 (W ).                                                     (2)



Districts choose W and B to minimize this function, constrained by the identity that                       W +B = 1      (and by

the non-negativity of W and B ). Substituting             W = (1 - B )     into this function and reducing produces:




                                                   Loss = B (1  - 2  ) + K                                                     (3)



where     K = 2 .   In this equation the marginal eect of a unit increase in a district's black teacher share (B )

is given by the expression in parentheses. The rst term in the parentheses indicates that when a school

district increases their black teacher share by one unit, their loss function increases by an amount equal to

  7 For   example consider a district where both the student body and teacher labor force are 50% black and 50% white.              If
students and teachers are matched without regard to race,        .5 × .5 = 25%   of student-teacher pairings will consist of white
students and black teachers, and   .5 × .5 = 25%   of student-teacher pairings will consist of black students and white teachers.




                                                                  8
the product of their white student share ( ) and the weight that the district places on avoiding such pairings

(1 ). The second term in the parentheses indicates that a district's loss function will also fall by an amount

equal to the product of their black student share           ( )   and the weight that the district places on avoiding

pairings of black students and white teachers (2 ).


Since the expression      1  - 2      consists only of parameters that are not dependent on black teacher employ-

ment levels, it has a xed value for each district, and this value leads districts to adopt one of two possible

corner solutions: If 1  > 2  the loss function is minimized at B = 0 and the district employs no black
teachers, while if 1  < 2  then the loss function is minimized at B = 1 and the district employs only black

teachers. Given that the white elected school boards in the studied context likely placed a greater weight on

avoiding exposure of white students to black teachers than vice-versa (1             > 2 ), and that African    American

students were the minority in approximately 80% of the studied             districts ( >  ), it seems likely    that for a

large majority of the studied districts          1  > 2    and the preferred level of black teacher employment after

desegregation was zero.


In summary, a simple theoretical framework predicts that most school districts would have set the black

teacher employment share approximately equal to the black student share prior to integration, and then

reduced black teacher shares as close to zero as possible after student integration. These predicted reductions

in black teacher employment are generally consistent with the main empirical ndings presented below,

although in practice districts rarely reduced their black teacher employment level all the way to zero. This

likely reects additional constraints not included in this simple theoretical framework such as the need to

comply with HEW desegregation guidelines and with Title VII of the CRA, which prohibited race-based

employment discrimination, or simply the practical short-term need to sta schools at some minimum level.


Secondary predictions of the model are that the incentive to reduce black teacher employment levels after

integration was weaker in districts with larger black student shares, since in such districts employing an

additional black teacher under integration led to a relatively small increase in the number of white students

with black teachers (and a relatively large increase in the number of black students with black teachers),

as well as in districts with a relatively low aversion to pairing white students and black teachers.                 These

predictions are broadly consistent with heterogeneous treatment eect estimates presented in Section 5.4.




4      Data
I draw on multiple archival sources to assemble a data set with information on student desegregation levels

and race-specic teacher employment levels for a panel of southern school districts in the 1960s and early

1970s.    This section provides an overview of the utilized data, with additional details reported in Online

Appendix A.


For the 1968, 1970 and 1972 school years I utilize surveys conducted by the US Oce of Civil Rights (OCR).
                                                                                                                          8

The OCR surveys were part of the federal government's eorts to monitor compliance with the CRA, and

collected school-level counts of students and teachers, disaggregated by race. The OCR sample for the 1968,

1970 and 1972 school years was quite comprehensive, and included approximately 75,000 individual schools

    8 These   surveys were generously converted from the original binary les and made publicly available by Ben Denckla and
Sarah Reber of UCLA, who are gratefully acknowledged. Note that throughout the paper school years refer to the calendar
year in which an academic year began, so that for instance the 1968 school year refers to the academic year beginning in the
fall of 1968 and ending in the spring of 1969.




                                                              9
located in 8,000 school districts nationwide.            All school districts with enrollment greater than 3,000 were

included in the sample, and districts with enrollment between 300 and 3,000 were subject to probability

sampling proportionate to their enrollment totals. Additionally, school districts of special interest to the

OCR were included irrespective of size, typically those with histories of compliance failure, which in practice

meant that a large majority of southern school districts were included. Once a school district was selected,

all of the schools within the district were surveyed.

The main shortcoming of the OCR surveys is that no data collection occurred prior to the 1968 school year,

when the southern student desegregation process was well underway.
                                                                                      9 I therefore draw on two additional

data sources to extend the series back to the beginning of the desegregation process.

First, for the 1967 school year, I have transcribed information contained in a print publication of the National

Center for Education Statistics titled Directory, Public Schools in Large Districts with Enrollment and

Sta, by Race, Fall 1967 (NCES 1967). The foreword of this directory indicates that it was a single-time

publication, developed to meet a specic, timely need for information and was conducted for administrative

purposes rather than for research, [but] the statistics were deemed to be of sucient general interest for

publication.      The directory contains school-level information on the number of students and instructional

sta, disaggregated by race, for a sample of school districts very similar to the districts contained in the

OCR surveys from 1968, 1970 and 1972.

Second, for the 1964 school year, which was the last school year before large scale student desegregation

occurred, I have transcribed data from print copies of annual reports issued by state departments of education

and state superintendent's oces, which contain race-specic counts of students and teachers at the district

level.
      10 The required information was contained in reports issued by eight states from the former Confederacy,

specically Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia.

Districts employing no black teachers in 1964 are excluded, as are districts not observed in any of the ve

available years.      After applying these restrictions the working data set is a balanced panel of 781 school

districts from eight states.        As a robustness check I demonstrate that the results are similar when using

a larger sample of 1,263 school districts from all eleven states of the former Confederacy (which includes

the states listed above plus Arkansas, Florida, and North Carolina), but with the data series necessarily

restricted to the 1967, 1968, 1970 and 1972 school years.

One issue with the state reports used for the 1964 school year is that race-specic enrollment totals are

reported at the district level, rather than the school level, so that the number of black students attending

school with whites is not directly observable.             For 1964 I instead assign each district the level of student

desegregation which occurred at the state level using transcriptions of a print publication titled A Statistical

Summary, State by State, of School Segregation Desegregation in the Southern and Border Area from 1954

to the Present, 14th Revision (Southern Education Reporting Service 1964).
                                                                                              11 These imputations will have

   9 In   addition to the utilized 1968, 1970 and 1972 waves, OCR surveys were conducted in 1969, 1971, 1973, 1974, 1976,
1978 and 1980, but in most of these years the number of surveyed districts was much smaller than the 1968, 1970 and 1972
samples, and no surveys were elded prior to 1968. Additionally, data collection on teachers was not included after 1972 because
responsibility for collecting this information was transferred to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
  10 The   utilized publications are Alabama Department of Education (1964); Georgia State Department of Education (1964);
State Department of Education of Louisiana (1965); Mississippi State Department of Education (1963); South Carolina State
Department of Education (1964); Tennessee Department of Education (1963); Virginia State Board of Education (1965); and
Texas Education Agency (1965).       For some states 1964 data was not available because only biennial reports were issued or
because race-specic reporting was discontinued in the lead-up to CRA implementation, and in these cases I use the latest
available data prior to 1964, which in practice came from either 1962 or 1963. See Online Appendix A.
  11 While   later revisions of this publication reported district level desegregation data, the smallest geographic units available
in 1964 are states.




                                                                 10
minimal practical impact, however, because virtually no student desegregation had taken place at this point

within the former Confederacy, with less than 3% of black students attending desegregated schools during

the 1964 school year.


I use the described data sources to construct district-year level measures of student desegregation and black

teacher employment. Specically I measure a district's student desegregation level as the percentage of its

black students attending a school where 5% or more of the enrolled students were white, and measure a

district's black teacher employment level using both the share of all teachers in the district that were black

and the natural log of the number of black teachers in the district.
                                                                               12 I also calculate, for each district-year,

the total number of students (of all races), the fraction of students who are black, and the total number of

teachers (of all races), and use these measures as control variables or weights in some specications.


Basic descriptive statistics are presented in Table A1 of Online Appendix A, which shows that the average

district in the working sample employed 301 teachers (75 of whom were black) and enrolled 7,006 students

(2,115 of whom were black).          Table A1 also reports the standard deviation, 10th and 90th percentiles of

these variables, which indicate a large amount of variation around the reported means, reecting the fact

that there are a relatively small number of both very large districts (typically in urban areas) and very small

districts (typically in rural areas). The share of observations from each state are also reported, and show

that Texas has the largest share of districts in the working sample at 32.1%, with Georgia, Virginia and

Alabama each representing more than 10% of the districts in the sample. Descriptive statistics for the larger

11-state sample (observed beginning in 1967) are also reported, and the districts in this expanded sample

have basic characteristics very similar to those observed in the 8-state sample.


Figures 1 and 2 present descriptive evidence on the relationship between student desegregation and black

teacher employment in the working sample.


Figure 1 plots the mean student desegregation level and the mean share of teachers who were black for the

studied districts in each year. The gure documents a clear, negative time-series association between student

desegregation and the black teacher employment share during the study period. Specically, the share of

black students attending desegregated schools in the average district increases from less than 5% in 1964 to

just under 40% in 1968, then accelerates after 1968 and reaches approximately 90% by 1970 and is stable

thereafter. Trends in the share of black teachers in the studied districts follow a very similar but inverse

pattern, falling from 30.6% in 1964, to 28.2% in 1968, to 24.2% in 1972, a total decline of 6.4 percentage

points or 21%.


Figure 2 examines cross sectional associations between student integration and black teacher employment for

the 1964 school year (before substantive desegregation began), the 1968 school year (when desegregation was

approximately half complete) and the 1972 school year (when the vast majority of southern black students

attended desegregated schools). The gures indicate that at all stages of the desegregation process, there

was a strong cross-sectional association between student desegregation and black teacher employment shares,

with more integrated districts employing a smaller share of black teachers. This was the case even in 1964,

when only token desegregation had occurred, with districts from states engaging in higher levels of token

integration (e.g. 7.2% in Texas rather than .02% in Alabama) also having a lower fraction of black teachers.

  12 The   use of a 5% threshold prevents large numbers of black students from being classied as attending desegregated schools
in cases where a very small number of white students entered a predominantly black school, although desegregation patterns
of this kind were exceedingly rare in practice. In Online Appendix B I show that the results are not sensitive to alternative
student integration measures, such as the dissimilarity or exposure index.




                                                               11
In the next section, I utilize dierence-in-dierence specications to study the extent to which the descriptive

evidence of negative black teacher employment impacts from student desegregation displayed in Figures 1

and 2 reect a systematic causal relationship.




5       Empirical Strategy and Main Findings

5.1         Empirical Strategy


The paper's primary research question is how the implementation of student desegregation impacted the

employment of black teachers. Figures 1 and 2 provided suggestive evidence of negative employment impacts

by examining aggregate trends over time (Figure 1) and cross-sectional associations within particular years

(Figure 2). However, standard omitted-variable and selection bias concerns prevent these relationships from

having credible causal interpretations.


In particular, the nature of student desegregation varied systematically with numerous school district char-

acteristics (Cascio et al. 2008), some of which may be unobserved, and school districts exercised substantial

local autonomy in deciding how quickly and completely they implemented the student desegregation required

by the CRA. These factors may cause districts with dierent student desegregation levels or trends to also

dier with respect to unobserved characteristics that aected teacher employment practices, for instance the

prejudicial attitudes of a school district's parents and administrators, the intensity of real or anticipated

federal scrutiny, or the levels of state and local tax revenues and other school funding sources, among other

possible confounders. These potential issues are exacerbated by the rapidly evolving social and economic

policy environment of the study period.


To help address these issues and isolate the impact of student desegregation on the employment of black

teachers, I estimate regression models of the following form:




                       ln(BlackT eachersdy ) = StudentDesegregationdy + d + y + Xdy  + dy                                    (4)



where  ln(BlackT eachersdy ) denotes the natural log of the total number of black teachers in school district
d   and yeary ; StudentDesegregationdy denotes the fraction of black students in district d and year y who
are attending desegregated schools; d and y are district and year xed-eects, respectively; and Xdy is a

vector of time-varying school district level characteristics.
                                                             13 The primary coecient of interest is  , which

estimates the conditional percent change in the size of a school district's black teacher labor force that is

associated with a school district's student body going from fully segregated to fully integrated.


Equation 4 is a dierence-in-dierence specication with a continuous treatment variable, where the included

district xed-eects account for unobserved time invariant district characteristics and the included year xed-

eects account for unobserved determinants of black teacher employment aecting all school districts in a

given year.        The main identifying assumption for this model is the so-called common trends assumption,

which in the current context requires that school districts executing dierent student desegregation paths

    13 To   preserve district observations that employed a positive number of black teachers in 1964 but zero black teachers in a
subsequent sample year, the dependent variable is transformed as       ln(BlackT eachersdy + 1).   This transformation preserves
observations from 14 districts, and in Online Appendix B I show that the results are virtually identical if these districts are
instead excluded.




                                                                 12
over the study period would have had similar black teacher employment levels in the absence of these policy

dierences. Below I conduct several tests that probe the accuracy of this identifying assumption, and the

results generally support its validity.




5.2        Baseline Results


My preferred estimate of Equation 4 is reported in Column 1 of Table 1. This baseline specication does

not include any controls in the        Xdy   vector and gives equal weight to each school district. Standard errors

are clustered at the district level and reported in parentheses.


The estimated coecient for the student desegregation variable in the model reported in Column 1 is -.382,

which after exponentiation indicates that a school district going from fully segregated to fully integrated

reduced black teacher employment by 31.8%, conditional on time-invariant district characteristics and year-

specic determinants of black teacher employment. This estimate is highly statistically signicant (P<.01).


In interpreting the results in Column 1 of Table 1, it is important to note that the estimated 31.8% reduction

in black teacher employment is relative to a counterfactual environment in which student desegregation did

not take place, and does not directly imply that 31.8% of existing southern black teachers lost their positions.

While school districts did face substantially less scrutiny of their employment practices than their student

integration practices, in most cases they were still constrained in their ability to simply re the totality

of their black teachers immediately after student integration, for instance due to Title VII requirements,

HEW compliance guidelines, and basic minimum stang needs. Furthermore, below I document that the

total number of teachers (of all races) employed by southern districts declined with student integration,

both because of white-ight induced student enrollment declines and because of operational eciencies

associated with administering a single unied school system, for instance operating fewer school buildings

and having higher aggregate student-teacher ratios.              These factors would reduce the need for districts to

directly terminate existing black teachers.


Historical accounts also indicate that while outright rings did occur, less overt mechanisms of reducing

black teacher employment were common as well. Changing the racial composition of new hires appears to

have been at least as important as outright dismissals, with a 1970 report prepared by the Race Relations

Information Center noting that it is in the [non] hiring of black teachers - rather than the ring - that the

biggest catastrophe for blacks probably lies (Hooker 1970).                Accounts of policies designed to hasten the

departure of black teachers after integration are common as well. For instance Fultz (2004) notes that many

black teachers faced various forms of demotion after integration, such as downgrading veteran black teachers

to substitute teacher or subordinate co-teacher positions and re-assigning black high school teachers to

the elementary level. These demotions led some black teachers to resign, while others protested and were

dismissed for insubordination, and their positions could then be lled by white teachers or simply left vacant

as operations were scaled down. The use of the National Teacher Examination expanded in southern states

in this period as well, and was sometimes used as a pretext for dismissing or not hiring black teachers. This

occurred to a sucient extent that in the early 1970s courts ruled against school districts in Louisiana and

Mississippi that had dismissed black teachers on the basis of NTE scores.
                                                                                       14

  14 The   relevant cases were Carter v School Board of West Feliciana Parish and Baker v. Columbus. See discussion in Ethridge
(1979).




                                                               13
The specication in Column 1 did not include any time varying district characteristics as covariates. Col-

umn 2 of Table 1 reports results where the         Xdy   vector contains a variable measuring the log of total teacher

employment (of all races) in each district year. This covariate was excluded from the baseline specication

because it is itself likely to have been aected by the student desegregation process via the discussed mech-

anisms of reduced enrollments and improved operational eciency. As a result, controlling for total teacher

employment arguably abstracts away from important aspects of how the desegregation process aected black

teacher employment, leading me to prefer the more parsimonious specication reported in Column 1. These

points notwithstanding, the extent to which student desegregation reduced black teacher employment above

and beyond any general teacher disemployment eects is of potential interest as well, and Column 2 shows

that the estimated coecient on the student desegregation variable declines only slightly to -.346 after the

inclusion of the total teacher employment control. This indicates that the baseline estimate in Column 1

did not simply reect race-neutral reductions in total teacher employment during desegregation, but rather

that a highly disproportionate share of the teaching positions eliminated during desegregation were held by

black teachers.
                 15


Another potentially important modeling choice in the baseline specication was that it gave each school

district in the sample equal weight. This choice reected the fact that each district is a distinct entity making

decisions about its levels of student desegregation and black teacher employment, such that unweighted

results estimate how the average school district responded to student desegregation, and follows previous

work in this area (e.g. Cascio et al. 2010). However, since school districts are of highly variable sizes and

racial compositions, it is arguably preferable to give greater weight to districts with a larger potential impact

on total black teacher employment. Column 3 of Table 1 reports results that weight districts by the number

of black teachers they employed in 1964, prior to substantive student desegregation, and when these weights

are applied the estimated eect of full student integration is reduced to .317 log points, or 27.2%, which is

moderately smaller than the baseline estimate of 31.8%. While both the unweighted and weighted estimates

are of interest, the baseline unweighted estimates are a better measure of how the typical school district

responded to integration, while the weighted estimates are preferable if the objective is to assess the eect

of integration on total black teacher employment. With respect to the latter, the studied districts employed

56,364 black teachers in the 1964 school year, so that a 27.2% reduction represents the elimination of over

15,000 black held teaching positions.          Since the current sample includes only eight of the eleven states in

which intensive student desegregation activity was occurring in this period, and has less than full coverage

within these eight states, this is a lower bound for the actual number of eliminated black held teaching

positions in the region.


A series of additional robustness and specication checks are presented in Online Appendix B. These include

specications that use alternative measures of black teacher employment; specications that use a Negative

Binomial estimator to account for the over-dispersion of black teacher counts; specications that utilize the

eleven state sample available from 1968-1972 rather than the eight state sample from 1964-1972; specications

that exclude districts that may have undergone a split or a merger during the study period and specications

that aggregate to the county level to account for possible district reorganizations; and specications that

use dissimilarity and exposure indices to measure student desegregation levels. In all cases the qualitative

ndings from the preferred specication in Column 1 of Table 1 are unchanged.

 15 A   similar conclusion can be drawn from the estimated coecient on the total teacher employment variable reported in
Column 2, which indicates that within the studied context a 1% increase in total teacher employment was associated with just
a .77% increase in black teacher employment.




                                                             14
5.3       The Validity of the Identifying Assumptions


As noted, the main identifying assumption of the reported analyses is the so-called common trends assump-

tion, which in the current context holds that school districts with dierent student desegregation paths would

have had similar black teacher employment levels in the absence of these dierences in student integration.

Columns 4-6 of Table 1 present the results of several tests that evaluate the validity of this key assumption.


One method of allowing for limited departures from the common trends assumption is to add interactions

between a linear year variable and school district indicators to the baseline specications.                         The inclusion

of these interactions allows any underlying trends in black teacher employment to vary linearly across each

individual school district. This exibility comes at the cost reduced precision, since much of the variation in

student desegregation within school districts will be absorbed by the linear trends.


The results of a specication with district specic linear time trends are reported in Column 4 of Table 1, and

are very similar to the baseline results in Column 1, with complete student integration estimated to reduce

black teacher employment by .409 log points. As expected, the standard errors in this specications increase

substantially, but the estimate remains statistically signicant at the 1% level. These results suggest that

the main ndings in Column 1 are not an artifact of dierent underlying trends in black teacher employment

practices for school districts implementing dierent student desegregation policies.
                                                                                                      16


The validity of the identifying assumptions can also be tested by examining the extent to which the timing of

changes in black teacher employment levels corresponded to changes in student desegregation. In particular,

if reductions in the employment of black teachers are a causal eect of student desegregation, then current

period levels of black teacher employment are likely to be (conditionally) independent of student desegrega-

tion occurring in future periods. For instance black teacher employment levels during the 1968 school year

are expected to be inuenced by student desegregation levels during the 1968 school year, and perhaps more

weakly by student desegregation levels in earlier school years, but not by student desegregation levels in

school years after 1968. While it is plausible that some districts reduced black teacher employment in antic-

ipation of more stringent desegregation requirements, it would have been dicult for a particular district to

precisely determine the degree of scrutiny it may face and in which specic year that scrutiny may occur. As

a result, anticipatory black teacher employment reductions, to the extent that they existed, would likely not

be strongly correlated with actual future desegregation activity. Given this, any substantively or statistically

signicant relationships between black teacher employment outcomes and leading values of student deseg-

regation would raise concerns that the estimates reported in Column 1 reect unobserved characteristics of

desegregating districts rather than student integration itself.


Column 5 of Table 1 reports the results of a model that contains two leading values of the student deseg-

regation variable in addition to its contemporaneous value. Note that the inclusion of each leading value

eliminates one year of data, so that the model in Column 5 excludes the teacher employment data from 1970

and 1972, with a corresponding reduction in sample size.
                                                                         17 The estimated eect of the contemporaneous

  16 A   limitation of district specic linear time trends is that any underlying district trends are only allowed to vary in a linear
fashion, which is a restrictive assumption in a context of highly discontinuous change such as the Civil Rights era South. An
alternative approach is to include state-year interactions, which allows for geographically specic and non-linear time eects,
but only at a state (rather than school district) level of aggregation. When state-year interactions are added to the baseline
specication (not shown), the coecient on the student desegregation variable is virtually unchanged at -.40, with a standard
error of .036.
  17 Also   note that given the data structure, the number of actual calendar years contained in a two period lead varies.
Specically, the model in Column 5 estimates how black teacher employment in 1964 is inuenced by student desegregation in
1967 and 1968; how black teacher employment in 1967 is inuenced by student desegregation in 1968 and 1970; and how black




                                                                  15
student desegregation variable remains negative and statistically signicant, while the coecients on the

leading values are small and statistically insignicant. (The increased magnitude of the contemporaneous

desegregation coecient in Column 5 is due to the dierent composition of the sample, and when a speci-

cation with only contemporaneous eects is estimated using the same sample as Column 5 the coecient

on student desegregation is -.633). This lack of conditional associations between current black teacher em-

ployment levels and future levels of student desegregation suggests that the baseline results in Column 1

reect causal relationships rather than the eects of unobserved district characteristics. These ndings also

suggest that any anticipatory reductions in black teacher employment were not strongly correlated with

the timing of future desegregation in particular districts, although to the extent to which there were any

general anticipatory reductions in black teacher employment prior to the actual implementation of student

desegregation, the baseline results underestimate the eect of integration on black teacher employment.
                                                                                                                           18


Additional threats to identication come from the fact that school desegregation took place within a rapidly

changing policy environment, most notably the introduction of War on Poverty and Great Society programs

such as Medicare, Medicaid, Head Start, and the Food Stamp program, many of which were rolled out in

1964 or 1965. This raises the potential concern that the eects of student desegregation on black teacher

employment reported above may partially reect these other policy changes rather than school integration

itself. However, for concurrent policies to confound the impacts of school desegregation, the timing of their

implementation would need to corresponded with the timing of desegregation within school districts, and the

other policies would also need to have a negative impact on the employment of black teachers specically,

both of which seem unlikely for the listed policy changes.
                                                                    19


The concurrent policy change which appears to have the most potential to confound the estimated eects

of school desegregation is Title I of the 1965 Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), which

allocated approximately $7 billion of new federal funds (in current dollars) for distribution to local school

districts. The funding formula used to allocate Title I funds sent more dollars to school districts located in

counties with higher numbers of low income 5-17 year-olds as of the 1960 Census, which in practice favored

more heavily African American districts. Additionally, Title I funds could be denied to school districts not

meeting desegregation requirements, and previous research indicates that districts did indeed change their

desegregation policies in response to these funding incentives (Cascio et al. 2008, 2010).
                                                                                                           20 These features

of Title I funding policy cumulatively led to signicant associations between the desegregation policies of

southern school districts and their levels of Title I funds, raising the possibility that the impacts of student

desegregation identied above actually reect the impacts of federal education funding levels.


One ex-ante reason to be skeptical of this explanation is that because desegregating districts and districts

with higher black enrollment shares typically received more Title I funding, if anything Title I funds would be

expected to have positive eects on black teacher employment, as additional funding owed to districts with

teacher employment in 1968 is inuenced by student desegregation in 1970 and 1972.
  18 Models   that include two lagged values of the student desegregation variable (not shown) nd that the contemporaneous
eect of student desegregation was -.141 log points (P<.01), the eect of student desegregation in the previous period was -.093
log points (P<.01), and that student desegregation two periods prior has a statistically insignicant point estimates of .026 log
points. Because a one period lag in the current data structure in many cases represents two school years, these results suggest
that the full eect of student desegregation on black teacher employment took 1-4 years to fully materialize.
  19 The   estimated eects of school desegregation may also be confounded by other provisions of the CRA, most importantly
Title VII, which prohibited racial discrimination in employment settings, and changing regional migration patterns in this
period are also a potential issue. These possibilities are discussed and analyzed further in Section 6 below.
  20 The   withholding of Title I funds for noncompliance with the CRA's school desegregation provisions ended when President
Nixon took oce in 1969, but by this time a great deal of desegregation activity had already taken place and federal courts had
established more vigorous and enforceable desegregation requirements (Cascio et al. 2013).




                                                               16
more progressive desegregation policies and higher black enrollment shares. This point notwithstanding, it

is possible to evaluate the potential role of Title I more directly by including controls for district nancing

levels from various sources, with the required data collected and generously made available by Cascio et al.

(2013) for a subset of the districts and years studied here.
                                                                       21 Column 6 of Table 1 uses this school nance data

to estimate a model that includes controls for total district revenue from federal, state and local sources, and

the estimates are almost identical to the baseline estimates in Column 1.
                                                                                         22 This suggests that the estimated

impacts of student desegregation from Column 1 were not an artifact of the introduction of Title I.




5.4        Heterogeneity


Additional insight into the nature of black teacher displacement due to integration can be gained from

examining the extent to which this displacement varied across dierent types of school districts.


The theoretical framework developed above suggested that one potentially important dimension of hetero-

geneity is a district's black student share, since in school districts with larger white student shares there is

a greater marginal eect of black teacher employment on the exposure of white students to black teachers.

Figure 3A reports the results of estimating the model reported in Column 1 of Table 1 separately within each

quintile of the initial (1964) share of black students (with the absolute values of the student desegregation

variable plotted). The gure indicates that the relative level of displacement was indeed weaker in districts

with a relatively large share of black students prior to desegregation. For instance in districts from the rst

quintile of 1964 black student share distribution, where on average just 6% of the students were black prior

to integration, desegregation resulted in a .48 log point reduction in black teacher employment. In contrast,

for districts in the fth quintile of 1964 black student share, where on average 64% of the students were black

prior to integration, the analogous reduction was approximately .19 log points.
                                                                                                 23


Another potentially relevant dimension of heterogeneity is a district's overall size. For instance very large

urban districts that were already operating both black and white systems at very large scales (e.g. Atlanta,

Dallas, Memphis or New Orleans) may have experienced minimal gains in labor eciency from transitioning

to a single integrated system, whereas for smaller rural districts integration may have substantially reduced

the total number of necessary teachers, with a disproportionate share of any layos falling on black teachers.

Diering racial attitudes among parents and elected school boards in larger, more urban districts could have

plausibly led to lower levels of aversion to cross-racial student teacher pairings as well (reected in the                        
terms in the model above), implying smaller reductions in black teacher employment after integration, and

large urban districts may have also been under greater federal and judicial scrutiny.


Figure 3B reports the results of estimating the baseline specication separately for each quintile of the

pre-integration total student distribution. The gure indicates that within the smallest quintile of districts,

enrolling an average of 970 students in 1964, complete student desegregation resulted in a .48 log point

reduction in black teacher employment. The magnitude of black teacher disemployment falls as progressively

  21 Cascio   et al. (2013) entered these data by hand from print reports by state departments of education. The most important
dierences in the utilized samples of school districts is that the school nance data is not available for Texas or for the 1972
school year.
  22 Measures    of state and local revenue are included in addition to federal revenues because state and local funding levels may
have changed in response to increased federal revenue under Title I.
  23 In   practice, district level black student shares were very closely correlated with black teacher shares prior to integration.
Given this, an alternative but not mutually exclusive interpretation of the results in Figure 3A is that districts with relatively
large numbers of black teachers prior to integration found it logistically or politically dicult to ll the necessary teaching
positions without absorbing substantial numbers of existing black teachers into the integrated schools.




                                                                  17
larger districts are analyzed, and for districts in the top quintile of total enrollment, enrolling over 21,000

students on average in 1964, black teacher employment was reduced by .27 log points due to integration.




6     Secondary Impacts of Black Teacher Displacement
The large scale of the reductions in black teacher employment documented above imply that the impacts of

displacement were unlikely to be conned specically to southern African American teachers, but instead en-

gendered a signicant overall restructuring of the teacher labor market in the South, with potential spillovers

into other labor markets and regions as well.


From the perspective of school districts, hiring white additional teachers to compensate for reduced black

teacher employment was one possibility, but the combination of eciencies from operating a unied school

system and white-ight induced enrollment reductions also may have allowed districts to instead simply

reduce their overall teacher employment levels. Conversely, from the perspective of high-skill southern black

workers, the elimination of large numbers of black-held teaching positions presumably led some individuals

to enter other elds, and the employment outcomes of these individuals have important implications both

for the welfare of displaced teachers and the extent to which displacement generated spillovers into other

labor markets and regions.


In this section I use the administrative data from the baseline models, as well as data from the Decennial

Censuses, to quantify the broader impacts of the documented elimination of black held teaching positions in

the South. I rst examine changes in school district operations and stang practices during the desegregation

process, then turn to the question of what alternative employment outcomes oset the reduction in teaching

employment among southern African Americans, and nally provide evidence on the earnings impacts of

reduced teaching employment among high-skill southern blacks.




6.1    Changes in District Operations and White Teacher Recruitment


To better understand how districts modied their operations after student desegregation, Table 2 reports the

results of estimating models that are similar to the preferred specication in Column 1 of Table 1, but that

replace black teacher employment levels with various other district characteristics as the dependent variable.

The most important nding is reported in Column 1, which uses the log of total teacher employment (of all

races) as the dependent variable and nds that student integration caused a statistically signicant reduction

in total teacher employment of 4.7%.


A district's total teacher employment level is mechanically equal to the product of its total student en-

rollments and its student-teacher ratio.   Columns 2 and 3 of Table 2 report results that use the log of

total student enrollment and the log of the student-teacher ratio as dependent variables, and nd that both

margins were likely important in accounting for the overall reduction in teacher employment. The results

in Column 2 indicate that going from fully segregated to fully integrated education reduced total student

enrollment by 3%. Notably, this overall enrollment decline is driven at least in part by relative reductions in

white enrollment, with the share of students in the studied districts who were white falling from 71.4% to

68.7% between 1964 and 1972, which is consistent with previous work (e.g. Reber 2005; Baum-Snlow & Lutz




                                                      18
2011). The results in Column 3 indicate that desegregation was also associated with a 1.8% increase in the

student-teacher ratio, although this estimate is not statistically signicant at conventional levels (P=.142).


The nal column of Table 2 uses the log of total operational school buildings as the dependent variable, since

the closure of previously all-black school buildings is commonly reported in historical accounts, although I

caution that this variable is only available from 1967 onward, with a corresponding sample size reduction.

The results indicate that a statistically signicant 17.4% reduction in the total number of schools occurred

during integration, and the resulting operational eciencies may partially explain the documented changes

in student-teacher ratios and total teacher employment.


Given the reductions in overall teacher labor demand documented in Column 1 of Table 2, a signicant

portion of the eliminated teaching positions previously held by African Americans could have simply gone

unlled. However, in many cases the black teacher employment reductions documented above would have

still necessitated the recruitment of substantial numbers of new white teachers. Specically, as of 1964 the

average district in the working sample had a teacher labor force that was 31% black, so that the baseline

estimate of a 32% reduction in black teacher employment would have reduced total teacher employment by

.31 × .32  10%.        The fact that the actual reduction in total teacher employment from Table 2 was only

4.7% implies that some additional hiring of white teachers occurred, and the overall impacts of integration-

induced black teacher employment reductions therefore include a corresponding increase in white teacher

recruitment.      One important question is what the characteristics of these new white teachers were, for

instance their qualications, age and gender composition, and region of origin.


Table 3 explores this issue by reporting mean changes in these characteristics among southern white teachers

between the 1960 and 1970 Decennial Censuses (Columns 1-3) and among southern white professionals who

were not teachers over the same period (Columns 4-6).
                                                                24 The nal column of Table 3 reports the change in

each studied characteristic between 1960 and 1970 among southern white teachers relative to other southern

white professionals. Comparing trends across these two groups will help distinguish any changes that were

specic to southern white teachers from broader demographic and labor market trends occurring over this

period. However, changes in the characteristics of southern white professionals are unlikely to fully capture

the counterfactual changes in the characteristics of southern white teachers that would have occurred in the

absence of desegregation, and these comparisons are therefore best interpreted as being primary descriptive


With respect to southern white teachers themselves, Columns 1-3 indicates that the average age of this

population fell from 42.13 in 1960 to 39.39 in 1970, a decrease of 2.74 years, and additionally that in 1970

the average southern white teacher was 2.8 percentage points more likely to be male, 5.8 percentage points

more likely to have been born outside of the South, and had completed .075 more years of education than the

average southern white teacher in 1960. However, Columns 4-6 of Table 3 indicate that these changes in part

reect more general trends occurring among all southern white professionals over this period, particularly the

increases in southern white professionals not born in the region and the increases in educational attainment.


The nal column of Table 3 calculates the change in each characteristic among southern white teachers over

this period relative to other southern white professionals. These estimates indicate that the largest relative

changes in white teacher characteristics occurred with respect to age and gender, with the average southern

white teacher 2.82 years younger (P<.01) and 5.4 percentage points more likely to be a male (P<.01) in

1970 than in 1960. A small and statistically insignicant increase in non-southern birth is observed, as is a

 24 Here   and in the analyses reported below professionals are dened using occupational codes 0-99 of the 1950 Census Bureau
occupational classication system, which indicate Professional and Technical occupations.




                                                              19
statistically signicant but qualitatively modest reduction of .119 years of educational attainment (P<.05).

The substantial relative reduction in the average age of white teachers, in conjunction with modest relative

reductions in their educational attainment, implies that the potential experience of southern white teachers

decreased signicantly between 1960 and 1970 as well.


Overall, the results in Table 3 provide suggestive evidence that southern school districts lled teaching

positions which would have been held by African Americans in the absence of student integration by recruiting

younger and less experienced white teachers, and by recruiting white male teachers.       There is also some

evidence that southern districts may have modestly increased their recruitment of less educated white teachers

and white teachers born outside of the region.




6.2    Employment Outcomes of Displaced Black Teachers


The main estimates from Table 1 are not informative with respect to the subsequent labor market outcomes

of southern blacks who would have been teachers in the absence of desegregation, but this question is critical

for understanding the full impacts of integration-induced displacement, including spillovers into other labor

markets and the welfare of displaced black teachers.


For instance, it is possible that some southern African Americans who would have held teaching positions in

the absence of integration instead readily entered into other types of professional employment in the South.

Indeed, it is plausible that some of the documented black teacher employment reductions were voluntary,

given that the concurrent implementation of Title VII led to general improvements in the employment

opportunities of southern blacks. Alternatively, displaced southern black teachers may have entered non-

professional occupations within the South, may have been forced to migrate out of the region in order to

pursue or continue their teaching careers, or may have become unemployed or withdrawn from the labor

force, and these possibilities have substantially dierent implications for the welfare of displaced teachers

and the broader labor market eects of the documented black teacher employment reductions. Below I use

Decennial Census data and two distinct empirical approaches to better understand what types of labor market

outcomes corresponded to the documented reductions in teaching employment among southern blacks.


Race-Specic Occupational Distributions

While no existing data sets track a large sample of southern black workers before and after school desegre-

gation longitudinally, the bulk of southern desegregation activity occurred between the Decennial Censuses

of 1960 and 1970, which allows me to observe cross-sections of employment outcomes before and after inte-

gration within large racially and regionally diverse samples. My main approach for estimating the outcomes

of displaced southern black teachers simply compares changes in the occupational distribution of high-skill

southern blacks between 1960 and 1970 to changes among high-skill southern whites over the same period.


Specically, I rst draw a sample of non-Hispanic black and white respondents from the 1960 and 1970

Censuses who were (1) born in one of the eleven states of the former Confederacy; (2) had completed at least

one year of post-secondary education and; (3) were from the 1904-1935 birth cohorts, such that they were

ages 25-55 in 1960 and ages 35-65 in 1970. These sample restrictions were chosen to focus on a population

that was likely to have been directly aected by changes in the southern teacher labor market during

desegregation. I next classify each individual into one of six exhaustive and mutually exclusive employment

categories based on their employment status, occupation, and region of residence, with the six categories




                                                       20
chosen to capture to the broad classes of employment outcomes that could have occurred among individuals

who were southern teachers prior to student desegregation or would have entered teaching in the absence of

desegregation. The six utilized categories are (1) southern teachers; (2) southern professionals other than

teachers; (3) southern non-professionals; (4) teachers outside of the South; (5) non-teachers outside of the

South and; (6) unemployed or out of the labor force.


I then analyze which employment categories became more and less common between 1960 and 1970 for

high-skill southern-born blacks relative to high-skill southern-born whites by estimating regressions of the

following form:




      EmploymentCategoryiy = 1 Blacki + 2 Y 1970 + 3 (Blacki × Y 1970) + s + µc + m + e + iy .              (5)




In this specication    EmploymentCategoryiy is an indicator of the employment category of individual i that
occurred in year   y ; Blacki and Y 1970 are respectively indicators of whether individual i was blacks (rather
than white) and whether they were observed in 1970 (rather than 1960); and the remaining terms are xed

eects for state of birth, birth cohort, male, and educational attainment. These covariates are included to

reduce confounding and improve precision, and estimates that exclude all controls are reported in Table

A3 of the Online Appendix and are qualitatively similar to those reported below. The main parameter of

interest in this specication is the coecient on the interaction of the black indicator and the 1970 indicator,

3 ,   which estimates the change in the fraction of African Americans in each employment category occurring

between 1960 and 1970, relative to the change in the same employment category among whites over the same

time period.


While Equation 5 has the structure of a dierence-in-dierence specication, the resulting estimates should

be viewed as primarily descriptive in nature. In particular, a causal interpretation of these estimates would

require the common-trends assumption to hold, which in this case consists of the strong assumption that

changes in the occupations of southern blacks between 1960 and 1970 would have been the same as the changes

in the occupations of southern whites over the same period if not for school desegregation. To the extent

that trends among southern whites do not constitute a valid counterfactual for trends of southern blacks

absent integration, which seems likely, Equation 5 will not recover the causal eect of school desegregation

on high skill southern blacks.


Despite this limitation, it is informative to descriptively observe relative changes in the occupational dis-

tributions of these two populations, and consider the extent to which the observed patterns are consistent

with various possible impacts of student integration on the labor market for high skill southern blacks, and

the results of estimating Equation 5 for each of the utilized employment categories are reported in the top

panel of Table 4. The results in Column 1 of Table 4 indicate that the share of African Americans in the

utilized sample who were teachers within the South declined by 2.8 percentage points between 1960 and

1970, relative to whites. The 1960 prevalence of southern teachers among African Americans in the utilized

sample is 21.4%, so that a 2.8 percentage point reduction represents a decline of   2.8/21.4  13.1%,   which is

broadly consistent with the 27.1% aggregate decline estimated using administrative school district records

with weights applied in Column 3 of Table 1, although somewhat smaller in magnitude. Unlike the analysis

using administrative records, the current approach is also able to observe which employment categories expe-

rienced corresponding relative increases among southern blacks (note that because the utilized employment



                                                       21
outcomes are exhaustive and mutually exclusive, the coecients on the interaction term of interest in Table

4 sum to zero by construction). Estimates for the other employment outcomes are reported in the remaining

columns of Table 4.


Column 2 reports the results of a specication that uses the prevalence of non-teaching professional employ-

ment within the South as the dependent variable. The results provide no evidence that displaced southern

black teachers were readily able to enter other professional occupations within the region, with a statistically

insignicant coecient of negative .011. The models in Columns 3 and 4 respectively use the prevalence of

non -professional employment within the South and the prevalence of teaching employment outside of the

South as dependent variables. The results suggest that displaced southern black teachers transitioned into

these other categories in approximately equal shares. Specically, the relative share of African Americans in

non-professional occupations within the South increased by 1.6 percentage points, and the relative share of

African Americans employed as teachers outside of the South increased by 2.1 percentage points, although

the former eect is not statistically signicant at conventional levels (P=.133).


The increase in southern-born African Americans working as teachers outside of the region is especially

notable given that net black migration into the South was actually positive between 1964 and 1970, reversing

decades of large-scale out-migration (see Wright 2013). The results in Column 4 suggest that regional out-

migration continued among African American teachers between 1960 and 1970, even as it reversed for the

African American population overall.            This nding is also consistent with the black teacher employment

trends outside of the South that are observed in the Oce of Civil Rights surveys used in the baseline

analysis above, with the number of non-southern black teachers in this data increasing from 67,264 (1.7%)

in 1968, to 74,439 (1.8%) in 1970, and to 80,269 (1.9%) in 1972.


The nal two columns of Table 4 Panel A use the prevalence of non-teaching employment outside of the

South and the prevalence of being unemployed or out of the labor force as dependent variables. The results

indicate that there were no statistically signicant changes in the relative share of African Americans within

these employment categories between 1960 and 1970.


A potential concern is that the results in Panel A of Table 4 reect longer-term trends in the employment

outcomes of high-skill southern-born black workers, which would make them uninformative on the possible

eects of student desegregation. To investigate this possibility, Panel B of Table 4 reports results of esti-

mating Equation 5 using data from the 1950 and 1960 Decennial Censuses, rather than the 1960 and 1970

Censuses. The results indicate that there were virtually no relative changes in the prevalences of the studied

occupational outcomes among blacks between 1950 and 1960, with all of the estimated coecients close to

zero and statistically insignicant. These results are reassuring in that they suggest the ndings in Panel A

reect unique circumstances occurring between 1960 and 1970, rather than the continuation of pre-existing

race-specic employment trends, even if school desegregation is not the only major change occurring between

1960 and 1970 in this context.
                                     25


In addition to observing a broader set of employment outcomes, an advantage of the analyzing occupational

distributions by race across the 1960 and 1970 Censuses is that it allows for the estimation of heterogeneous

  25 The   results of estimating Equation 5 using data from the 1970 and 1980 Decennial Censuses are reported in Table A3 of the
Online Appendix, and show that relative reductions in southern teaching employment among blacks continued between 1970
and 1980. One explanation for these continued reductions is that desegregation activity continued into the early 1970s, and
that its negative employment eects often occurred with a lag of several years. Additionally, Table A3 nds evidence of large
scale withdrawals from the labor force and large increases in northern non-teaching employment among blacks between 1970
and 1980, suggesting that the labor market for high-skill southern-born blacks was generally volatile in this period, making it
hard to attach a strong interpretation to continued reductions in southern teaching employment.




                                                               22
eects by demographic characteristics such as gender and age, and the remaining panels of Table 4 re-estimate

Equation 5 separately by gender (Panels C and D) and by whether respondents were older or younger than

age 40 in 1964 (Panels F and G).


The gender specic estimates in the rst column of Panels C and D indicate that there were larger absolute

reductions in teacher employment among southern black females than among southern black males.              In

particular, the results in the rst column of Panel C estimate that the relative share of African American

females who were teachers within the South declined by 3.9 percentage points between 1960 and 1970, while

the analogous decline among African American males was only 2.5 percentage points. However, a test of

the hypothesis that the coecients are equal across genders indicates that this dierence is not statistically

signicant at conventional levels (P=.449), and the baseline prevalence of southern teaching employment in

the utilized sample was higher among black females (28.2%) than among black males (12.9%), so that the

reported percentage point declines translate into a smaller percent reduction for females.


With respect to the other studied employment outcomes, the gender specic results from Columns 3 and

4 indicate that African American females were signicantly less likely than males to enter non-professional

employment within the South (female coecient of -.031 versus male coecient of .045, P-value of dierence

<.01), but were signicantly more likely than males to migrate outside of the South and remain in teaching

(.031 versus .006, P=.027). Speculatively, these dierences could reect more extensive non-teaching labor

market opportunities for African American men in the South, especially after 1964, leading black men to

exit teaching but remain in the region when their positions were eliminated, while African American women

had few desirable non-teaching options in the region and were therefore more likely to migrate.


Column 5 of Panels C and D indicates that there were also substantial gender dierences in the prevalence

of non-work within the studied African American population. Specically, there was a large increase in the

fraction of African American women who were unemployed or out of the labor force between 1960 and 1970,

but a large decrease in the fraction of African American men in this category over the same period, and the

dierence in these coecients by gender is statistically signicant (P<.01). The increase in non-work among

African American females is consistent with a lack of labor force opportunities for high-skill black women

outside of teaching, while the relative decrease among black men could plausibly reect general improvements

in employment opportunities associated with reduced discrimination in blue-collar labor markets over this

period (see Wright 2013).    More generally, declines in labor force participation among southern African

American women and corresponding increases among southern African American men could reect changing

household labor supply choices associated with post-CRA changes in the southern labor market.


Turning to the age specic estimates in Panels E and F, the results in Column 1 indicate that among African

Americans who were ages 40 or below in 1964, the proportion who were teachers in the South declined by

4.0 percentage points between 1960 and 1970, relative to whites, while the analogous decline among African

Americans who were over age 40 in 1964 was 1.8 percentage points. These dierences may reect greater job

security for more senior teachers, but the estimated dierence is again below conventional levels of statistical

signicance (P=.256), warranting a cautious interpretation.


As was the case for gender, there are also statistically and qualitatively signicant dierences by age with

respect to changes in the fraction of individuals working as teachers outside of the South and working in

non-professional occupations within the South. Specically, African Americans who were over age 40 in 1964

were substantially more likely to transition to non-professional occupations within the South between 1960

and 1970 than were younger African Americans (.030 versus -.006, P=.106). Conversely, African Americans



                                                      23
who were ages 40 or below in 1964 were substantially more likely to transition to being a teacher outside

of the South between 1960 and 1970 than were older African Americans (.033 versus .005, P=.011). These

dierences may reect the greater willingness of younger workers to migrate for economic reasons, relative

to older workers with stronger ties to their current community and fewer working years remaining in their

careers.


In summary, the results in Table 4 corroborate the baseline nding that large-scale reductions in black

teacher employment occurred within the South over the course of the integration process, and suggest that

approximately half of the southern blacks who would have held teaching positions in the South instead entered

lower skill occupations within the South, while the other half migrated from the region to work as teachers.

Women and younger teachers appear to have experienced the most severe employment reductions, and were

also more likely to have left the region to continue or pursue teaching, while men and older individuals were

more likely to transition to non-professional occupations within the South.


Direct Employment Transitions

In addition to comparing occupational outcomes over time in the Decennial Censuses, Form 2 of the 1970

Census (also known as the 15% sample) included a question asking respondents their primary occupation ve

years ago. This question allows occupation to be observed for the same individuals in both 1965 and 1970, a

period that incidentally spans much of the student integration activity studied here. It is important to note

that this data can only be used to analyze individuals who transitioned directly out of teaching between 1965

and 1970, and not a more general counterfactual population of individuals who plausibly would have held

teaching positions in the South in the absence of student desegregation. In contrast, the baseline estimates

using district-level data and the overall occupational distribution estimates both included individuals who

were not hired as a result of student integration, rather than only those who were directly red.                        This

point withstanding, the ve year occupation question does allow for the direct observation of employment

transitions between 1965 and 1970 at the individual level, which provides valuable complementary evidence

to the analyses above.


I begin by restricting the 1970 Form 2 Census sample to individuals who either exited the teaching occupation

entirely between 1965 and 1970, or were teachers in both 1965 and 1970 but had also migrated across regions

over this period. I then observe the distribution of 1970 employment outcomes within this sub-population,

disaggregated by race and 1965 region of residence.
                                                               26   Column 1 of Table 5 reports 1970 labor market

outcomes among African Americans who were teachers in the South in 1965, but were no longer teachers

in the South by 1970.        The results indicate that 22% of such individuals had entered other professional

occupations, 26% had entered non-professional occupations, 14% were teachers outside of the South, and

38% were unemployed or out of the labor force.


To quantify the extent to which this distribution of 1970 labor market outcomes was unique, Column 2 of

Table 5 reports the prevalence of the same labor market outcomes among white Census respondents who

were teachers in the South in 1965 but not in 1970, while Column 3 of Table 5 reports outcomes for African

Americans who were teachers outside of the South in 1965 but not in 1970. Finally, Columns 4 and 5 report

the dierences in the prevalence of each outcome between Southern black teachers and these other two

groups, as well as the standard errors of these dierences.

 26 Respondents   were also asked their state of residence ve years ago, which allows me to identify migrants, and for present
purposes I consider individuals to have migrated across regions in they left the South or entered the South between 1965 and
1970.




                                                             24
The most clear and consistent pattern in Table 5 is that African Americans who were southern teachers in

1965 but not in 1970 were much more likely to have migrated across regions and continued teaching than

the other groups. Specically the third row of Table 5 shows that this type of transition was 9.3 percentage

points more common among former southern black teachers than former southern white teachers (P<.01)

and 9.5 percentage points more common among former southern black teachers than among former northern

black teachers (P<.01). For other employment outcomes, the relative prevalences among former southern

black teachers typically depend on the comparison group. For instance relative to northern blacks, former

southern black teachers were much less likely to enter professional occupations (22% versus 33%, P<.05),

and relative to southern whites, former southern black teachers were much less likely to be unemployed

or out of the labor force (38% versus 57%, P<.01). Table 5 does nd reasonably consistent evidence that

former southern black teachers were more likely to enter non-professional occupations than the other two

groups, with a dierence of 6.6 percentage points (P<.05) between southern black and southern whites, and

a statistically insignicant dierence of 2.5 percentage points between southern blacks and non-southern

blacks.


On balance, the results in Table 5 strongly indicate that African Americans who directly exited teaching

positions in the South between 1965 and 1970 were disproportionately likely to transition to being teach-

ers in a new region, and more weakly indicates that transitions to non-professional employment were also

disproportionately common. Both of these ndings are generally consistent with the estimates in Table 4.

Speculatively, the smaller and less precisely estimated increase in non-professional occupations in Table 5

relative to Table 4 may be because southern blacks who directly left teaching were more likely to migrate

and continue teaching, while southern blacks who did not become teachers due to desegregation were more

likely to enter non-professional occupations.


Finally, the ve year occupation question in the 1970 Census can also be used to corroborate the baseline

nding of overall reductions in the number of teaching positions held by southern blacks after desegregation.

In particular, I have estimated regressions using the full 1970 Form 2 sample (not shown) in which the

dependent variable is an indicator of either exiting the teaching profession entirely or moving across regions

while remaining a teacher, and the independent variables are a black indicator, an indicator of southern

residence in 1965, and their interaction. The coecient on the interaction term in this specication is equal

to .0019 (P<.01), which indicates that African Americans residing in the South in 1965 were .19 percentage

points more likely to have had a teaching career disrupted between 1965 and 1970 than other race-by-region

groups. The mean of the dependent variable for groups other than southern blacks in this sample is .0069, so

that the estimated eect of .19 percentage points indicates that southern blacks were    .0019/.0069  27.5%
more likely than other race-by-region groups to have had a teaching career disrupted between 1965 and 1970,

which is in line with the ndings in Tables 1 and 4. Complete results are available upon request.


Earnings Impacts of Black Teacher Displacement

The qualitatively large magnitudes of the black teacher employment reductions estimated above suggest

that desegregation engendered a signicant overall negative shock to the demand for high-skilled black labor

after 1964. An important related question is whether this demand shock translated into negative impacts

on the earnings of high-skilled black workers. Importantly, this demand shock occurred within a broader

context of rapid black-white earnings convergence between 1965 and 1970, especially in the South (Donohue

& Heckman 1991; Wright 2013). But if reduced teaching employment was simultaneously exerting a negative

impact on black earnings, then the observed convergence was actually smaller than it could have been in the



                                                     25
absence of desegregation-induced black teacher employment reductions.


To help evaluate this possibility, I rst estimate a specication similar to Equation 5, but which uses log

earnings rather than occupational outcomes as the dependent variable, with the results reported in Column

1 of Table 6. The interaction between black and the 1970 indicator is highly signicant in this specication,

and has an estimated coecient of .179, indicating that the black-white earnings gap fell by .179 log points

among high-skill southern-born workers between 1960 and 1970.                      The second column of Table 6 adds a

control variable for being a southern teacher to the specication.
                                                                 27 This model estimates black-white earnings

convergence between 1960 and 1970 while holding constant the level of southern teaching employment, and to

the extent that reduced southern teaching employment slowed black-white earnings convergence, the addition

of this covariate will increase the magnitude of the coecient on the interaction term. The magnitude of the

coecient on the interaction term in Column 2 does indeed grow to .185, and a hypothesis test indicates that

this increase is statistically signicant (P=.032). But the size of this increase is qualitatively small, suggesting

that reduced teaching employment among blacks did not substantively slow racial wage convergence among

high-skill southern-born workers between 1960 and 1970.
                                                                       28


To better understand why reduced teaching employment among blacks appears to have had such a small

eect on wage convergence, Columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 report the results of regressing log wages onto

an indicator of being a southern teacher among black workers in 1960 and in 1970, respectively.                               The

results in Column 3 show that southern black teachers enjoyed a large earnings premium in 1960, earning

approximately 16% more than other types of southern-born black workers with at least a year of post-

secondary education. However, the results in Column 4 indicate that this earnings premium is wholly absent

by 1970.      While this elimination of a teacher earnings premium among southern blacks is plausibly itself

due to integration-induced reductions in black teacher demand, supplementary analyses indicate that the

elimination of a teaching premium among southern blacks was driven primarily by rapid earnings growth

among college-educated southern blacks who were not teachers, rather than reductions in the growth or

levels of earnings among southern black teachers.
                                                               29     These patterns are more consistent with post-1964

reductions in discrimination within non-teaching occupations, for instance due to Title VII of the CRA,

than they are with negative teacher wage impacts of student desegregation.                       In any case, the ndings in

Table 3 suggest that maintaining 1960 levels of teaching employment would not have signicantly altered

the 1970 wage distribution of high-skill southern-born black workers, simply because by 1970 southern black

teachers earned no more than other types of high-skill southern black workers.




7     Discussion and Conclusion
The present paper has been primarily concerned with changes in the teacher labor market occurring in the

1960s and early 1970s, but the ndings additionally have some relevance for more contemporary issues in

education research and policy.

  27 To   allow the wage eect of being a southern teacher to vary by race, the model in Column 2 additionally includes an
interaction between the southern teacher indicator and a black indicator.
  28 As   before, a causal interpretation of the coecients in Table 6 would require the strong assumption that changes in the
earnings of southern blacks between 1960 and 1970 would have been the same as the changes in the earnings of southern whites
over the same period if not for school desegregation, and should therefore be viewed as primarily descriptive.
  29 Specically,   the earnings of black teachers grew by .37 log points between 1960 and 1970 while the earnings of black college-
educated non-teachers grew by .50 log points over the same period. The analogous changes for white teachers and non-teachers
were .31 log points and .32 log points, respectively.




                                                                 26
One such area is the eects of own-race teachers on student outcomes, with a growing literature indicating

that exposure of black students to black teachers has positive impacts on academic and behavioral outcomes.

For instance Dee (2004) exploits the random assignment of students to classrooms in Tennessee's Project

STAR experiment to estimate that being assigned to an own-race teacher increased the math and reading

test scores of black students by approximately 5 percentile points, with larger cumulative eects for students

having own-race teachers for multiple years. Likewise, Lindsay & Hart (2017) use administrative data from

North Carolina and student xed-eects models and nd that full exposure to own-race teachers reduced

the probability that black students were suspended or expelled by 18%.


In an historically salient anecdote on the potential benets of own-race teachers even in the segregation era,

Leola Brown, the named plainti in Brown v. Board, described the teachers at the segregated school she

was suing to integrate as Qualied...fantastic teachers. [And] they were good to us, more like an extended

family, like mothers and so forth, because they took an interest in you (Kansas State Historical Society

1991).
       30 Likewise Everett Dawson, an African American teacher in North Carolina during the desegregation

process, noted that I got disillusioned with integration because... I could not get to my people and tell them

all the things that they needed to know" (Foster 1997).


Since black students in segregated southern schools had virtually all black teachers, a substantial decline

in black student's exposure to own-race teachers was an unavoidable consequence of student desegregation,

and few would argue that it was desirable for African American students to have exclusively own-race

teachers.   However, the magnitude of the reductions in exposure of black students to black teachers was

clearly increased by the disproportionate elimination of black held teaching positions documented above,

with potentially deleterious impacts on African American students.


A related point relevant to contemporary policy debates is that there is currently a widespread perception

among educational practitioners and many academics that African Americans and other racial and ethnic

minorities are problematically underrepresented within the teaching profession.                   For instance Villegas &

Davis (2008) report that 36 states have adopted policies intended to increase the recruitment of minority

teachers since the 1990s, a recent report from the National Education Association (Dilworth & Coleman

2014) is devoted to examining the compelling need to recruit and retain teachers of color and Villegas

& Irvine (2010) review a large interdisciplinary academic literature arguing that increased recruitment of

minority teachers would be benecial to students and communities.


While the data and methodology of the current study do not allow for the direct estimation of how

desegregation-induced black teacher employment reductions aected the subsequent recruitment of black

teachers, presumably eliminating large numbers of black held teaching positions had at least some nega-

tive eect on the choice of subsequent cohorts of African Americans to enter the teaching profession. An

unscientic 1968 survey of placement directors at seven predominantly black teacher training programs in

the South found that the number of education graduates at these institutions had declined by more than

10% between 1965 and 1968 (Southern Education Report 1968), and Hudson & Holmes (1994) report a

66% decline in the number of African American students majoring in education nationwide between 1975

and 1985. While it is dicult to distinguish the eects of displacement on the entry of new black teachers

from the eects of expanded professional employment opportunities outside of teaching, at a minimum the

large-scale elimination of black held teaching positions during desegregation did not encourage young African

 30 More precisely,   Leola Brown was the mother of the student named in Brown v. Board, but is speaking here in the rst-person
here because she had attended the same elementary school herself as a child, when it was fully segregated.




                                                               27
Americans to enter the profession.


The dismantling of de-jure segregation in southern schools was arguably the signature accomplishment of

the Civil Rights Movement, and a generational victory for the cause of racial equality in the United States.

Desegregation generated large benets for many groups, ranging from students in the South who received an

education formally free of racial considerations, to the broader population that gained the ability to live in a

society that better reected democratic principles of equal citizenship. But such a fundamental reform of a

major institution also inevitably comes with disruption and costs. The results of the present study indicate

that the costs associated with transitioning to a more equitable educational system were in large part paid

by African American teachers.




                                                      28
References
Alabama Department of Education (1964). Statistical and nancial data, annual report for the scholastic

year ending June 30, 1964Quarterly Journal of Economics and for the scal year ending September 30, 1964.


Baum-Snow, N., & Lutz, B. (2011). School desegregation, school choice, and changes in residential location

patterns by race. American Economic Review, 101(7), 3019-3046.


Billings, S., Deming, D., & Rocko, J. (2013).      School segregation, educational attainment, and crime:

Evidence from the end of busing in Charlotte-Mecklenburg. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 435-

476.


Boustan, L. (2012).   School desegregation and urban change: Evidence from city boundaries.        American

Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1), 85-108.

Card, D., & Krueger, A. (1992a). Does school quality matter? Returns to education and the characteristics

of public schools in the United States. Journal of political Economy, 100(1), 1-40.


Card, D., & Krueger, A. (1992b). School quality and black-white relative earnings: A direct assessment.

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 151-200.

Carruthers, C., & Wanamaker, M. (2017). Separate and unequal in the labor market: Human capital and

the Jim Crow wage gap. Journal of Labor Economics, 35(3), 655-696.


Cascio , E., Gordon, N., & Reber, S. (2013). Local responses to federal grants: Evidence from the introduc-

tion of Title I in the South. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(3), 126-159.


Cascio, E., & Washington, E. (2013). Valuing the vote: The redistribution of voting rights and state funds

following the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 379-433.


Cascio, E., Gordon, N., Lewis, E., & Reber, S. (2008). From Brown to busing. Journal of Urban Economics,

64(2), 296-325.


Cascio, E., Gordon, N., Lewis, E., & Reber, S. (2010).    Paying for progress: Conditional grants and the

desegregation of southern schools. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1), 445-482.


Clotfelter, C. (2011). After Brown: The rise and retreat of school desegregation. Princeton University Press,

Princeton, NJ.


Dee, T. (2004). Teachers, race, and student achievement in a randomized experiment. Review of Economics

and Statistics, 86(1), 195-210.

Detweiler, J. (1967). The negro teacher and the Fourteenth Amendment. Journal of Negro Education, 36(4),

403-409.


Dilworth, M., & Coleman, M. (2014). Time for a change: Diversity in teaching revisited. National Education

Association Report, Washington, DC.


Donohue, J., & Heckman J. 1991. Continuous versus episodic change: The impact of Civil Rights policy on

the economic status of blacks. Journal of Economic Literature 29 : 1603-43.


Ethridge, S. (1979). Impact of the 1954 Brown vs. Topeka Board of Education decision on black educators.

Negro Educational Review, 30(4), 217.



                                                     29
Foster, M. (1997). Black teachers on teaching. New Press, New York, NY.


Fultz, M. (2004). The displacement of black educators post-Brown: An overview and analysis. History of

Education Quarterly, 44(1), 11-45.

Georgia State Department of Education (1964).       Annual report of the Department of Education to the

General Assembly of the State of Georgia.


Guryan, J. (2004). Desegregation and black dropout rates. American Economic Review, 94(4), 919-943.


Hooker, R. (1970).    Special Report: Displacement of black teachers in the eleven southern states.      Race

Relation Information Center, Nashville, TN.


Hudson, M., & Holmes, B. (1994). Missing teachers, impaired communities: The unanticipated consequences

of Brown v. Board of Education on the African American teaching force at the pre-collegiate level. Journal

of Negro Education, 63(3), 388-393.

Jackson, C. (2009). Student demographics, teacher sorting, and teacher quality: Evidence from the end of

school desegregation. Journal of Labor Economics, 27(2), 213-256.


Johnson, R. (2011). Long-run impacts of school desegregation & school quality on adult attainments. NBER

Working Paper 16664.

Joint Center for Political Studies (1977). National roster of black elected ocials, Vol. 7, Washington, DC.


Kansas State Historical Society (1991). Brown v. Topeka Board of Education oral history collection, Topeka

KS.


Lindsay, C., & Hart, C. (2017). Exposure to same-race teachers and student disciplinary outcomes for black

students in North Carolina. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 39(3), 485-510.


Logan, J., Stults, B., & Farley, R. (2004).    Segregation of minorities in the metropolis:   Two decades of

change. Demography, 41(1), 1-22.


Margo, R. (1990). Race and schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An economic history. University of Chicago

Press, Chicago, IL.


Mississippi State Department of Education (1963). Biennial report and recommendations of the state su-

perintendent of public education to the legislature of Mississippi for the scholastic year 1962/1963.


National Center for Educational Statistics (1967). Directory: Public schools in large districts with enrollment

and sta, by race, fall 1967. Washington, DC.


National Education Association (1965). Addresses and proceedings of the National Education Association,

Volume 103.


Oakley, D., Stowell, J., & Logan, J. (2009). The impact of desegregation on black teachers in the metropolis,

19702000. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 32(9), 1576-1598.


Oreld, G. (1969). The reconstruction of southern education: The schools and the 1964 Civil Rights Act.

Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.


Reardon, S., & Owens, A. (2014). 60 years after Brown: Trends and consequences of school segregation.

Annual Review of Sociology, 40, 199-218.




                                                      30
Reber, S. (2005).   Court-ordered desegregation successes and failures integrating American schools since

Brown versus Board of Education. Journal of Human Resources, 40(3), 559-590.


Reber, S. (2010). School desegregation and educational attainment for blacks. Journal of Human Resources,

45(4), 893-914.


Rivkin, S. (1994). Residential segregation and school integration. Sociology of Education, 67(4), 279-292.


Rivkin, S., & Welch, F. (2006). Has school desegregation improved academic and economic outcomes for

blacks? Handbook of the Economics of Education, 2, 1019-1049.


Ruggles, S. (2015). Integrated public use microdata series: Version 6.0. University of Minnesota.


Schultz, M. (1970). The National Education Association and the black teacher: The integration of a profes-

sional organization. University of Miami Press, Miami, FL.


South Carolina State Department of Education (1964). Ninety-sixth annual report of the state superinten-

dent of education, state of South Carolina, 1963-1964.


Southern Education Report (1965). August 1965: "Desegregation."


Southern Education Report (1966). August 1966: "Desegregation: Legal backing for the guidelines."


Southern Education Report (1968). December 1968: "How are the new negro teachers faring?"


Southern Education Reporting Service (1964). A statistical summary, state by state, of segregation-desegregation

activity aecting southern schools from 1954 to present. Fourteenth revision.


Southern School News (1955). November 1955: Negro teacher tenure is surveyed.


State Department of Education of Louisiana (1965). Bulletin No. 1049: One hundred and sixteenth annual

report for the session 1964-65.


Tennessee Department of Education (1963). Annual statistical report of the Department of Education for

the scholastic year ending June 30, 1963.


Texas Education Agency (1965). Biennial report of the Texas Department of Education.


Tillman, L. (2004). (Un)intended consequences? The impact of the Brown v. Board of Education decision

on the employment status of black educators. Education and Urban Society, 36(3), 280-303.


US Oce of Education. (1965). Task force survey of teacher displacement in seventeen states. Department

of Health, Education and Welfare, Washington, DC.


Vigdor, J., & Ludwig, J. (2008). Segregation and the test score gap. In Steady Gains and Stalled Progress:

Inequality and the Black-White Test Score Gap, 181-211. Magnuson, K. & Waldfogel, J., eds. Russel Sage

Foundation, New York, NY.


Villegas, A., & Davis, D. (2008). Preparing teachers of color to confront racial/ethnic disparities in educa-

tional outcomes. Handbook on Research in Teacher Education, 583-605.


Villegas, A., & Irvine, J. (2010). Diversifying the teaching force: An examination of major arguments. Urban

Review, 42(3), 175-192.

Virginia State Board of Education (1965). Annual report of the superintendent of public instruction of the

Commonwealth of Virginia, school year 1964-65.



                                                     31
Welch, F. (1987). New evidence on school desegregation. Commission on Civil Rights, Washington, DC.


Wright, G. (2013). Sharing the prize. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.




                                                  32
33
34
                                                                                                  Figure 3: Treatment Effect Heterogeneity
                                                       A: Treatment Effects by Pre-Integration Black Student Share                                                        B: Treatment Effects by Pre-Integration District Size




                                              .6
                                                                                                                                                                 .6




                              .4
                                                                                                                                                 .4




35
             .2
                                                                                                                                .2




      Treatment Effect Magnitude (abs. value)
                                                                                                                         Treatment Effect Magnitude (abs. value)




                          0
                                                                                                                                             0

                                                   1          2                       3                    4         5                                                1      2                       3                    4       5
                                                                    Quintile of 1964 Black Student Share                                                                              Quintile of 1964 Student Count

     Notes: Reported treatment effect magnitudes are the absolute values of the coefficient on the student desegregation variable when Equation 4 is estimated using a sample consisting of the
     districts within the specified quintile of black student share as of 1964 (Panel A) or total number of students as of 1964 (Panel B). 90% confidence intervals also shown.
                           Table 1: The Effect of Student Desegregation on Black Teacher Employment
                                                    (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)                (6)
                                                                  Total Teacher                                                                       Finance
                                                 Baseline           Control             Weighted          District Trends          Leads
                                                                                                                                                      Controls
Fraction of Black Students in                   -0.382***            -0.346***           -0.317***           -0.409***            -0.620***           -0.353***
Desegregated Schools                             (0.031)              (0.032)             (0.036)             (0.038)              (0.081)             (0.034)
                                                                     0.766***
Ln(All Teacher Count)
                                                                      (0.064)
Fraction Students Desegregated, 1-                                                                                                  0.005
period lead                                                                                                                        (0.035)
Fraction Students Desegregated, 2-                                                                                                  0.015
period lead                                                                                                                        (0.068)
District-Year Observations                             3,905              3,905                  3,905             3,905                2,343           1,586
Number of Unique Districts                              781                 781                   781               478                  781              781
Notes: The dependent variable is the natural log of the number of African American teachers. All models contain school district and year fixed-effects. The
model in Column 2 also controls for the natural log of total district teacher employment (of all races) and the model in Column 6 also controls for district
revenues from federal, state and local sources. Additionally, the model in Column 4 contains interactions of school district indicators and a linear year variable,
while the model in Column 5 contains two leading values of the student desegregation variable. All observations are given equal weight, except for in the model
in Column 3, where each observation is weighted by the number of black teachers the district employed during the 1964 school year. Standard errors, clustered
at the school district level, are in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                     Table 2: The Effect of Student Desegregation on District Operations
                                                       (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)
                                                                                                  Log Student-               Log School
                                                Log Teachers              Log Students
                                                                                                  Teacher Ratio               Buildings
Fraction of Black Students in                      -0.047***                 -0.030*                    0.018                 -0.174***
Desegregated Schools                                (0.015)                  (0.018)                   (0.012)                 (0.022)
District-Year Observations                              3,905                     3,905                    3,905                   3,124
Number of Unique Districts                               781                       781                      781                     781
Notes: The dependent variables in Columns 1-4 are respectively the log of total teacher employment (of all races), the log of total
student enrollments (of all races), the log of the ratio of the district's total student count to its total teacher count, and the log of total
operational school buildings. All models contain school district and year fixed-effects. All observations are given equal weight. Standard
errors, clustered at the school district level, are in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels, respectively.
                  Table 3: Relative Changes in the Characteristics of Southern White Teachers
                                               Southern White Teachers                          All Southern Professionals                  Relative
                                          1960          1970         Change                   1960        1970        Change                Changes
                                                                    -2.74***                                           0.08                 -2.82***
Age                                       42.13         39.39                                 39.30       39.39
                                                                     (0.300)                                          (0.169)                (0.344)
                                                                          0.028***                                      -0.026***           0.054***
Male                                      0.229            0.258                              0.713         0.687
                                                                           (0.010)                                       (0.006)             (0.011)
                                                                          0.058***                                       0.048***             0.010
Born Outside of South                     0.181             0.24                              0.302          0.35
                                                                           (0.009)                                        (0.006)            (0.011)
                                                                           0.075*                                        0.194***           -0.119**
Years of Education                        15.96            16.04                              14.30         14.49
                                                                           (0.044)                                        (0.039)            (0.059)
Observations                              3,004            5,122            8,126             9,298        16,663         25,961             34,087
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report the mean of the indicated characteristic among southern whites reporting "teacher" as their primary occupation in the 1960
and 1970 Decennial Censuses, respectively, and Column 3 reports the difference in each characteristic between 1960 and 1970 within this population.
Columns 4-6 repeat this exercise among southern whites reporting professional occupations other than teacher. The final column reports the difference
between the change in each characteristics among southern white teachers between 1960 and 1970 and the change in that characteristic among southern
whites in other professional occupations over the same period. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                           Table 4: Relative Changes in Employment Categories between 1960 and 1970
                                       (1)                    (2)                    (3)                     (4)                    (5)                      (6)
                                                        Other Southern          Southern Non-        Teacher Outside of        Non-Teacher
                               Southern Teacher                                                                                                        Not Working
                                                         Professional            Professional              South              Outside of South
A: Baseline
                                   -0.028***                -0.011                   0.016                0.021***                  0.007                 -0.006
Black × Y1970
                                    (0.010)                 (0.008)                 (0.011)                (0.006)                 (0.012)                (0.009)
Observations                         43,128                 43,128                  43,128                 43,128                  43,128                 43,128
B: Trends from 1950-1960
                                      0.001                 -0.001                   0.001                  0.002                  -0.001                 -0.002
Black × Y1960
                                     (0.021)                (0.015)                 (0.023)                (0.010)                 (0.024)                (0.011)
Observations                         18,568                 18,568                  18,568                 18,568                  18,568                 18,568
C: Females
                                   -0.039***                -0.007                 -0.031**               0.031***                 -0.003                 0.051***
Black × Y1970
                                    (0.014)                 (0.010)                 (0.014)                (0.009)                 (0.015)                 (0.015)
Observations                         18,321                 18,321                  18,321                 18,321                  18,321                  18,321
D: Males
                                    -0.025**                -0.012                  0.045**                 0.006                   0.014                -0.028***
Black × Y1970
                                     (0.012)                (0.012)                 (0.018)                (0.006)                 (0.019)                (0.010)
Observations                         24,807                 24,807                  24,807                 24,807                  24,807                  24,807
E: Age  40 in 1964
                                   -0.040***                -0.015                  -0.006                0.033***                  0.007                  0.020
Black × Y1970
                                    (0.013)                 (0.011)                 (0.015)                (0.008)                 (0.017)                (0.013)
Observations                         20,552                 20,552                  20,552                 20,552                  20,552                 20,552
F: Age >40 in 1964
                                       -0.018                 -0.005                  0.030*                  0.005                 0.005                  -0.016
Black × Y1970
                                      (0.014)                (0.011)                  (0.016)                (0.008)               (0.018)                (0.013)
Observations                          22,576                 22,576                   22,576                 22,576                22,576                  22,576
Notes: Sample is drawn from 1960 and 1970 Decennial Censuses, except in Panel B where the sample is drawn from the 1950 and 1960 Decennial Censuses. All
samples are restricted to non-Hispanic black or white respondents who were born in one of the eleven states of the former Confederacy, had completed one or
more years of college, and were from the 1904-1935 birth cohorts. The dependent variable for each specification is an indicator of the employment category listed
in the column titles. All models include controls for birth cohort, state of birth, gender, and educational attainment. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                     Table 5: Employment Outcomes of Disrupted Teachers by Race and Region
                                               (1)                    (2)                     (3)                      (4)                        (5)
                                                                                                               (Southern Black) -         (Southern Black) -
                                        Southern Black         Southern White          Northern Black
                                                                                                                (Southern White)           (Northern Black)
                                                                                                                      0.032                    -0.107**
Professional Occupation                       0.22                    0.19                    0.33
                                                                                                                     (0.028)                    (0.043)
                                                                                                                     0.066**                     0.025
Non-Professional Occupation                   0.26                    0.19                    0.23
                                                                                                                     (0.028)                    (0.042)
                                                                                                                     0.093***                  0.095***
Teacher in New Region                         0.14                    0.05                    0.04
                                                                                                                      (0.016)                   (0.029)
                                                                                                                    -0.191***                   -0.013
Not Working                                   0.38                    0.57                    0.39
                                                                                                                     (0.034)                    (0.048)
Observations                                  245                    1,317                    181
Notes: Sample consists of respondents to Form 2 of the 1970 Decennial Census who either (1) reported teacher as their primary occupation for 1965 but not
for 1970, or (2) reported teacher as their primary occupation in both 1965 and 1970 but had also migrated into or out of the South over this period. Columns 1-
3 report simple means for the indicated population and employment category; Columns 4 and 5 report mean differences across the indicated populations. *, **
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
             Table 6: Southern Teaching Employment and Relative Black Earnings
                                       (1)                      (2)                      (3)                     (4)
                                 Pooled 1960 and          Pooled 1960 and          Black Workers,          Black Workers,
                                  1970 Samples             1970 Samples                 1960                    1970
                                      -0.252***               -0.306***
Black
                                       (0.018)                 (0.020)
                                      0.315***                 0.316***
Y1970
                                       (0.010)                  (0.010)
                                      0.179***                 0.185***
Black × Y1970
                                       (0.024)                  (0.024)
                                                               0.049***                0.164***                 -0.009
Southern Teacher
                                                                (0.015)                 (0.037)                 (0.034)
                                                               0.211***
Black × Southern Teacher
                                                                (0.024)
Observations                          34,483                   34,483                   2,702                      2,883
Notes: Sample is drawn from 1960 and 1970 Decennial Censuses and restricted to non-Hispanic black or white respondents
who were born in one of the eleven states of the former Confederacy, had completed one or more years of college, and
were from the 1904-1935 birth cohorts. The dependent variable in all specifications is the log of total labor market earnings.
Column titles indicate the sample composition. All models include controls for birth cohort, state of birth, gender, and
educational attainment. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels, respectively.
