                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE ROLE OF NONEMPLOYERS IN BUSINESS DYNAMISM AND AGGREGATE
                           PRODUCTIVITY

                                        Pedro Bento
                                       Diego Restuccia

                                     Working Paper 25998
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25998


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




For helpful comments and suggestions we thank Benjamin Bridgman, John Haltiwanger,
Benjamin Pugsley, and audiences at Texas A&M University, the University of Texas at Austin,
the 2019 Midwest Macroeconomic Meetings at Michigan State University, the 2019 RCEA
Growth, Innovation and Entrepreneurship Conference at Wilfrid Laurier University, and the 2020
Econometric Society North American Winter Meetings in San Diego. All errors are our own.
Restuccia gratefully acknowledges the support from the Canada Research Chairs program and the
Bank of Canada Fellowship. The views expressed herein are not necessarily those of the Bank of
Canada or the National Bureau of Economic Research and are the authors alone.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Pedro Bento and Diego Restuccia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Nonemployers in Business Dynamism and Aggregate Productivity
Pedro Bento and Diego Restuccia
NBER Working Paper No. 25998
June 2019
JEL No. E02,E1,O1,O4,O51

                                           ABSTRACT

A decline in the net entry rate of employer firms in the United States in the last decades, a decline
in business dynamism, may explain the observed productivity slowdown. We consider the role of
nonemployers, businesses without paid employees, in business dynamism and aggregate
productivity. Despite the decline in the growth of employer firms, the total number of firms has
increased since the early 1980s, which in the context of a standard model of firm dynamics
implies an average annual growth of aggregate productivity of 0.26-0.39%, over one quarter of
the productivity growth in the data.


Pedro Bento
Texas A&M University
1101 Hollow Creek Dr. Unit 2208
Austin, TX 78704
pbento@tamu.edu

Diego Restuccia
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca
1    Introduction

A number of studies have documented a slowdown in business startups and entrepreneurship
in the United States over the last several decades. The decline since the Great Recession, in
particular, has been proposed as a potential source of the slowdown in aggregate productivity
growth (Decker et al., 2016; Furman and Orszag, 2018). However, Decker et al. (2016) and
Li (2017) have noted that standard measures of business dynamism appear unrelated to esti-
mates of aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) growth before the Great Recession. In this
paper, we construct a broader measure of the total number of firms we believe paints a more
comprehensive picture of business dynamism in the United States over time.

Canonical theories of firm size and firm dynamics, such as Hopenhayn (1992), have been used
to draw implications for TFP from data on business dynamism. In these models, TFP depends
on factor inputs and a term that aggregates the productivity of all firms, which also depends
on the total number of firms. In this context, measured TFP--the aggregate amount of output
per unit of composite aggregate inputs--depends on the total number of firms. We construct
a comprehensive measure of U.S. businesses that includes nonemployers, that is businesses
that are subject to federal income tax but have no paid employees, composed solely of owner-
managers and unpaid workers such as family members. We show that the startup rate for
this measure of firms has not declined, instead it has increased substantially. The literature
on business dynamism has thus far focused on employer firms, firms with at least one paid
employee, abstracting from nonemployer firms. But nonemployers account for 82% of all firms
in 2014, suggesting their evolution over time is an important determinant of changes in the total
number of firms. We combine employers data from the Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS)
with nonemployers data from the Nonemployer Statistics (NES) and other data sources, to
construct a measure of the total number of U.S. businesses from 1981 to 2014. We focus on
the number of firms per worker, which according to standard theory, is the relevant measure
when drawing implications for aggregate productivity (Hopenhayn, 1992; Karahan et al., 2018).
Although the number of employers per worker decreased by 4.5% from 1981 to 2014--consistent

                                               2
with the findings in Karahan et al. (2018)--the total number of firms per worker in our measure
increased by 53% over the same period.

We consider a standard model of firm entry in order to quantitatively assess the impact of the
surge in the number of firms on aggregate TFP. In the baseline model the distribution of firm-
level productivities is constant over time but we allow for changes in aggregate employment as
observed in the data. We assume that the cost of entry changes over time in order to match the
observed evolution in the number of firms. The calibrated model suggests aggregate TFP grew
at an annualized rate of 0.26% from 1981 to 2014 due to the increase in firms, one quarter of the
actual growth in measured TFP. In contrast, using the number of employers as is standard in
the literature, the model implies slightly negative growth in TFP. Over 33 years, these implied
rates compound into a cumulative increase in aggregate TFP of 9% when using the total number
of firms per worker and -1% when using the number of employers per worker.

Our baseline model implies an invariant employment size distribution across producers over
time, while the data and recent studies of market concentration suggest otherwise (Autor et al.,
2019; Rossi-Hansberg et al., 2019). We extend the baseline model to allow for changes in
average productivity over time, which might arise from differential exit rates of employers and
nonemployers and from changes over time in the dynamics of incumbents. We discipline these
features using data on exit rates and changes in the employment-size distribution of entrants
and incumbents over time. Under relatively weak structural assumptions commonly made in
the firm-dynamics literature, we show how this additional data can be combined with data on
the total number of firms to derive the implied change in the average productivity of firms over
time up to a constant, that is, relative to any change in productivity common to all firms. We
find that implied average firm-level productivity has increased from the 1980s to 2014, making
the implied cumulative increase in aggregate TFP in the extended model 13.3% compared to
9% in the baseline model. TFP growth implied by the extended model correlates well with
observed TFP growth over the medium and longer run relative to a model that includes only
employer firms.


                                               3
We provide a comprehensive measure of business dynamism that includes nonemployers, com-
plementing the important work of Decker et al. (2014), who emphasize the decline in net entry
rates for employer firms. We show that the net entry rate of all firms has not declined. Karahan
et al. (2018) and Hopenhayn et al. (2019) document a marginally declining trend in employ-
ers per worker and conclude that changing business dynamism has not been a quantitatively
significant driver of TFP trends. We show instead that when considering nonemployers in the
total number of firms, business dynamism has contributed substantially to positive productivity
growth.

In the next section, we discuss the evidence on nonemployers and why they may matter for busi-
ness dynamism. Section 3 describes the data for employers and nonemployers and documents
trends in the variables of interest. In Section 4 we present our baseline model of firm entry to
assess the quantitative impact of firms per worker on aggregate productivity. Section 5 extends
the analysis to include differential firm exit rates and firm-level productivity growth showing
that implied TFP growth from firm dynamics is even larger than in the baseline model. Section
6 provides a discussion of potential alternative drivers of business dynamism. We conclude in
section 7.




2     Nonemployer U.S. Businesses

We construct a comprehensive measure of the total number of firms in the U.S. economy to
assess the role of changes in net entry on aggregate productivity. We focus on a measure of the
total number of firms that includes nonemployer businesses. Nonemployer businesses are firms
with no paid employees, including self-employed entrepreneurs. A comprehensive measure of
firms may be relevant in understanding changes in net entry rates over time, as is the case
when considering very small firms in the context of cross-country differences in establishment
size (Bento and Restuccia, 2017, 2020).

For many economic questions it is reasonable to abstract from nonemployers, as they contribute


                                               4
little to aggregate output in the U.S. economy. Although nonemployers constitute 82% of all
U.S. businesses in 2014, they represent only about 4% of total revenues. However, theories of
firm size and firm dynamics suggest patterns of firm entry and exit are essential for aggregate
productivity implications. In this context, it is important for the analysis to account for all
firms. This is the case even if nonemployers are less productive than employer firms and
account for a small proportion of output and employment, although these characteristics need
to be taken into account.

Including nonemployers in the total measure of firms raises important questions. Are nonem-
ployer firms using different technologies than employer firms or operating in different product
markets? Or are nonemployers the same as employer firms albeit with lower productivity? Our
data, together with recent papers by Acs et al. (2009), Davis et al. (2009), and Fairlie et al.
(2018), provide us with a characterization of U.S. nonemployers that can be compared with
employer firms. In the data, nonemployers coexist and compete with employers within narrow
industries. In each of the nine industries we consider, nonemployers represent more than 55%
of all firms in 2007 (more than 80% in five industries) and are more prevalent in industries
with smaller average employment firm size. The survival rate of nonemployer startups is close
to that of employer startups. Data on employment in nonemployers (i.e., owner-managers and
unpaid workers) are not available, but average growth rates of revenue are similar to that of
small employer firms. A small percentage of nonemployers transition into employer status each
year, roughly consistent with employment growth rates among small employers. Considering
differences in average revenue across different firm-size classes, nonemployers do not appear
distinct from small employer firms in terms of relative size. For instance, comparing employer
firms with 10 to 20 employees to employer firms with 1 to 5 employees--a 5-fold difference
in average employment between these two groups--we find that there is a 6-fold difference in
average revenues. Comparing employer firms with 1 to 5 employees to nonemployers, we find
a close 5-fold factor difference in average revenues. The main difference between employer and
nonemployer firms other than size appears to be their probability of exit, which is consistent



                                              5
with a declining exit rate with firm size. While about 8 to 9% of employers exit each year,
nonemployers exit at a higher rate of 15% (Davis et al., 2009).

From these facts we conclude it is reasonable to treat nonemployer businesses as employers but
operating at a lower scale--possibly because of lower productivity--with higher exit rates.




3    Data

We describe the data and procedure used to construct our measure of the total number of firms
over time in the U.S. economy. Data for employer firms is from the U.S. Census Bureau's Busi-
ness Dynamics Statistics (BDS), the standard data source in the business dynamism literature
(Decker et al., 2014). The employer data contains employer-firm counts by industry, employ-
ment size, and age from 1977 to 2014. All non-farm firms with at least one formal employee
are included.

Data for nonemployers is from the U.S. Census Bureau's Nonemployer Statistics (NES). NES
contains economic data for businesses that have no paid employees and are subject to federal
income tax, providing nonemployer business counts by industry for 1992 and from 1997 onward.
The U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax return data is used by the Census Bureau to
identify the universe of potential nonemployers. IRS counts up to 2008 are reported in U.S.
Statistical Abstracts. Care is then taken to identify duplicates (multiple tax numbers belonging
to one firm), and reclassify nonemployers when they are properly part of an employer firm.

To construct our measure of the total number of firms, we simply add nonemployer businesses
to employer firms. This is done for the years 1992 and 1997 to 2014 for which we have data
for both nonemployers and employer firms. We impute nonemployer counts for the years 1981
to 1991 and 1993 to 1996. For the years 1993 to 1996, we simply assume that the number of
nonemployers increased smoothly from 1992 to 1997, and add the implied number of nonem-
ployers to the observed number of employers. For the years 1981 to 1991, we impute the number
of nonemployers using IRS data. We describe this imputation in Appendix A.

                                               6
Figure 1 documents the evolution of the number of firms and firms per worker in the U.S. Panel
(a) reports our measure of the number of firms and the more common measure of the number
of employers over time, normalized to one in 1981. Panel (b) reports the net entry rate (growth
in the number of firms) of all firms and employers. Two features of the data stand out. First,
the net entry rate of all firms has been consistently higher than that of employer firms. Second,
the net entry rate of all firms declined along with that of employer firms from the early 1980s,
but then diverged sharply starting in the late 1990s. From 1981 to 2014, while the number of
employers increased by 42%, the total number of firms increased by a striking 128%.

                        Figure 1: Evolution of Firms and Firms per Worker

                (a) Number of firms                                      (b) Net entry rate




               (c) Firms per worker                               (d) Net entry rate per worker




Notes: Panel (a) reports the number of all firms and the number of employer firms with levels normalized to one
in 1981. Panel (b) reports the net entry rate of all firms and of employer firms. Panel (c) reports the number
of firms per worker and panel (d) the net entry rate per worker.


Theories of firm dynamics suggest the more relevant measure of business dynamism when
drawing implications for TFP is the number of firms per worker. Using data on the total
employed civilian non-institutional population from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' Current

                                                      7
Population Survey (CPS), Figure 1 panel (c) documents the number of firms per worker for all
firms and for employers, and panel (d) the net entry rate per worker. Both the total number of
firms per worker and the number of employers per worker drop during the 1990s. But whereas
the growth rate of employer firms per worker stays negative (on average) after 2000, the total
number of firms per worker recovers and grows at a positive rate. From 1981 to 2014, the
number of firms per worker increases by 53%, whereas the number of employers per worker
decreases by 4.5%.1

The striking difference in the number of firms over time between all firms and employers is robust
to removing sole-proprietors from nonemployer counts. Data on the legal form of nonemployers
is available from 1997 onwards. Figure 2 compares the number of all firms per worker, the
number of firms without nonemployer sole-proprietors, and the number of employers. Although
the cumulative increase in the number of firms per worker since 1997 is lower when removing
sole-proprietors, an 8% increase rather than a 24% increase with all firms, it is still markedly
higher than the -7% for employers per worker. We also note the increase in the number of
firms per worker over time occurs within sectors and is not the result of reallocation across
sectors with different firms per worker. Appendix B documents that firms per worker have
increased in seven out of nine sectors and that most employment reallocation has occurred
between manufacturing and other services with similar increases in firms per worker. More
formally, Appendix B shows via a counterfactual that only 20% of the increase in the number
of firms per worker can be accounted for by structural change.

In summary, accounting for nonemployer businesses in firm counts dramatically changes the
pattern of net entry over time in the U.S. economy. While the number of employers per worker
has fallen slightly over the last three decades, the number of all firms per worker has risen
substantially by more than 50%.
   1
     The measure of CPS employment we use is fairly consistent with the measures of labor force participation
analyzed in Karahan et al. (2018) and Hopenhayn et al. (2019).




                                                     8
           Figure 2: Number of Firms per Worker with and without Sole-Proprietors




Notes: The solid line represents the total number of firms per worker in the data, the doted line is employer
firms per worker, and the dashed line is the total number of firms per worker excluding sole-proprietors. In each
case, levels are normalized to 1 in 1997.


4     Baseline Model

We consider a version of the firm dynamics model in Hopenhayn (1992) in order to provide
a mapping from changes in net entry of firms to aggregate TFP. We also use the model to
assess the factors leading to the divergence overt time between the number of employer and
nonemployer firms.



4.1     Environment

At each date, a single homogeneous good (the num´
                                                eraire) is produced by firms. Firms have
access to a decreasing returns to scale technology in variable inputs and are heterogeneous with
respect to their productivity z :
                                               y = (Az )1-  ,                                                (1)




                                                       9
where y is output,      is the labor input, and A an exogenous productivity term common to all
firms that can change over time. Decreasing returns to scale in variable inputs implies   (0, 1),
hence the optimal scale of a firm depends non-trivially on productivity. More productive firms
operate at a larger scale by hiring more inputs, producing more output, and generating higher
profits. Firms take the current real wage w as given, and the only cost incurred by incumbents
is their wage bill.

There are a large number of potential entrants that can become producers by incurring an entry
cost equal to ce · Y /L, where Y /L is aggregate output per worker.2 We allow ce to change over
time. We assume potential entrants draw their productivity z from some constant cumulative
distribution function G(z ), and learn their productivity after entry. There is no fixed operating
cost for producers, and firm-level productivity is assumed to stay fixed over the lifetime of a firm.
We assume all firms face an exogenous probability of exit  in each period after production.

We denote employment by L which can change over time. We assume that firms always believe
current levels of L, ce , and A persist forever. At the beginning of each period they learn
otherwise, but then again believe current levels of these variables persist. We discuss below and
in Appendix C that this assumption about beliefs does not affect our main results, it mainly
affects the implied entry cost ce in the model. We abstract from household choices by assuming
a constant exogenous real interest rate R.



4.2     Equilibrium

A competitive equilibrium is defined by a wage rate w, firm-level functions labor demand (z )
and per-period profits  (z ), and number of firms N , given exogenous entry cost ce · Y /L, labor
supply L, real interest rate R, and firm-level productivity distribution G(z ), such that:


  (i) Given w, firms choose (z ) to maximize  (z ).
   2
    Having entry costs scale up with output per capita is consistent with the evidence in Bollard et al. (2016)
and Bento and Restuccia (2020).




                                                      10
 (ii) Free entry ensures the expected present value of lifetime profits for an entrant is equal to
                               (z )
      the entry cost,       z 1-
                                    dG(z )   = ce · Y /L, where  = (1 - )/(1 + R).

(iii) The labor market clears: aggregate labor is equal to the quantity of labor demanded by
      firms, L = N      z
                            (z )dG(z ).

The equilibrium in each period can be easily solved. Producers choose labor to maximize
operating profits, resulting in the following optimal demand for labor, output, and operating
profits, expressed as functions of z ;

                                                                 1
                                                                1-
                                                   = Az              ,                                (2)
                                                           w
                                                                 
                                                                1-
                                                 y = Az              ,                                (3)
                                                        w
                                                            
                                                           1-
                                               = Az             (1 - ).                               (4)
                                                    w

Labor market clearing implies total labor is equal to aggregate labor demand;

                                                                 1
                                                                1-
                                               L=N ·A                    z
                                                                         ¯,
                                                      w

where z
      ¯ is equal to average firm-level productivity. This is in turn equal to the expected value
of each draw z from G(z ), or          z
                                           z dG(z ). The wage can therefore be expressed as a function of
the number of firms per worker;

                                                                     1-
                                                          1-    N
                                              w = (Az
                                                    ¯)                        .                       (5)
                                                                L


Using equations (3) and (5), aggregate output per worker as a function of firms per worker is;

                                                                                      1-
                                Y   N                1-              1-           N
                                  =   ·A                  z
                                                          ¯ = (Az
                                                                ¯)                         .          (6)
                                L   L    w                                        L


Free entry ensures N in each period is such that the discounted expected profits of an entrant

                                                          11
are equal to the cost of entry:

                                                            
                                      Y  A(1 - )¯
                                                z          1-
                                  ce · =                         .                            (7)
                                      L    1-     w

This free entry condition holds as long as ce is not too high relative to previous periods. If ce
were to increase too much from period t - 1 to period t, then the number of firms in period t
would be Nt = (1 - )Nt-1 . This constraint never binds when we take this model to the data.
Along with equations (5) and (6), the free entry condition implies the following characterization
of the number of firms per worker;
                                        N     1-
                                          =           .                                       (8)
                                        L   ce (1 - )

Note that firms per worker does not depend on the common productivity term A, on average
firm-level productivity z
                        ¯, or on the size of the workforce L.

Lastly, output per capita, aggregate T F P , and the wage can be expressed as functions of
exogenous variables;
                                                                     1-
                             Y                         1-
                                           ¯)1-
                               = T F P = (Az                              ,                   (9)
                             L                       ce (1 - )

                                         w =  · T F P.                                      (10)



4.3    Implications

Entry costs. In the model, the number of firms responds solely to changes in employment L
and the entry cost ce , and the number of firms per worker depends only on the entry cost (8).
Therefore, we calculate the implied evolution of ce after 1981 using equation (8). Figure 3a
documents the implied evolution of ce which follows the inverse of the number of firms per
worker. We note that the implied entry cost depends on assumptions about the beliefs held
by firms with respect to future aggregate employment growth and future entry costs. But
regardless of what we assume about firms' expectations, the overall decline in the implied entry
cost would still hold. Appendix C shows how entry costs change when firms know the future


                                               12
              Figure 3: Implied Entry Costs and Aggregate TFP in Baseline Model

                   (a) Entry Cost                                      (b) Aggregate TFP




Notes: Entry costs ce is from equation (8) in order to match the total number of firms per worker in the data,
normalized to 1 in 1981. Aggregate TFP in each year relative to 1981 is from equation (11) using the total
number of firms per worker (solid line) and the number of employer firms per worker (dashed line).


paths of ce and L.

Aggregate Productivity. In the model aggregate labor productivity and aggregate TFP coincide
and are characterized by equation (9) as a function of parameters and exogenous variables such
as the entry cost, or by equation (6) as a function of exogenous variables and the number of
firms per worker. Using equation (6), we link the effect of changes in the number of firms per
worker in the data to changes in aggregate TFP, noting that average productivity z
                                                                                 ¯ drops out
since we have assumed that the distribution of productivity is constant:

                                                     1-                    1-
                              T F Pt          At              Nt /Lt
                                       =                                        .                        (11)
                             T F P1981       A1981          N1981 /L1981

To calculate implied TFP over time (relative to 1981), we use a value for  equal to 0.8,
consistent with much of the firm-dynamics literature. This relatively high value can be seen
as giving a conservative estimate of implied TFP, as lower values (used occasionally in the
literature) imply larger effects on TFP from changes in the number of firms per worker. Figure
3b illustrates our main results on the implied growth in aggregate TFP in equation (11) using
the total number of firms per worker (solid line), contrasting it with the implied change in TFP
in the model if instead we use employers per worker (dashed line) as the measure of the number
of firms. Through the lens of the model, the increase in the total number of firms per worker

                                                     13
from 1981 to 2014 implies a 9% cumulative increase in TFP, or an annualized growth rate of
0.26%. This is substantial relative to the observed 0.85% annual growth rate of TFP in the
United States over the same time period.3 In other words, over one quarter of the growth in
TFP during the period can be attributed to the change in the number of firms per worker. In
contrast, using the number of employers per worker as is standard in the literature, implied
TFP decreases by 1% between 1981 and 2014.

Evolution of employer and nonemployer firms. Even with a constant distribution of produc-
tivities, the number of employers grows slower, and could even drop, as the total number of
firms increases. For intuition, note that a firm's optimal demand for labor in equation (2) is
increasing in productivity z and decreasing in the wage. From labor market clearing, the wage
is therefore increasing in both the number of firms per worker and average firm-level produc-
tivity z
       ¯. Combining optimal labor demand in equation (2) with the equilibrium wage (5), we
can express a firm's choice of labor as a function of productivity and the number of firms per
worker;
                                                            -1
                                             z          N
                                           =                     .                                  (12)
                                             z
                                             ¯          L

If the number of firms per worker increases, demand for labor increases and pushes up the equi-
librium wage (equation 5). This results in lower employment for any given level of productivity,
as shown in equation (12).

Assume nonemployers are firms with optimal labor demand less than one, with labor provided
by an owner-manager. Using equation (12) we can solve for a productivity threshold z1 above
which a firm is counted as an employer;

                                                        N
                                          z1 = -1 z
                                                  ¯          .                                      (13)
                                                        L

The number of employers per worker is the number of firms above the productivity threshold
  3
    Our measure of observed TFP growth is utilization-adjusted TFP growth from Fernald (2012), updated to
2014.




                                                   14
z1 , which is increasing in the number of firms. This number can be decomposed as follows:

                                  N emp      N
                                        =             · [1 - G(z1 )].                        (14)
                                   L         L

If the number of firms increases, the number of employers increases less as z1 rises and hence
G(z1 ) rises. Depending on the shape of the distribution G(·), the number of employers in
principle could even drop.

In Appendix D we quantitatively assess the importance of this mechanism for explaining the
decrease over time in the number of employers. After calibrating G(z ) to U.S. data, we conclude
that this mechanism cannot account for a significant part of the drop in employers over time.
This suggests that changes in the productivity distribution across producers, assumed constant
in the baseline model, could be quantitatively important. We address this shortcoming of the
baseline model in the next section by accounting for changes in the productivity distribution
over time.




5    Extended Model

We have derived implications of changes in the number of firms per worker on TFP growth
assuming that the distribution of productivity across firms remains constant over time. One
implication of this assumption is that the model does not capture the shift over time in the share
of firms classified as nonemployers, which could affect our implied TFP growth calculations.
Another implication is the distribution of employment across firms remains unchanged. This is
inconsistent with the observed shift in employment from small to large firms. For instance, we
find the average employment size of all incumbent firms relative to entrants rose from about 4
in the early 1980s to more than 5 after 2010. This shift in employment from small to large firms
is consistent with a recent literature documenting broader trends in market concentration of
economic activity at the top of the firm distribution (Autor et al., 2019; Rossi-Hansberg et al.,
2019).

                                                 15
Through the lens of the model, the shift in employment shares may reflect an increase in the
average productivity of incumbents relative to entrants. There are several potential reasons
for this trend. For instance, Hopenhayn et al. (2019) note that average exit rates for incum-
bents have fallen over time. If lower exit rates are due to higher productivity growth among
incumbents (rather than lower operating costs), then we expect higher average productivity of
incumbents relative to entrants. Aghion et al. (2019) point to a falling cost of firm expansion
which benefits high-productivity firms more than low-productivity firms, which leads to higher
average employment in incumbent firms relative to entrants.

We address this issue by extending the baseline framework to account for observed changes
in the employment size distribution and the share of firms that are employers. To do so, we
allow for changes in the exit rate of employers and changes in the productivity distribution of
incumbents over time. As before, entrants draw from a constant distribution of productivities
G(z ) and aggregate labor supply L varies according to data.

In each period, optimal firm-level labor, output, and profits are functions of productivity z
and the wage rate as described in equations (2) through (4). From labor market clearing, the
equilibrium wage rate is a function of average productivity and the number of firms per worker
in equation (5). As a result, aggregate TFP which is equal to aggregate output per worker in
our model, is still described by equation (6).

We use equation (6) to derive implications for aggregate TFP over time using 1982 as the
benchmark year since we now use data on firm exit:

                                          1-             1-                  1-
                    T F Pt         At             z
                                                  ¯t            Nt /Lt
                             =                                                    .       (15)
                   T F P1982      A1982          z
                                                 ¯1982        N1982 /L1982

Changes in TFP can be decomposed into terms representing the evolution of: (a) the common
productivity term A, (b) average productivity across firms, and (c) the number of firms per
worker. As before, we use data on the total number of firms per worker over time as our measure
of N/L. We depart from the baseline model in that we now use additional data to infer the



                                                 16
evolution of average firm-level productivity z
                                             ¯ previously assumed constant. We use data from
the BDS and NES on the exit rate of employers over time and the evolution of the average
size of all firms relative to the average size of entrants. We now describe the specifics of our
approach.

The model provides a mapping from relative productivity to relative size across firms. Denote
the average employment size of entrants and all firms by ¯ent and ¯all . Given the mapping
from size to productivity (up to a constant) in equation (12), average productivity of all firms
relative to entrants in each year is;
                                                   z
                                                   ¯all,t   ¯all,t
                                                          = ¯ .
                                                   z
                                                   ¯ent,t    ent,t


Given our assumption that entrants draw z from a constant distribution G(z ), we infer average
firm-level productivity in each year relative to 1982;

                    z
                    ¯all,t          z
                                    ¯ent,t             ¯all,t / ¯ent,t           ¯all,t / ¯ent,t
                               =               ·   ¯all,1982 / ¯ent,1982   = ¯            ¯       .   (16)
                   z
                   ¯all,1982       z
                                   ¯ent,1982                                  all,1982 / ent,1982



From BDS we know the number of employees for both entrant and incumbent employer firms.
To impute the labor input of nonemployers, we assume a uniform distribution of employment
between 0 and 1 for all nonemployers (both entrants and incumbents) in each year. Hence, the
average size of all firms and entrants in any year is:

                            emp          non                                   emp          non
             ¯all = Lall = Lall + 0.5 · Nall ,                  ¯ent = Lent = Lent + 0.5 · Nent ,     (17)
                    Nall         Nall                                  Nent         Nent

where superscripts distinguish between employers and nonemployers, and subscripts between
entrants and all firms.

We have data on the number of employer entrants but not the corresponding measure for
nonemployers. We therefore assume a constant exit rate  = 0.15 for nonemployers as reported
by Davis et al. (2009) and use it to infer the number of nonemployer entrants in each year;


                                       non      non            non
                                      Nent,t = Nall,t - (1 - )Nall,t-1 .                              (18)

                                                           17
                           Figure 4: Aggregate TFP in Extended Model

               (a) Aggregate TFP                                    (b) Growth in TFP




Notes: TFP growth in the data and implied by the models are reported as 10-year moving averages. TFP data
from Fernald (2012), updated to 2014.


Note that we abstract from any transitions from nonemployer to employer status since we
cannot differentiate between truly new employers and transitioning nonemployers. As a result,
we overstate the number of employer entrants, however, given the small number of transitioning
nonemployers in a given year documented by Davis et al. (2009), it should not be quantitatively
important.

We calculate average firm-level productivity in each year, relative to 1982, using equations
(16)-(18), and use it along with the number of firms per worker to calculate implied TFP from
equation (15). Figure 4a reports the results compared with those of the baseline model. Our
inferred measure of average firm-level productivity is generally increasing from 1982 to 2014. As
a result, the implied cumulative increase in aggregate TFP is even higher than in the baseline
model. From 1982 to 2014, the cumulative increase in TFP is 13.3%, compared to 7.7% in the
baseline model over these years.

Figure 4b reports the implied growth rate of aggregate TFP over time in the extended model,
reported as a 10-year moving average. From 1982 to 2014, implied annual growth averaged
0.39%. The doted line is the 10-year moving average of TFP growth in the U.S. data. The
evolution of TFP growth over time implied by the model follows the data well over the medium
and long term (correlation 21%), suggesting that business dynamism in fact plays an important
quantitative role in driving trends in aggregate productivity, as suggested by canonical theories

                                                   18
of firm dynamics such as Hopenhayn (1992). The cumulative growth in TFP observed in the
data between 1982 and 2014 amounts to 32%, meaning our implied measure of TFP can account
for more than 40% of the actual increase. The dashed line in Figure 4b shows a corresponding
measure of implied TFP growth when employers are used as the number of firms in the baseline
model. Not only does this measure imply a decline in aggregate TFP over time, it is also strongly
negatively correlated with observed productivity growth (correlation -32%).




6    Alternative Drivers of Firm Dynamics

An important literature links low average firm size (the ratio of workers to the number of firms)
to policy distortions in developing countries. We consider two mechanisms highlighted in this
literature as potential alternative drivers of the trends in business dynamism: (a) an increase
in resource misallocation driven by size-dependent distortions (Hsieh and Klenow, 2014; Bento
and Restuccia, 2017, 2020) and (b) increasing barriers for firms entering new markets (Bento,
2019).

If large productive firms are effectively taxed at higher rates than small unproductive firms,
then all firms reduce investment in productivity. This effectively reduces non-production costs
for all firms, thereby increasing profitability and encouraging entry. In equilibrium, these size-
dependent distortions result in more but less-productive firms. Appendix E provides evidence
that the relationship between firm size and effective tax rates in the U.S. is insignificant and
has not grown over time.

If firms operate in multiple markets, Bento (2019) shows that increasing barriers to market
entry (distinct from barriers to starting a firm) can result in more firms, each competing in
fewer markets. As a result each market is characterized by fewer competing firms, and aggregate
TFP drops even as the aggregate number of firms increases. To the extent that firms create
multiple establishments to access multiple markets, higher market entry barriers should result
in fewer establishments per firm as the number of firms increases. Appendix E shows this has


                                               19
not been the case for the U.S. over time.

In summary, the evidence suggests that various mechanisms encouraging firm entry while lower-
ing TFP--which are prevalent in developing countries--are not driving the increase in business
dynamism in the United States.




7    Conclusions

An important literature documenting a decline in business dynamism in the U.S. over the last
several decades has focused solely on employer firms. We consider a broader measure of firms
that includes nonemployers, and find that the total number of firms has diverged dramatically
from the number of employers over time. We interpret this fact, along with the evolution
of the employment distribution across firms, through the lens of a model of firm dynamics
based on Hopenhayn (1992). We show that accounting for nonemployers drastically changes
the implications for aggregate productivity. Although nonemployers are (by definition) small
relative to employers, the increase in the number of firms and in firm-level productivity together
imply that business dynamism has been responsible for over one third of observed aggregate
productivity growth from 1982 to 2014. This is in striking contrast to the decrease in TFP
implied by a model considering only employer firms.

Decker et al. (2016) and Li (2017) note that previous measures of business dynamism (focusing
on employer firms) do not correlate well with TFP growth, casting doubt on the quantitative
importance of theories of firm dynamics. Our broader measure of business dynamism, which
accounts for nonemployers and the evolution of the size distribution over time, follows TFP
growth in the data more closely since the 1980s.

Our results suggest several avenues for future research. It would be useful to relate our com-
prehensive measure of the number of firms with recently documented trends in market concen-
tration, price-cost markups, and job reallocation rates as documented in Decker et al. (2014),
De Loecker et al. (2018), and Rossi-Hansberg et al. (2019). Relatedly, theories developed to

                                               20
explain increasing markups and market concentration, as well as the declining labor share of
aggregate income, have taken as given a decline in the number of firms. For instance, Akcigit
and Ates (2019) relate these trends to declining business dynamism. As a result, an important
direction for future research may be exploring mechanisms that can account for these trends
in the context of higher firm entry. Finally, we have abstracted from the underlying causes of
changes in exit rates and productivity growth across firms and over time. Understanding these
patterns, as explored in Aghion et al. (2019) and Cao et al. (2019), remains an important area
for further work.




                                             21
References
Acs, Z. J., Headd, B., and Agwara, H. (2009). Nonemployer start-up puzzle. Technical report,
  Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy.

Aghion, P., Bergeaud, A., Boppart, T., Klenow, P. J., and Li, H. (2019). A theory of falling
  growth and rising rents. Unpublished manuscript.

Akcigit, U. and Ates, S. T. (2019). What happened to u.s. business dynamism? Unpublished
  manuscript.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L. F., Patterson, C., and Van Reenen, J. (2019). The fall of the
 labor share and the rise of superstar firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Bento, P. (2019). Competition, innovation, and the number of firms. Technical report, Texas
  A&M University.

Bento, P. and Restuccia, D. (2017). Misallocation, establishment size, and productivity. Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(3):267­303.

Bento, P. and Restuccia, D. (2020). On average establishment size across sectors and countries.
  Journal of Monetary Economics.

Bollard, A., Klenow, P. J., and Li, H. (2016). Entry costs rise with development. Unpublished
  manuscript, Stanford University.

Cao, D., Hyatt, H. R., Mukoyama, T., and Sager, E. (2019). Firm growth through new estab-
  lishments. Unpublished manuscript.

Davis, S. J., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., Krizan, C. J., Miranda, J., Nucci, A., and Sandusky,
  K. (2009). Measuring the dynamics of young and small businesses: Integrating the employer
  and nonemployer universes. Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, pages
  329­366.

De Loecker, J., Eeckhout, J., and Unger, G. (2018). The rise of market power and the macroe-
  conomic implications.

Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., and Miranda, J. (2014). The secular decline of
  business dynamism in the united states. Unpublished manuscript, University of Maryland.

Decker, R. A., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., Krizan, C. J., and Miranda, J. (2016). Declining
  business dynamism: Implications for productivity. Technical report.


                                               22
Fairlie, R. W., Miranda, J., and Zolas, N. (2018). Job creation and survival among en-
  trepreneurs: Evidence from the universe of u.s. startups. Technical report, University of
  California, Santa Cruz.

Fernald, J. G. (2012). A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity.
  FRBSF Working Paper, 2012-9.

Furman, J. and Orszag, P. (2018). Slower productivity and higher inequality: Are they related?

Hopenhayn, H., Neira, J., and Singhania, R. (2019). From population growth to firm demo-
  graphics: Implications for concentration, entrepreneurship and the labor share. National
  Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 25382.

Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992). Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium. Econometrica,
  60:1127­50.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china and india.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4):1403­1448.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2014). The life cycle of plants in india and mexico. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129(3):1035­1084.

Karahan, F., Pugsley, B., and S
                              ¸ ahin, A. (2018). Demographic origins of the startup deficit.
 Unpublished manuscript.

Li, H. (2017). How does business dynamism link to productivity growth? FRBSF Economic
  Letter.

Rossi-Hansberg, E., Sarte, P.-D., and Trachter, N. (2019). Diverging trends in national and
  local concentration.




                                             23
On-line Appendix (Not for publication)

A     Data Imputation

For the years between 1981 to 1991, we impute the number of nonemployers by using the growth
rate in the total number of firms reported by the IRS (constructed using tax returns). We work
backwards from 1992, imputing the total number of firms using the growth rate in each year
from the IRS data, then subtracting the number of employers (from BDS) to obtain the number
of nonemployers. Figure 5 documents the fact that the growth rate in the total number of firms
reported by the IRS tracks very closely our measure of the growth rate of the total number of
firms over the years for which we have data for nonemployers and employers. Hence, we argue
this imputation of the number of nonemployer firms is reasonable.

         Figure 5: The Growth Rate in the Number of Firms, IRS and Our Measure




                                             24
B      Sectoral Composition in Number of Firms

Given the structural transformation in the U.S. economy over the last several decades, it is
important to assess whether the large increase in the total number of firms per worker is
driven by within-sector changes in net entry or by changes in sectoral employment shares,
that is changes from sectors with a low number of firms per worker to sectors with a high
number of firms per worker. We analyze how sectoral employment shares have evolved over time
between 1983 to 2014 for 9 sectors of the economy: agriculture, forestry, and fishing; mining;
construction; manufacturing; wholesale trade; retail trade; transportation, communication, and
utilities; finance, insurance, and real estate; and other services. We find that the most significant
change is the reallocation of employment away from manufacturing to other services. Within
these two sectors, firms per worker in manufacturing rose by 47%, while firms per worker in
other services rose by a close 46%, which suggests that the process of structural transformation
is not driving the increase in the total number of firms per worker. Indeed, firms per worker
rose in seven out of nine sectors. The only sectors that experienced a drop in the number of
firms per worker are Mining (-52%) and Retail Trade (-16%).

          Table 1: The Role of Structural Transformation in Total Firms per Worker


                                                        Employment share Firms per worker
                                                              (%)             (×100)
                                                        1983    2014     1983     2014
    Sectors
      Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                   4         2          9         16
      Mining                                               1         1          25        12
      Construction                                         7         7          21        29
      Manufacturing                                       20         11          3         4
      Wholesale trade                                      4         3          17        20
      Retail trade                                       12         12          21        17
      Transportation, communication, and utilities        6          6          11        24
      Finance, insurance, and real state                   7          7         29        38
      Other services                                      40         52         15        22
    Aggregate                                            100        100         14        20




                                                 25
            Figure 6: Total Number of Firms per Worker, Actual vs. Counterfactual




Notes: The solid line represents the evolution of the total number of firms per worker in the data, whereas the
dashed line is the counterfactual evolution of the total number of firms per worker when firms per worker in
each sector is kept fixed at 1983 levels.


Nevertheless, to get a more concrete quantitative assessment of the importance of structural
transformation to the increase in the number of firms per worker, we compute a counterfactual
aggregate number of firms per worker assuming that the number of firms per worker in each
sector is fixed at 1983 levels. Changes in this counterfactual measure over time are therefore
solely driven by changes in sectoral employment shares. Figure 6 reports this counterfactual
measure of the aggregate number of firms per worker, along with the actual number of all firms
per worker for comparison. The counterfactual shows that only 20% of the increase in the total
number of firms per worker can be accounted for by structural change.




C      Alternative Beliefs in the Baseline Model

We show that our assumptions about the beliefs of firms in the baseline model affect the implied
evolution of the entry cost over time, but do not affect our calculation of the implied evolution


                                                      26
of aggregate productivity. In the baseline model we assume firms always believe the current
supply of labor L and entry cost ce will persist indefinitely, and are subsequently shocked each
period. We now assume that firms know the future paths of both L and ce with certainty. For
this exercise we assume that the economy is in a steady state in 1981, such that L and ce were
previously constant at 1981 levels. We further assume these variables stop changing after 2014.

Per-period optimal output, labor demand, and profits, are still described by equations (2)
through (4), as functions of firm productivity. The wage is still described by equation (5), as a
function of the number of firms per worker. That equation (5) still holds in each period implies
that our calculation of implied TFP (11) also holds, given the observed number of firms per
worker in each year in the data.

Free entry requires that the expected discounted profits of entrants are exactly equal to the
entry cost in the period they enter. This can be expressed recursively as;

                                               (1 - )
                                      ce,t =             + ce,t+1 ,                            (19)
                                               (Nt /Lt )

                                                      (1 - )
                                   ce,2014 =                         .                         (20)
                                               (N2014 /L2014 )(1 - )

Potential entrants now take into account future entry and labor supply growth when making
their entry decision. Taking as given the number of firms per worker in the data, the more
firms per worker in the future, the lower the current entry cost must be to rationalize a given
current number of firms per worker. In Figure 7 we show how the implied entry cost ce must
evolve over time in order to match the observed evolution of the number of firms per worker
in the data. Compared to the baseline, this alternative implied entry cost must be lower in
1981, given that firms are now taking into account the future observed increase in the number
of firms per worker. By 2014, the two measures converge, as must be the case since the two
sets of beliefs also converge. With these alternative beliefs, the implication for the evolution of
entry costs is much the same, except here the implied entry cost is less volatile over time.




                                                    27
                    Figure 7: Implied Entry Cost with Alternative Beliefs




D     Share of Employers in Baseline Model

To assess the ability of our baseline model to explain the change in the number of employers
over time, given observed changes in the total number of firms, we calibrate the distribution of
productivity across firms G(z ) to match the employment distribution of firms in 1981. To do this
we need data on employment in nonemployers, which is not available. We therefore assume
labor is distributed uniformly between 0 and 1 across nonemployers, with owner-managers
spending the rest of their time working at other firms. The BDS data reports the number of
employer firms falling within 12 different size bins, and the top bin is open-ended. We assume
that size is uniformly distributed between the lower and upper bound of each bin, and choose
an upper bound for the top bin such that the average size of firms in the top bin implied by
a uniform distribution is equal to the average size in the data. Note that equation (2) implies
the following productivity ratio between two arbitrary firms i and j with different levels of
employment;
                                            zi      i
                                               =        .                                   (21)
                                            zj      j




                                               28
              Figure 8: The Number of Employer Firms in the Model and Data




Given the observed employment-size distribution, equation (21) gives the distribution of pro-
ductivity across firms, up to a constant. Given G(z ), we calculate the number of employers
generated by the model as the number of firms changes each year (again, we assume the entry
cost changes over time generate this outcome). Figure 8a reports the number of employer firms
in the model and data and Figure 8b the growth rate in these two time series. The model clearly
overstates the number of employer firms. For instance by the end of the sample, the number of
employer firms in the model is a factor of 2-fold that in the data. This result implies that the
mechanism we focus on, namely the effect of the number of firms on the nonemployer threshold,
cannot by itself explain the majority of the divergence between the total number of firms and
the number of employers over time. What is striking, however, is that while the growth rate of
employers implied by the model is consistently higher than in the data, the growth rates move
together quite closely.




E     Evidence on Alternative Drivers of Firm Dynamics

Here we assess whether the mechanisms highlighted in a recently literature linking low average
firm size to low aggregate TFP in poor countries are relevant for the U.S. experience since
the early 1980s. We start by considering whether an increase in the extent of size-dependent
distortions may be driving the increase in the number of firms in the U.S. economy over time.


                                              29
Hsieh and Klenow (2014) and Bento and Restuccia (2017) show that cross-country differences
in the extent to which firm-level distortions are positively related to firm size can go a long way
to rationalizing the large differences in average firm size across countries at differing levels of
development. To assess this basic mechanism in the U.S. data over time, we use data from the
Economic Census for 74 3-digit NAICS industries for the years 2002 and 2012. Within each
industry, we have data on the total number of firms, the number of firms in each size bin, the
number of employees per firm within each bin, total payroll, and total revenue.4 Although we
only have data from 2002 to 2012, this period is still characterized by a substantial increase in
the number firms by 22%. For each size bin within each industry, we use the ratio of revenue to
payroll as our measure of the average distortion faced by each firm within the bin. Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) show that under certain structural assumptions, profit maximization implies
each firm within an industry should be choosing its labor input such that all firms are left with
the same average product of labor. To the extent that the average product is higher for firms
in a large size category relative to a small category, we interpret this as evidence that larger
firms face a larger effective tax.

As in Hsieh and Klenow (2014) and Bento and Restuccia (2017), we regress (logged) average
products on (logged) employment size within each industry to obtain an estimate of the elas-
ticity of distortions with respect to size.5 The higher the elasticity, the larger the effective tax
rate faced by large firms relative to small firms. For 2002, we find an average elasticity across
industries equal to -0.01, with a variance across industries of 0.01. For 2012, we find an average
elasticity even closer to zero, with a similar variance. These numbers suggest there is very little
systematic misallocation on average, as well as very little change in the extent of systematic
misallocation over time. From 2002 to 2012, Figure 9 presents a histogram of the fraction of
firms in industries that saw a given change in the size elasticity of distortions, indicating that
the vast majority of firms are in industries that saw very little change in this elasticity over
   4
    For manufacturing industries, we use establishments rather than firms, and value added rather than revenue.
   5
    For these regressions we exclude all firms with less than 5 employees, to address the problem of unpaid
workers not being counted in small firms. For the purposes of this discussion, the `number of firms' is defined
as the number of firms with at least 5 employees.



                                                      30
            Figure 9: Distribution of Changes in the Size Elasticity of Distortions




                                   .2       .15
                      Fraction of All Firms
                              .1   .05
                                   0




                                                  -.1   -.05            0                .05            .1    .15
                                                        Change in Size Elasticity of Distortions: 2002-2012




time. This suggests that the type of misallocation responsible for cross-country differences in
firm dynamics is not driving the increase in the number of firms in the U.S. economy over time.

Another possible explanation for the increase in the number of firms is higher barriers to entering
a market. Bento (2019) shows that when firms choose how many markets to enter, and the cost
of entering is increasing in the number of markets entered, barriers to market entry (distinct
from barriers to starting a firm) encourage more firm startups, with each firm competing in
fewer markets in equilibrium. As a result, each market is characterized by fewer competing
firms, and aggregate productivity drops even as the aggregate number of firms increases. If
barriers to market entry have been increasing in the U.S. economy, we should observe fewer
firms competing in each local market, even as the aggregate number of firms increases. We
do not have data on the number of firms present in each market, and defining a market is
difficult. But we can consider how the aggregate number of establishments changes over time.
To the extent that firms create multiple establishments to access multiple markets, the number
of establishments per firm can serve as a proxy for the number of markets per firm. Figure 10
reports that the number of establishments per firm essentially remained constant from 1981 to


                                                                            31
                Figure 10: The Number of Establishments per Firm (1981=1)




2014, even as the number of firms per worker grew by 53%. Note that Aghion et al. (2019) and
Cao et al. (2019) make a similar observation about establishments per firm over time in the
context of employer firms. This suggests that increasing barriers to market entry are not likely
driving the increase in the number of firms per worker in the U.S. economy.




                                              32
