                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    IS THERE A RISK-RETURN TRADEOFF IN THE CORPORATE BOND MARKET?
                TIME-SERIES AND CROSS-SECTIONAL EVIDENCE

                                          Jennie Bai
                                         Turan G. Bali
                                          Quan Wen

                                      Working Paper 25995
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25995


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




We thank Andreas Barth, Marc Crummenerl, Kris Jacobs, Yigitcan Karabulut, Francesco
Sangiorgi, Christian Schlag, Grigory Vilkov, and seminar participants at Bloomberg, Frankfurt
School of Finance and Management, Goethe University, University of Houston, and 2019 Q-
group annual conference for their helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Kenneth
French, Lubos Pastor, and Robert Stambaugh for making a large amount of historical data
publicly available. All errors remain our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jennie Bai, Turan G. Bali, and Quan Wen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is There a Risk-Return Tradeoff in the Corporate Bond Market? Time-Series and Cross-Sectional
Evidence
Jennie Bai, Turan G. Bali, and Quan Wen
NBER Working Paper No. 25995
June 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. C13,G10,G11,G12

                                           ABSTRACT

We provide time-series and cross-sectional evidence on the significance of a risk-return tradeoff
in the corporate bond market. We find a significantly positive intertemporal relation between
expected return and risk in the bond market and the time-series predictability is driven by
aggregate systematic risk instead of aggregate idiosyncratic risk. We also propose a new measure
of systematic risk for corporate bonds and find a positive link between systematic risk and the
cross-section of future bond returns. We provide an explanation for the significance of systematic
(idiosyncratic) risk based on different investor preferences and informational frictions in the bond
(equity) market.

Jennie Bai                                       Quan Wen
McDonough School of Business                     Georgetown University
Georgetown University                            Washington, DC 20057
3700 O Street, NW                                quan.wen@georgetown.edu
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
jennie.bai@georgetown.edu

Turan G. Bali
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
Between 37th and O Streets
Washington, D.C. 20057
turan.bali@georgetown.edu
1       Introduction

Most asset pricing theories postulate a positive intertemporal relation between expected return
and risk of market portfolios (Merton, 1973). Empirically, this relation has been studied
primarily in the equity market. The literature, however, has not yet reached to an agreement
on the existence of a positive risk-return tradeoff for stock market indices; indeed, many
studies cannot even identify a robust and significant time-series relation.1
    While earlier studies focus on equities, debt financing forms a significant portion in the
capital structure of U.S. corporations (Graham, Leary, and Roberts, 2015), underscoring the
need to study the risk-return tradeoff in the corporate bond market. Since the Great Recession
of 2007-2009, the corporate bond market has increased substantially with respect to trading
volume and the market size.2 Institutional investors in particular make an extensive use of
bonds in constructing their portfolios, which elevates the role of bonds in investors' portfolios
more than any time in the past. Motivated by these observations, this paper studies the
risk-return tradeoff in the corporate bond market.
    Does the risk-return relation for equities or its lack thereof extend to corporate bonds?
This is an open question given the significant difference in institutional and informational
frictions across equities and bonds. Using a big dataset of 1.3 million bond return observations
from January 1995 to June 2019, we provide the first comprehensive study on the risk-return
    1
      French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987) find that the risk-return coefficient is not significantly different
from zero when they use past daily returns to estimate the monthly conditional variance. Follow-up studies
by Campbell and Hentchel (1992), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), Harrison and Zhang (1999),
and Bollerslev and Zhou (2006) rely on the GARCH-in-mean and realized volatility models that provide no
evidence of a robust, significant link between risk and return on the equity market portfolio. Several studies
even find that the intertemporal relation between risk and return is negative (e.g., Campbell, 1987; Nelson,
1991; Glosten et al., 1993; Whitelaw, 1994; Harvey, 2001; and Brandt and Kang, 2004). Some studies do
provide evidence supporting a positive and significant link between expected return and risk in the equity
market (e.g., Bollerslev, Engle, and Wooldridge, 1988; Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov, 2005; Guo and
Whitelaw, 2006; Bali, 2008; and Bali and Engle, 2010).
    2
      Corporate bonds constitute one of the largest components of the U.S. bond market, which is considered
the largest security market in the world. According to the Federal Reserve database, the total market value
of outstanding corporate bonds in the United States was about $1.74 trillion in 1990 and it increased mono-
tonically to $14.02 trillion by the end of 2019. This implies an annual growth rate of 7.6% from 1990 to 2019.
The corporate bond market is active as well. Over the past 16 years, daily trading volume has been in the
range of $12.6 and $24.5 billion, with an average of $17.6 billion (source: www.sifma.org).




                                                       1
tradeoff in the corporate bond market, both in time series and in the cross section. Overall,
we ascertain a robust, significant, and positive intertemporal relation between expected return
and risk in aggregate bond market portfolios, and also a consistent positive risk-return relation
in the cross section of individual bonds. Our findings in the bond market are in line with
asset pricing theories, but are foiled against the evidence in the equity market. We delineate
reconciling explanations later in this section and more details in Section 5. The basic idea is
that the investor clientele plays an important role in the contrasting risk-return relations in
the bond versus equity markets.
    We start the analysis with the intertemporal relation between the conditional mean and
the conditional variance of aggregate bond market returns. We find that the bond market risk
proxied by its lagged (or conditional) variance predicts future bond market returns. Moreover,
we show that the time-series predictability is driven solely by aggregate systematic risk instead
of aggregate idiosyncratic risk. The results are robust under three different weighting schemes
in aggregating the bond-level risk measures, namely, the equal-weighted, value-weighted, and
rating-weighted average. The results are also robust to controlling for a number of variables
proxying for business cycle fluctuations.
    To appraise the economic significance of the time-series predictability, we simulate the
returns of a trading strategy based on the out-of-sample one-month-ahead forecasts of the
bond market using its realized variance.3 In this market-timing strategy, we obtain both
a higher mean return and a lower standard deviation compared to the strategy using the
forecasts from existing corporate bond market factors. We find that a risk-averse investor is
willing to pay an annualized fee of 3.65.0% to invest in the strategy that forecasts the bond
market return based on the market variance.
    After thoroughly investigating the time-series risk-return relation at the market level,
we propose new measures of bond-level systematic and idiosyncratic risk and examine the
   3
     For each month t, the strategy invests 100% in the bond market index if the predicted excess return of
bonds over the risk-free rate is greater than zero; otherwise it invests 100% in Treasury bills. At time t + 1,
the return of the portfolio is realized, a new regression is estimated, a return forecast computed, and new
portfolio weights determined. In this way, we obtain a monthly time series of returns to the trading strategy.



                                                      2
cross-sectional predictability on individual corporate bonds. Consistent with the time-series
predictability results at the market level, we find a significantly positive link between sys-
tematic risk and the cross-section of future bond returns, whereas the cross-sectional relation
between idiosyncratic risk and future bond returns is economically and statistically insignif-
icant. Overall, the results indicate that institutional investors dominating the bond market
hold well-diversified portfolios with a negligible exposure to bond-specific risk.
   One central prediction in classical asset pricing theory is that the cross-sectional differ-
ences in expected returns on securities are explained solely by their systematic risk under the
assumptions that markets are complete and frictionless and investors are well-diversified (Mer-
ton, 1987). If markets are incomplete or investors face frictions and hold poorly diversified
portfolios, then expected returns should be positively associated with idiosyncratic volatili-
ty (Hirshleifer, 1988). Empirically, the most widely-cited study on idiosyncratic risk, Ang,
Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), demonstrates a negative cross-sectional relation between
idiosyncratic volatility and future equity returns. This result is highly inconsistent with the-
oretical predictions and thus considered a puzzle. Several subsequent papers have proposed
explanations for the idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) puzzle in the equity market (see Hou and
Loh (2016) for a summary).
   In this paper, we revisit the IVOL puzzle in the corporate bond market by proposing new
measures of idiosyncratic and systematic risk of corporate bonds. According to a recent work
by Bai, Bali, and Wen (2019, hereafter BBW), it is crucial to rely on the prominent features
of corporate bonds when constructing bond-implied risk factors, in particular because the
bond market is dominated by institutional investors and such clientele requires compensation
for risks different from those in the equity market. BBW introduce novel risk factors based
on downside risk, credit risk, and liquidity risk of corporate bonds and show that these bond
factors have significant risk premia and outperform all other models in the literature.
   After assembling a comprehensive dataset of corporate bond transactions from 1995 to
2019, we conduct nonparametric portfolio analyses. For each bond and each month in our



                                               3
sample, we regress the monthly excess returns of corporate bonds on BBW's risk factors.
Idiosyncratic risk of an individual bond is measured by the residual variance of bond excess
returns from the monthly time-series regressions. Accordingly, systematic risk of an individual
bond is defined as the difference between the total and the residual variance, which is a
function of the variance of risk factors, the covariance of them, and the bond exposures to
risk factors.
   Consistent with the theoretical predictions, we show that there does not exist an IVOL
puzzle in the corporate bond market; instead, future bond returns are explained by their sys-
tematic risk. When sorting corporate bonds into quintile portfolios based on their systematic
risk, we find that bonds in the highest systematic risk quintile generate 7.32%10.20% per
annum higher return than bonds in the lowest systematic risk quintile, with the premium
stemming from the superior performance of bonds with high systematic risk (long leg of the
arbitrage portfolio). Such results remain robust after controlling for various bond characteris-
tics. In contrast, idiosyncratic risk has no significant explanatory power. When comparing the
relative performance of systematic and idiosyncratic risk in terms of their ability to predict
the cross-sectional differences in future bond returns, we find that idiosyncratic risk becomes
even weaker, both economically and statistically, after controlling for systematic risk, where-
as systematic risk remains a significant determinant of the cross-sectional dispersion in bond
returns after controlling for idiosyncratic risk.
   Since corporate bonds and equities issued by the same firm are contingent claims on the
on the same cash flows (Merton, 1974), it may be surprising to see the contradictory findings
on the relation between expected return and risk in the equity versus bond markets. There
are at least two major reasons why the findings in the equity market do not directly apply
to the bond market. First, Merton (1974) makes a number of assumptions in a perfect finan-
cial market to obtain the no-arbitrage relation: (i) all investors are symmetrically informed;
(ii) there are no transaction costs, no taxes, and no restrictions on short selling; and (iii)
lending rates equal borrowing rates. However, these assumptions do not generally hold in



                                                4
practice. For example, equities and bonds attract different clienteles (Auh and Bai, 2020).
Corporate bonds are primarily held by sophisticated institutional investors, whereas naive
retail investors form a material part of the clientele for equities.4 It is reasonable to argue
that the risk appetites and investment objectives of institutional and retail investors differ
as well, suggesting heterogeneity in information sets and preferences across the two markets.
Further, shorting costs as well as liquidity levels are markedly different across the two asset
classes (Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar, 2007), suggesting arbitrage frictions. Finally, equities
and bonds are held by investors who are subject to different regulatory, capital, and funding
liquidity constraints (Bali, Subrahmanyam, and Wen, 2020).
   Second, equity and bond returns are not perfectly correlated (Cao, Goyal, Xiao, and
Zhan, 2020) as they are driven by different risk factors (Bai, Bali, and Wen, 2019). The
correlation between equities and non-investment-grade bonds tends to be higher than that
between equities and investment-grade bonds. Confirming this observation, our sample shows
that the correlation between the monthly returns of non-investment-grade bonds (investment-
grade bonds) and equities is 0.38 (0.22).5 It is also important to note that an equity is a long
position in call option on the firm's asset, while a bond is a short position in put option on
the firm's asset. Thus, equity and bond prices may react differently to changes in the firm's
asset volatility. As such, the direction and significance of the time-series and cross-sectional
relations between expected return and risk in the equity and bond markets may differ.
   To reconcile the conflicting findings on the risk-return tradeoff for equities and bonds,
we explore a potential explanation based on investor preferences and clienteles. According
to the Flow of Funds report released by the Federal Reserve Board, corporate bonds are
primarily held by institutional investors, in particular long-term investors such as insurance
companies, whereas equities are mainly held by retail investors. As of 2019, retail investors
   4
      According to flow of fund data from 1986 to 2019, approximately 78% of corporate bonds were held by
institutional investors, including insurance companies, mutual funds, and pension funds. The participation
rate of retail investors in the corporate bond market is very low.
    5
      The generally low correlation between equity and bond returns is also consistent with Kapadia and Pu
(2012), Chordia et al. (2017), and Bali et al. (2020).




                                                    5
own about 6% in the corporate bond market versus 37% in the equity market. Clearly, two
groups of investors; retail vs. institutional, have distinct risk appetites, preferences, and
investment objectives. Thus, investor clientele can be a plausible cause of the different risk-
return relations in the bond and equity markets. Indeed, we find that in the equity market, the
IVOL puzzle is only pronounced for stocks predominantly held by retail investors but absent
for those largely held by institutional investors. In the corporate bond market, we find that
the idiosyncratic volatility effect is uniformly weak, no matter if the institutional ownership
is high or low. Hence, the investor clientele is likely an explanation for the significance of
systematic risk (idiosyncratic risk) in the bond (equity) market.



2     Data

2.1    Corporate bond returns

We compile corporate bond pricing data from the National Association of Insurance Commis-
sioners database (NAIC) and the enhanced version of the Trade Reporting and Compliance
Engine (TRACE) for the sample period from January 1994 to June 2019, with the TRACE
data starting from July 2002. We then merge corporate bond pricing data with the Mergent
fixed income securities database to obtain bond characteristics such as offering amount, of-
fering date, maturity date, coupon rate, coupon type, interest payment frequency, bond type,
bond rating, bond option features, and issuer information.
    For bond pricing data, we adopt the filtering criteria proposed by Bai, Bali, and Wen
(2019). Specifically, we remove bonds that (i) are not listed or traded in the U.S. public
market, or not issued by U.S. companies; (ii) are structured notes, mortgage-backed, asset-
backed, agency-backed, or equity-linked; (iii) are convertible; (iv) trade under $5 or above
$1,000; (v) have floating coupon rates; and (vi) have less than one year to maturity. For
intraday data, we also eliminate bond transactions that (vii) are labeled as when-issued,
locked-in, or have special sales conditions; (viii) are canceled, and (ix) have a trading volume


                                               6
smaller than $10,000. From the original intraday transaction records, we first calculate the
daily clean price as the trading volume-weighted average of intraday prices to minimize the
effect of bid-ask spreads in prices, following Bessembinder et al. (2009).
    The corporate bond return in month t is computed as

                                           Pi,t + AIi,t + Couponi,t
                                  ri,t =                            - 1,                                (1)
                                                Pi,t-1 + AIi,t-1

where Pi,t is the end-of-month transaction price, AIi,t is accrued interest on the same day of
bond prices, and Couponi,t is the coupon payment in month t, if any. The end-of-month price
refers to the last daily observation if there are multiple trading records in the last ten days
of a given month. We denote Ri,t as bond i's excess return, Ri,t = ri,t - rf,t , where rf,t is the
risk-free rate proxied by the one-month Treasury bill rate.
    After applying the aforementioned data filtering criteria, our sample includes 23,859 bonds
issued by 4,485 unique firms, for a total of 1,318,058 bond-month return observations covering
the sample period from January 1995 to June 2019. Bonds in our sample have an average
monthly return of 0.77%, an average rating of 8 (i.e., BBB+), an average issue size of 450
million dollars, and an average time-to-maturity of 10.13 years. The sample consists of 75%
investment-grade bonds and 25% high-yield bonds.6


2.2     The corporate bond market index

To capture the U.S. corporate bond market returns, we generate an index of the bond market
using the value-weighted average monthly returns of all bonds in our sample for the peri-
od January 1995 ­ June 2019. As a robustness check, we also use the Merrill Lynch U.S.
Corporate Index which is comprised of U.S. dollar denominated investment grade corporate
   6
      We collect bond-level rating information from Mergent FISD historical ratings and assign a number to
facilitate the analysis. Specifically, 1 refers to a AAA rating, 2 refers to AA+, ..., and 21 refers to CCC.
Investment-grade bonds have ratings from 1 (AAA) to 10 (BBB-). Non-investment-grade bonds have ratings
above 10. A larger number indicates higher credit risk or lower credit quality. We determine a bond's rating
as the average of ratings provided by S&P and Moody's when both are available, or as the rating provided
by one of the two rating agencies when only one rating is available.



                                                     7
bonds publicly issued in the U.S. domestic market with at least one year to maturity. The
average (median) excess return on the value-weighted bond market index is 0.33% (0.31%)
per month with a standard deviation of 1.43%. Similarly, the average (median) excess return
on the Merrill Lynch bond index is 0.32% (0.38%) per month with a standard deviation of
1.48%. As expected, the correlation between the two bond market indexes is economically
and statistically significant: 88% with a t-statistic of 14.41.


2.3    Corporate bond and equity holdings

To investigate the clientele effect in the equity and bond markets, we also collect the data on
asset holdings. For equity holdings, we use the Thomson Reuters' institutional holdings (13F)
database that covers all investment companies including banks, insurance companies, mutual
funds, pension funds, university endowments, and other types of professional investment ad-
visors for the sample period of 1980­2019. For bond holdings, we use the Thomson Reuters
eMaxx data that covers investment companies including insurance companies, mutual funds,
and pension funds for the sample period of 2001­2017 (the earliest bond holding data starts
from 2001). For each asset, equity or corporate bond, we aggregate the shares held by all
institutional investors provided in the data and label it as institutional ownership, INST.




3     The Intertemporal Relation Between Expected Return and Risk

The Merton (1973) intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM) shows that the con-
ditional expected excess return on aggregate market is a linear function of its conditional
variance plus a hedging demand component that captures investors' motive to hedge unfavor-
able shifts in future investment opportunities. Merton (1980) indicates that the intertemporal
hedging demand component becomes negligible under certain conditions, and the conditional
expected excess return on the market, Et (Rm,t+1 ), should vary positively with the market's




                                                8
                          2
conditional variance, Et (m,t +1 ):



                                                         2
                                      Et (Rm,t+1 ) = Et (m,t +1 ),                                     (2)


where  is the coefficient of relative risk aversion of the representative agent and according to
the model,  should be positive. Equation (2) establishes the dynamic relation that investors
require a larger risk premium at times when the market is riskier.
   Despite the theoretical appeal of the ICAPM, the trade-off has been hard to find in the
data. Previous estimates of the relation between risk and return in the equity market often
have been insignificant and sometimes even negative. In this section, we first investigate the
intertemporal risk-return relation in the corporate bond market, then compare the findings
to those in the equity market.


3.1    The intertemporal risk-return tradeoff in the bond market

Following French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987), we examine the intertemporal relation
between expected return and risk of bond market returns based on the following time-series
predictive regressions:


                                                2
                                 Rm,t+1 =  +  · m,t +         m,t+1 ,                                  (3)
                                                  n
                                 2          1
                                 m,t    =           (Rm,t - Rm )2 ,                                    (4)
                                          n - 1 t=1
                                                                             2
where Rm,t+1 is the monthly excess return of the bond market in month t + 1; m,t is the
realized variance of the bond market in month t, as a proxy for the expected conditional
                                        2        2
variance of bond market excess returns, m,t  Et (m,t +1 ). According to the ICAPM, 
                                                                        n
                                                    ¯m =                   Rm,t
should be zero and  should be positive. In Eq. (4), R                   t=1
                                                                          n
                                                                                  is the sample average of
                                                            2
market excess returns over the past 36 months (n = 36), and m,t is the sample variance of
monthly excess returns over the past 36 months.



                                                   9
   Table 1 presents the results from the monthly predictive regressions with the value-
weighted corporate bond market index (VWbond ) and the Merrill Lynch bond index (MRLbond ).
Consistent with the theoretical predictions, the estimated slope coefficient on the lagged real-
ized variance ( ) is positive and statistically significant: 21.75 (t-stat.=2.55) for VWbond and
17.53 (t-stat.=2.22) for MRLbond .7 The estimate of the intercept term () is insignificant:
-0.10 (t-stat.=-0.53) for VWbond and -0.08 (t-stat.=-0.38) for MRLbond . The adjusted R2
values, 6.49% for VWbond and 3.50% for MRLbond , are very high, compared to the earlier
studies on the equity market. Overall, these results provide strong evidence of a significant
and positive intertemporal relation between expected return and risk in the corporate bond
market.
   The estimated slope coefficients, 21.75 for VWbond and 17.53 for MRLbond , may appear
notably large to the asset pricing audience as they are familiar with much smaller estimates
of the risk aversion coefficient in the equity market. To provide an insight on the magnitude,
                                                                          2
we calculate the unconditional mean (µm ) and the unconditional variance (m ) of excess
returns on VWbond and MRLbond as well as the ratio of the sample mean to variance (µm /m
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         ).
For the sample period of January 1997 ­ June 2019, the unconditional mean, variance, and the
                     2                  2
ratio are µm =0.33%, m =0.021%, and µm /m =16.09 for VWbond and µm =0.32%, m
                                                                           2
                                                                             =0.022%,
        2
and µm /m =14.76 for MRLbond . As shown in Eq. (2), these large ratios, 16.09 and 14.76,
are proxies of the relative risk aversion coefficient ( ), assuming that the hedging demand
component is negligible. The fact that the estimated slope coefficients, 21.75 for VWbond and
17.53 for MRLbond as reported in Table 1, are close to their unconditional counterparts (16.09
                                                                     2
and 14.76, respectively) suggests that the lagged realized variance, m,t , is a good proxy for
    2
Et (m,t +1 ) in the bond market.

   To provide a comparison, we also calculate the same statistics for aggregate stock market
portfolio, proxied by the value-weighted average returns of all stocks trading in NYSE, AMEX,
and NASDAQ (i.e., the CRSP index). For the same sample period, the unconditional mean,
   7
    The t-statistics are estimated using the Newey and West (1987) adjustment with six lags to account for
autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity in monthly bond returns.



                                                   10
                                                             2                 2
variance, and the ratio for the equity market are µm =0.59%, m =0.20%, and µm /m =2.91.
Thus, consistent with earlier studies, the unconditional estimate of relatively risk aversion
coefficient is much lower at 2.91 for the equity market.


3.1.1    Robustness check: Controlling for the hedging demand

As shown by Merton (1973), and subsequently pointed out by Campbell (1987), Guo and
Whitelaw (2006), and Bali and Engle (2010), Eq. (2) omits the hedging demand component
that captures investors' motive to hedge for future investment opportunities. Thus, we in-
clude financial and macroeconomic variables to capture the state variables that determine the
investment opportunity set:8


                                             2
                              Rm,t+1 =  +  · m,t +  · Xt +         m,t+1 ,                          (5)


where Xt denotes a vector of the one-month lagged financial and macroeconomic variables
proxying for business cycle fluctuations. Following Goyal and Welch (2008), we control for
variables related to macro fundamentals including the log earnings-to-price ratio (EP), the log
dividend-to-price ratio (DP), the book-to-market ratio (BM), the difference between long-term
return on government bonds and the one-month Treasury-bill (TERM), and the difference
between the return on a market portfolio of long-term corporate bonds and the long-term
government bond return (DEF).
   Panel B in Table 1 shows that the intertemporal risk-return relation remains strong after
                                                                                          2
accounting for the hedging demand. It is important to note that the slope coefficients on m,t
reduce from 21.75 to 10.62 for VWbond and from 17.53 to 11.18 for MRLbond , although both
estimates remain highly significant. These results indicate that the corporate bond investors
demand extra compensation in the form of higher expected return for bearing the unfavorable
shifts in the investment opportunity set due to heightened distress risk, default risk, and/or
   8
    See, e.g., Chen, Roll, and Ross (1986), Keim and Stambaugh (1986), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama
and French (1988, 1989), Fama (1990), Campbell (1991), and Ferson and Harvey (1991).



                                                  11
interest rate risk proxied by the control variables such as value-to-price ratios, default spread,
and term spread. Thus, accounting for the changes in these state variables leads to a decline
in the slope coefficients on the lagged realized variance.


3.1.2     Robustness check: GARCH-in-Mean model

We also estimate the risk-return tradeoff using an alternative approach proposed by En-
gle, Lilien, and Robins (1987), the generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity
(GARCH)-in-Mean model:


                                                  2
                                   Rm,t+1 =  +  · m,t +1|t +        m,t+1 ,                              (6)
                                2            2                     2         2
                           Et   m,t+1 |t   = m,t +1|t = 0 + 1      m,t   + 2 m,t,                        (7)


                                                                                2
where Rm,t+1 is the monthly excess return of the bond market in month t + 1 and m,t +1|t

is the time-t expected conditional variance of bond market excess returns. In Eq. (7), t
denotes the information set available at time t and the one-month-ahead conditional variance
                                                                               2
of bond market returns is a function of current unexpected news (              m,t )   and current variance
 2
(m,t ).
    Panel A of Table A.1 in the online appendix shows that for the period January 1997 ­ June
2019, the estimated slope coefficient on the conditional variance of the bond market is positive
and significant:  =20.13 (t-stat.=2.62), whereas the estimate for the equity market is positive
but insignificant:  =1.24 (t-stat.=0.47).9 We also replicate the GARCH-in-Mean analysis for
the equity market using the longest sample period available at CRSP (July 1926-June 2019)
and the estimate is similar:  =1.13 (t-stat.=1.50).
    Note that the GARCH model of Bollerslev (1986) in Eq. (7) is defined as a function
of the squared information shocks to the bond market (or squared unexpected news in the
bond market). Since positive and negative shocks of the same magnitude produce the same
   9
    It is important to note that for the bond market, the magnitude of the risk aversion coefficient obtained
from the GARCH-in-Mean model, 20.13, is very close to the coefficient obtained from the realized variance
model, 21.75, reported in Table 1.


                                                     12
amount of volatility, the symmetric GARCH model in Eq. (7) cannot cope with the skewness
of bond market returns. Hence, one may think that the risk-return coefficients from the
symmetric GARCH-in-Mean model are biased for skewed bond return series. To alleviate
this potential concern, we use the asymmetric GARCH model of Glosten et al. (1993), known
as the Threshold GARCH (or GJRGARCH) model:

                                              2
                               Rm,t+1 =  +  · m,t +1|t +        m,t+1 ,                      (8)

                       2            2                   2         2             2
                  Et   m,t+1 |t   = m,t +1|t = 0 + 1    m,t   + 2 m,t, + 3 Dt   m,t ,        (9)

                           Dt = 1 if   m,t   < 0, and Dt = 0 otherwise

where Eq. (9) allows positive and negative shocks to have different impacts on the conditional
variance of the bond market. If 3 is positive, the GJRGARCH model implies that negative
(positive) shocks increase (decrease) the conditional variance of bond market returns.
   Results for the GJRGARCH-in-Mean model are similar to those for the GARCH-in-Mean
model, as shown in Panel B of Table A.1. The estimated slope coefficient on the conditional
variance of the bond market is positive and significant:  =18.12 (t-stat.=2.47), whereas the
estimate for the equity market becomes negative for the sample period 1997­2019,  =-0.98
(t-stat.=-0.38) and remains insignificant in the longer sample period, 0.72 (t-stat.=1.03).
   Overall, the intertemporal relation between expected return and risk in the bond market
is significantly positive and robust, whereas there is no significant risk-return tradeoff in the
equity market (consistent with earlier studies).



3.2    Economic significance of the intertemporal risk-return tradeoff
       in the bond market

In this section, we investigate the economic value of bond market forecasts based on the
variance of bond market returns. Following Kandel and Stambaugh (1996), Campbell and
Thompson (2008), and Ferreira and Santa-Clara (2011), among others, we compute the cer-



                                                  13
tainty equivalent return (CER) gain for a mean-variance investor who optimally allocates
between the corporate bond market portfolio and the risk-free asset using the out-of-sample
predictive regression forecasts.
    At the end of month t, the investor optimally allocates wt of the portfolio to bonds and
1 - wt to the risk-free asset and earn the realized return at the end of month t + 1 as

                                       p          m               f
                                      Rt +1 = wt Rt+1 + (1 - wt )Rt+1 ,                                     (10)
                                                                  m
                                                               1 Rt +1
                                          where         wt =      2
                                                                       .                                    (11)
                                                                t  +1

                                                m
In Eq.(11),  is the risk aversion coefficient, Rt +1 is the out-of-sample forecast of the corporate

                               2
bond market excess return, and t +1 is the variance forecast. The CER of the portfolio is


                                                           2
                                           CERp = µp - 0.5 p ,                                              (12)

             2
where µp and p are the sample mean and variance of the investor's portfolio over the fore-
casting evaluation period. The CER gain is the difference between the CER based on the
forecast of market return generated by the realized market variance and the CER based on
the historical average forecast.10 To examine the effect of risk aversion, we consider three
levels; 10, 15, and 20, to be consistent with the risk aversion estimates in Table 1.
    Table 2 shows that the bond market variance delivers large economic gains for a mean-
                                                                                   2
variance investor. For the value-weighted bond index in Panel A, the CER gains for m,t across
the risk aversion coefficients are consistently positive and economically large, ranging from
3.64% to 5.04%. Specifically, an investor with a risk aversion of 10, 15, and 20 would be willing
to pay an annual portfolio management fee up to 3.64%, 4.34%, and 5.04%, respectively, to
have access to the intertemporal risk-return regressions in Eqs. (3)­(4). As expected, the
fee increases with risk aversion. Contrary to the large CER gains from the market variance,
macroeconomic variables proxying for business cycle fluctuations generate small economic
   10
     We multiply this difference by 12 so that it can be interpreted as the annual portfolio management fee that
an investor would be willing to pay to have access to the predictive regression forecast instead of the historical
average forecast. We follow DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009) to assess the statistical significance of the
CER gain.


                                                       14
gains. For example, when the risk aversion is 10, EP, DP, BM, and DEF have negative CER
gains of -2.23%, -0.22%, -4.38%, and -2.70%, respectively. The only exception is TERM
which delivers positive economic gains in the range of 1.68% and 2.47%, though the gains are
still much smaller than those based on the bond market variance. As shown in Panel B of
Table 2, the results are similar when we use the Merrill Lynch bond index as an alternative
proxy of the bond market return.
    In addition to the CER gains, we simulate the returns of a trading strategy based on
the out-of-sample one-month-ahead forecasts of the bond market returns using its realized
variance. For each month t, the strategy invests 100% in the bond market index if the
forecasted excess return of bonds over the risk-free rate is greater than zero; otherwise it
invests 100% in Treasury bills. At time t + 1, the return of the portfolio is realized; a new
regression using the expanding window is estimated and a new return forecast is computed.11
We find that for the out-of-sample period from January 2007 to June 2019, the market-timing
strategy using VWbond and its realized variance generates an average return of 0.55% per
month with a standard deviation of 1.52% and a monthly Sharpe ratio of 0.32, higher than
many of the existing corporate bond market factors.12 Overall, Table 2 demonstrates that the
                      2
bond market variance, m,t , can generate sizable economic value for a mean-variance investor,
and the results are robust to different risk aversion coefficients and different proxies for the
corporate bond market returns.


3.3     The intertemporal risk-return tradeoff in the equity market

To make comparisons with the bond market, we now replicate the test in the equity market.
Following French et al. (1987) and a number of follow-up studies, we estimate the time-series
predictive regressions in Eq. (3) using the value-weighted CRSP index as a proxy for the U.S.
   11
      The in-sample estimation period starts from January 1997 to December 2006 and the out-of-sample bond
return forecasts spans January 2007 to June 2019. We choose the in-sample estimation period to be before
the crisis in 2007 to investigate the performance of the market-timing strategy during the crisis period.
   12
      During the same period from January 2007 to June 2019, the monthly Sharpe ratios for the default factor,
term factor, downside risk factor, credit risk factor, and liquidity risk factor are -0.09, 0.22, 0.24, 0.15, and
0.28, respectively.



                                                       15
equity market. Consistent with the findings in French et al. (1987), Goyal and Santa-Clara
(2003), Ghysels et al. (2005), and Bali (2008), Table 3 shows that there exists no significant
intertemporal relation between the realized variance and the one-month-ahead excess return
of aggregate stock market portfolio.
    For the same sample period as used in the bond market, January 1997 ­ June 2019,
the estimated slope coefficient on the lagged realized variance is positive but statistically
insignificant; 1.91 (t-stat.=0.76). When we use the longest sample period available at CRSP
(July 1926-June 2019), the estimate remains insignificant, 0.53 (t-stat.= 0.79). Table 3 also
shows that the adjusted R2 values are close to zero: 0.05% for the 1926­2019 period and
-0.14% for the 1997­2019 period, confirming the insignificant predictive power of the equity
market risk. Controlling for the same set of variables (EP, DP, BM, DEF, TERM), we find
no evidence of a significant time-series link between expected return and risk in the equity
market.
    To understand the contradictory findings on the risk-return tradeoff in the equity versus
bond markets, we provide further investigation in Section 5.




4     The Cross-Sectional Relation Between Expected Return and
      Risk

After thoroughly investigating the time-series relation between risk and return in the bond
market, in this section, we examine the cross-sectional relation between total, systematic,
and idiosyncratic risk and future returns on individual corporate bonds. We first propose a
new measure of systematic and idiosyncratic risk for corporate bonds. Second, we explore
alternative factor models to calculate the risk-adjusted returns of bond portfolios sorted by
systematic and idiosyncratic risk. Third, we present comprehensive evidence on the cross-
sectional relation between risk and future returns of corporate bonds using the portfolio-
level and bond-level Fama-MacBeth regressions. Finally, we test the relative performance of
aggregate systematic vs. idiosyncratic risk in predicting future bond market returns and bond

                                             16
market volatility.

4.1      Systematic and idiosyncratic risks of corporate bonds

For each month, we use a 36-month rolling window to estimate the monthly variance (total
risk) of corporate bonds:
                                                           n
                                           2         1
                                           i,t   =           (Ri,t - Ri )2 ,                                     (13)
                                                   n - 1 t=1
                                                                                           n
                                                                    ¯i =                         Ri,t
where Ri,t = ri,t - rf,t is the excess return on bond i in month t, R                      t=1
                                                                                             n
                                                                                                         is the sample
                                                                2
average of excess returns over the past 36 months (n = 36), and i,t is the sample variance of
monthly excess returns over the past 36 months. A bond is included in the risk calculations
if it has at least 24 monthly return observations in the 36-month rolling window before the
test month.
                                                                               2
    After computing the total risk of each bond, we divide the total variance (i ) into its sys-
tematic and idiosyncratic components. Our objective is to investigate whether the systematic
and/or idiosyncratic component has significant predictive power on future corporate bond
returns. We use the factor model of Bai, Bali, and Wen (2019) that introduces the downside
risk, credit risk, and liquidity risk factors based on independently sorted bivariate portfolios
of bond-level credit rating, value-at-risk, and illiquidity:13


              Ri,t = i + 1,i · M KTt + 2,i · DRFt + 3,i · CRFt + 4,i · LRFt +                           i,t ,    (14)

where Ri,t is the excess return on bond i in month t. Total risk of bond i is measured by
                                             2
the variance of Ri,t in Eq. (13), denoted by i . Idiosyncratic (or residual) risk of bond i is
proxied by the variance of        i,t   in Eq. (14), denoted by  2,i . Systematic risk of bond i is defined
                                                            2
as the difference between total and residual variance, SR = i -  2,i , and it is a function of
the variance of the M KT , DRF , CRF , and LRF factors, the cross-covariances of the M KT ,
   13
     DRF is the downside risk factor, defined as the value-weighted average return difference between the
highest-VaR portfolio minus the lowest-VaR portfolio within each rating portfolio. CRF is the credit risk
factor, defined as the value-weighted average return difference between the highest credit risk portfolio minus
the lowest credit risk portfolio within each illiquidity portfolio. LRF is the liquidity risk factor, defined as the
value-weighted average return difference between the highest illiquidity portfolio minus the lowest illiquidity
portfolio within each rating portfolio.


                                                           17
DRF , CRF , and LRF factors, and the exposures of the bond's excess returns to the M KT ,
DRF , CRF , and LRF factors (i.e., factor loadings). That is, systematic risk of bond i is
attributable to the overall volatility of the four factors as well as the factors' cross-covariances.
   Motivated by the fact that downside risk, credit risk, and liquidity risk jointly play an
important role in determining the expected bond returns, we introduce a new, composite
measure of systematic risk of individual corporate bonds that integrates the covariances of
these risk factors (DRF, CRF, LRF) as well as their own variances. We will show that the
conventional measure of market risk, such as the market beta alone, is not sufficient to capture
the broad systematic risk in the corporate bond market.


4.2    Alternative factor models

We consider three different factor models to estimate the risk-adjusted returns (alphas) of
corporate bond portfolios sorted by total, systematic, and idiosyncratic risk.
   The first one is the 5-factor model with equity market factors, including the excess return
on the market portfolio proxied by the value-weighted stock market index (MKTStock ) in the
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), the size factor (SMB), the book-to-market
factor (HML), the momentum factor (MOMStock ), and the liquidity risk factor (LIQStock ),
following Fama and French (1993), Carhart (1997), and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003).14
   The second one is the 5-factor model with bond market factors, including aggregate corpo-
rate bond market (MKT), the default spread factor (DEF), the term spread factor (TERM),
the bond liquidity factor (LIQBond ), and the bond momentum factor (MOMBond ), following
Fama and French (1993), Elton, Gruber, and Blake (1995), Lin, Wang, and Wu (2011), and
Jostova et al. (2013). Following Fama and French (1993), we define the default factor (DE-
F) as the difference between the return on a market portfolio of long-term corporate bonds
(the composite portfolio on the corporate bond module from Ibbotson Associates) and the
  14
     The factors MKTStock (excess market return), SMB (small minus big), HML (high minus low), MOM
(winner minus loser), and LIQ (liquidity risk) are described in and obtained from Kenneth French's
and Lubos Pastor's online data libraries: http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/ and
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/lubos.pastor/research/.


                                                 18
long-term government bond return, and we define the term factor (TERM) as the difference
between the monthly long-term government bond return (from Ibbotson Associates) and the
one-month Treasury bill rate. Following Jostova et al. (2013) and Bali et al. (2020), the bond
momentum factor (MOMBond ) is constructed from 5×5 bivariate portfolios of credit rating
and bond momentum, defined as the cumulative returns over months from t - 7 to t - 2
(formation period). We construct the liquidity risk factor (LIQBond ) in line with Lin, Wang,
and Wu (2011).
   The third one is the 10-factor model combining the five equity market factors and the five
bond market factors described above.
   Panel A of Table 4 shows that bonds in our sample have an average systematic risk of 0.13%
with a standard deviation of 0.27%. Panel B presents the correlation matrix between SR and
the other bond characteristics. Following Bai, Bali, and Wen (2019), our proxy for downside
risk is the 5% Value-at-Risk (VaR), the second lowest monthly return observation over the past
36 months.15 Following Roll (1984), bond-level illiquidity is proxied by the autocovariance of
daily bond price changes within each month. As shown in Panel B, systematic risk is positively
associated with rating, maturity, downside risk, and bond-level illiquidity, with respective
correlations of 0.342, 0.124, 0.623, and 0.184. These numbers indicate that bonds with higher
credit risk, longer maturity (proxying for higher interest rate risk), higher downside risk, and
lower liquidity have higher systematic risk. Bond size is negatively correlated with systematic
risk, implying that smaller and illiquid bonds have higher systematic risk.


4.3     The cross-sectional relation between systematic risk and ex-

        pected bond returns

We first test the significance of a cross-sectional relation between systematic risk and future
bond returns using portfolio-level analysis. For each month from January 1997 to June 2019,
we form value-weighted univariate portfolios by sorting corporate bonds into quintiles based
  15
     Following BBW, we multiply the original VaR measure by -1 so that a higher value is associated with
higher downside risk for convenience of interpretation.

                                                  19
on their systematic risk (SR), where quintile 1 contains bonds with the lowest SR and quintile
5 contains bonds with the highest SR. Table 5 shows, for each quintile, the average systematic
risk of bonds, the next month average excess return, the 5-factor alpha from stock market
factors, the 5-factor alpha from bond market factors, and the 10-factor alpha from both stock
and bond market factors. The last six columns report the average bond characteristics for
each quintile, including the bond market beta, illiquidity, downside risk, credit rating, time-to-
maturity, and bond size. The last row displays the differences in the average returns and the
alphas between quintile 5 and quintile 1. The average excess returns and alphas are defined
in terms of monthly percentages. Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics with six lags are
reported in parentheses.
   Moving from quintile 1 to quintile 5, the average excess return on the SR-sorted portfolios
increases monotonically from 0.19% to 1.03% per month. This indicates a monthly average
return difference of 0.85% between quintiles 5 and 1 with a Newey-West t-statistic of 3.64,
implying that this positive return difference is economically and statistically significant. This
result shows that corporate bonds in the highest SR quintile generate 10.20% per annum
higher average return than bonds in the lowest SR quintile do.
   In addition to the average excess returns, Table 5 presents the intercepts (alphas) from
the regression of the quintile excess portfolio returns on a constant, the excess stock market
return (MKTStock ), the size factor (SMB), the book-to-market factor (HML), the momentum
factor (MOM), and the liquidity factor (LIQ) described in Section 4.2. The third column
of Table 5 shows that, similar to the average excess returns, the 5-factor alpha from stock
market factors also increases monotonically from 0.15% to 0.76% per month, moving from the
low-SR to the high-SR quintile, indicating a positive and significant alpha spread of 0.61%
per month (t-stat.= 2.51).
   Beyond the well-known stock market factors, we also test whether the significant return
difference between High-SR bonds and Low-SR bonds is explained by prominent bond market
factors. Similar to our earlier findings from the average excess returns and the 5-factor alphas



                                               20
from stock market factors, the fourth column of Table 5 shows that, moving from the low-
SR to the high-SR quintile, the 5-factor alpha from bond market factors increases almost
monotonically from 0.06% to 0.80% per month. The corresponding 5-factor alpha spread
between quintiles 5 and 1 is positive and highly significant: 0.73% per month with a t-statistic
of 3.25. The fifth column of Table 5 presents the 10-factor alpha for each quintile from the
combined five stock and five bond market factors. Consistent with our earlier results, the 10-
factor alpha is 0.62% per month with a t-statistic of 2.46. Overall, these results indicate that
the commonly used stock and bond market factors do not explain the significantly positive
systematic risk premium in the corporate bond market.16
    Next, we investigate the source of the significant risk-adjusted return (alpha) spread be-
tween the high- and low-SR bonds. As reported in Table 5, the 10-factor alpha in quintile
1 (low-SR bonds) is economically and statistically insignificant, whereas the 10-factor alpha
in quintile 5 (high-SR bonds) is positive and highly significant. Hence, we conclude that
the significantly positive alpha spread between the high- and low-SR bonds is due to the
outperformance by high-SR bonds (long leg of the arbitrage portfolio), but not due to the
underperformance by low-SR bonds (short leg of the arbitrage portfolio).17
    Finally, we examine the average characteristics of SR-sorted bond portfolios. As shown in
the last six columns of Table 5, high-SR bonds have higher bond market beta, lower liquidity,
higher downside risk, lower credit quality, and longer maturity. These results indicate that
bonds with higher systematic risk have higher market, credit, and downside risk and have
lower liquidity. Thus, we will test whether the systematic risk premium is explained by the
aforementioned risk and liquidity characteristics of corporate bonds in bivariate portfolio sorts
   16
       Our finding of a significantly positive systematic risk premium in the bond market is also consistent
with Koijen, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2017) showing that bond factors which predict future economic
activity at business cycle horizons are priced in the cross-section of bond returns, highlighting the role of
systematic risk in the bond market.
   17
      In Table A.2 of the online appendix, we test the significance of a cross-sectional relation between total
risk (volatility) and future bond returns. Similar to our findings in Table 5 for SR-sorted portfolios, Table A.2
shows that the average return and alpha spreads between high-VOL and low-VOL quintiles are positive and
highly significant and the significantly positive alpha spread is driven by the outperformance of high-volatility
bonds, but not due to the underperformance of low-volatility bonds.




                                                       21
and multivariate regressions.


4.4     Is there an IVOL puzzle in the corporate bond market?

In sharp contrast to the findings in Table 5, Table 6 presents evidence for the poor performance
of idiosyncratic risk (IR) in predicting the cross-sectional variation in future bond returns.
Compared to Table 5, the average return spread between quintiles 5 and 1 in Table 6 is weaker
economically: 0.45% per month (t-stat. = 2.14). More importantly, the 10-factor alpha spread
between the high-IR and low-IR quintiles is economically and statistically insignificant at
0.17% per month (t-stat. = 1.16). These results show that the standard bond market factors
explain the average return spread in idiosyncratic volatility-sorted portfolios.
   As discussed earlier, corporate bonds are primarily held by institutional investors. The
insignificant 10-factor alpha spread in Table 6 suggests that institutional investors in the
corporate bond market are able to create well-diversified portfolios with a small exposure to
bond-specific risk so that idiosyncratic volatility does not command a significant risk premium
in the bond market. Since institutional investors do not demand compensation for not being
able to diversify firm-specific risk, there exists no significant relation between idiosyncratic risk
and future bond returns, consistent with the theoretical models of Levy (1978) and Merton
(1987). Thus, we conclude that there is no IVOL puzzle in the corporate bond market.

4.5     Bivariate portfolios of systematic risk and idiosyncratic risk

In this section, we investigate the predictive power of systematic and idiosyncratic risk while
accounting for the interaction between them. Specifically, we perform a bivariate portfolio
analysis for systematic risk by controlling for idiosyncratic risk, and then we conduct the same
test for idiosyncratic risk while controlling for systematic risk.


4.5.1   Bivariate portfolios of systematic risk controlling for idiosyncratic risk

We first test whether the positive relation between systematic risk and future bond return-
s remains significant after controlling for idiosyncratic risk. To perform this test, we form

                                                 22
quintile portfolios every month from January 1997 to June 2019 by first sorting corporate
bonds into five quintiles based on their idiosyncratic risk. Then, within each IR-sorted port-
folio, bonds are further sorted into five sub-quintiles based on their systematic risk. This
methodology produces sub-quintile bond portfolios with dispersion in SR but nearly identical
IR values under each IR-sorted quintile. SR,1 represents the lowest SR-ranked bond quintiles
within each of the five IR-ranked quintiles. Similarly, SR,5 represents the highest SR-ranked
quintiles within each of the five IR-ranked quintiles. Panel A of Table 7 shows the average
systematic risk and the next month average return for each quintile. Moving from portfolio
SR,1 to SR,5, the average return increases almost monotonically from 0.44% to 1.21% per
month. The average return difference between portfolio SR,5 and SR,1 (i.e., high-SR bonds
versus low-SR bonds) is 0.77% per month with a t-statistic of 2.73, indicating that the positive
relation between systematic risk and future bond returns remains significant after controlling
for idiosyncratic risk.
   We also check whether this significant return spread between portfolio SR,5 and portfolio
SR,1 is explained by established equity and bond market factors. The 5-factor stock, 5-factor
bond, and 10-factor alpha spreads are all positive at 0.71%, 0.65%, and 0.59% per month,
and statistically significant. Thus, first controlling for idiosyncratic risk and then controlling
for stock and bond market factors, the risk-adjusted return spread between the high-SR and
low-SR bonds remains positive and significant.


4.5.2   Bivariate portfolios of idiosyncratic risk controlling for systematic risk

We now investigate the relation between idiosyncratic risk and future bond returns after
controlling for systematic risk. To perform this test, we reverse the portfolio sorting in the
above subsection and rank corporate bonds first by SR, and then by IR within each SR-sorted
portfolio. In Table 7, Panel B shows that the average return spread between portfolio IR,5 and
IR,1 is positive but economically small, 0.11% per month, and statistically insignificant with a
t-statistic of 0.78, indicating that the significant relation between idiosyncratic risk and future



                                                23
raw returns disappears after controlling for systematic risk. In addition, the differences in the
5-factor stock, 5-factor bond, and 10-factor alphas are all economically small and statistically
insignificant. Overall, the bivariate portfolio analyses indicate that compared to idiosyncratic
risk, the composite measure of systematic risk is a more powerful determinant of the cross-
sectional variation in corporate bond returns.


4.6     Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions

We have so far tested the significance of systematic and idiosyncratic risk measures as deter-
minants of the cross-section of future bond returns at the portfolio level. To examine their
impact simultaneously, we use Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions and control for other
risk characteristics, including the bond market beta, default beta, term beta, bond-level illiq-
uidity, credit rating, year-to-maturity, bond amount outstanding, and lagged bond return.18
Monthly cross-sectional regressions are run for the following specification and nested versions
thereof:
                                                             K
              Ri,t+1 = 0,t + 1,t · SRi,t + 2,t · IRi,t +          k,t · Controlk,t + i,t+1 ,         (15)
                                                            k=1

where Ri,t+1 is the excess return on bond i in month t + 1.
   Table 8 reports the time series average of the intercept, slope coefficients ('s), and the
adjusted R2 values over the 252 months from January 1997 to June 2019. The univariate
regression results confirm those obtained from the portfolio analysis. In Regression (1), the
average slope, 1,t , from the monthly regressions of excess returns on SR alone is 1.828 with
a t-statistic of 4.33. The economic magnitude of the associated effect is similar to that doc-
umented in Table 5. The spread in average SR between low-SR and high-SR portfolios is
approximately 0.50%, and multiplying this spread by the average slope of 1.828 produces an
estimated monthly return difference of 91 basis points.19 Similarly, the estimate of idiosyn-
  18
      The bond market beta ( M KT ), default beta ( DEF ), and term beta ( T ERM ) are the risk exposures
to aggregate bond market factor, the default factor, and the term factor obtained from a 36-month rolling
window estimation.
   19
      Note that the ordinary least squares (OLS) methodology used in the Fama-MacBeth regressions gives an


                                                   24
cratic risk premium, 2,t , is positive and significant in univariate regression (2), consistent
with the significantly positive raw return spread reported in Table 6. When including both
SR and IR in regression (3), systematic risk premium remains significant, while idiosyncrat-
ic risk premium disappears. This finding is consistent with the bivariate portfolio results
reported in Table 7.
    After controlling for various bond characteristics in regressions (4)-(6), the results remain
robust that there is no premium for idiosyncratic risk, but a significantly positive premium for
systematic risk. These results show that the newly proposed composite measure of systematic
risk has distinct information beyond bond size, maturity, rating, liquidity, market risk, and
default risk, and that it is a strong and robust predictor of future bond returns.
    Our findings are consistent with theoretical predictions. We attribute the theoretical align-
ment to the fact that we construct an economically sensible measure of systematic risk not
only because we choose robust risk factors that capture common variation in corporate bond
returns, but also because of the way we synthesize information over these factors. Our sys-
tematic risk measure is a function that synthesizes the variance of the underlying factors, the
cross-covariances of the factors, and the exposures of bond returns to the factors. Motivated
by the fact that downside risk, credit risk, and liquidity risk jointly play an important role in
determining expected bond returns, one needs a comprehensive measure that can integrate
the covariances of these risk factors as well as their own variances. Thus, the conventional
measure of market risk, such as the market beta alone, is not sufficient to capture the broad
systematic risk in the corporate bond market, as shown by the insignificant average slope
coefficients on  M KT .

4.7     Robustness check

We conduct several robustness checks on the predictive power of systematic risk and present
the results in the online appendix (Tables A.3 to A.6). Our results show that the predictive
equal weight to each cross-sectional observation so that the regression results are more aligned with the equal-
weighted portfolios. That is why the economic significance of SR obtained from Fama-MacBeth regressions,
0.91% per month, is somewhat higher than the 0.85% per month obtained from the value-weighted portfolios
(see Table 5).

                                                      25
power of SR for future bond returns (i) is significantly positive for both investment-grade
and non-investment-grade bonds, (ii) remains economically and statistically significant for
different subperiods from January 1997 to June 2019 (including the crisis and the postcri-
sis/recovery periods), and (iii) is robust to using firm-level regressions by picking one bond
with median size or the most liquid bond as a representative bond of the firm.



4.8     The nexus of the cross-section and time-series predictability

Cochrane (2005) and Maio and Santa-Clara (2012) investigate the ICAPM restrictions in the
cross-section and time-series predictability, and show that the cross-sectional variable (when
aggregated) should predict future market return and market volatility if the variable can be
interpreted as the state variable that affects investment opportunity set in the ICAPM. In
this subsection, we provide novel evidence in the bond market supporting this interpretation.
   We construct three aggregate measures of systematic risk using different weighting schemes,
namely, the equal-weighted, value-weighted, and rating-weighted cross-sectional average of
bond-level systematic risk, and investigate their predictive power for future returns and volatil-
ity of aggregate bond market portfolio. Fig.1 plots the time-series of aggregate systematic
risk over the sample period from January 1997 to June 2019. The three measures are highly
correlated with an average correlation coefficient of 0.95, and all spike during the Great Re-
cession.20 To test the time-series predictive power of aggregate systematic risk, we control for
a large set of macroeconomic variables proxying for business cycle fluctuations:


             Yt+ =  + 1 · SRt + 2 · Xtk +          t+1 ,     k = 1, ..., 6;    = 1, 2, ..., 12        (16)

where Yt+ is one of the two dependent variables: bond market excess return (VWbond ) and
bond market variance (MKTV OL ), calculated as the sum of squared daily bond market returns
in a month. Xtk is a vector of control variables similar to those used in Eq. (5).
  20
     As a result, we use the value-weighted average systematic risk (SRV W ) in our time-series predictive
regressions. Table A.7 of the online appendix shows that the results are similar when we use the equal- and
rating-weighted aggregate measures.


                                                    26
     Table 9 presents the performance of aggregate systematic risk in predicting  -month a-
head aggregate bond market returns and bond market volatility for different horizons ( =
1, 2, ..., 12). Panel A shows that the estimated slope coefficients, 1 , in Eq. (16) are signifi-
cantly positive, indicating the strong predictive power of aggregate systematic risk on future
bond market returns up to 9 months, even after controlling for a number of time-series return
predictors. Further, the adjusted R2 values are very high compared to those presented in ear-
lier studies for the equity market.21 Panel B shows that aggregate systematic risk positively
predicts future bond market volatility up to six months into the future. Both sets of results
suggest that the composite measure of systematic risk satisfies the ICAPM restrictions on the
time-series and cross-sectional predictability.
     In sharp contrast to the strong predictability of aggregate systematic risk, Table 10 shows
that aggregate idiosyncratic risk does not have any predictive power for future bond market
returns or volatility. None of the estimated slope coefficients on aggregate idiosyncratic risk
is significant for any forecasting horizon in either Panel A or Panel B.
     The time-series predictability of aggregate systematic risk in this subsection resonates the
findings in Section 3, both corroborating the significance of a positive intertemporal risk-return
tradeoff in the corporate bond market.




5        Investigating the Role of Systematic and Idiosyncratic Risk in
         the Bond and Equity Markets

In this section, we examine the different roles played by systematic and idiosyncratic risk in
the cross-sectional pricing of equities versus bonds. First, we propose a similar measure of
systematic risk for individual stocks and revisit the IVOL puzzle in the equity market. Then,
we explore the impact of the investor clientele on the predictive power of idiosyncratic risk
    21
     The strong predictive power of SR in Table 9 is consistent with Table A.8 in the online appendix, which
reports the significant time-series predictive power of the value-, equal-, and rating-weighted average of total
variance of individual bonds for the one-month-ahead bond market returns.




                                                      27
for future stock and bond returns.

5.1     Revisiting the IVOL puzzle in the equity market

Our composite measure of systematic risk for corporate bonds is a function of the variance of
the underlying bond factors, the cross-covariances of the factors, and the bond exposures to
these factors. Thus, the key input to construct a sound measure of systematic risk is to use
economically sensible risk factors that capture common return variation in corporate bonds
and that provide an accurate characterization of firm fundamentals.
   In this section, we propose a similar comprehensive measure of systematic risk for individ-
ual stocks using the powerful equity factor models proposed by Fama and French (2015) and
Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). Specifically, we construct a composite measure of systematic
risk for individual stocks based on the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015) in Eq. (17)
and the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) in Eq. (18):

                      Stock
 Ri,d = i + 1,i · M KTd     + 2,i · SM Bd + 3,i · HM Ld + 4,i · RM Wd + 5,i · CM Ad +               i,d ,   (17)

                            Stock
       Ri,d = i + 1,i · M KTd     + 2,i · M EQ,d + 3,i · ROEQ,d + 4,i · IAQ,d +             i,d .           (18)


                                                                      Stock
where Ri,d is the excess return of stock i on day d. In Eq. (17), M KTd     , SM Bd , HM Ld ,
RM Wd , and CM Ad in) are the daily equity market, size, book-to-market, profitability, and
investment factors of Fama and French (2015). In Eq. (18), M EQ,d , ROEQ,d , and IAQ,d are
the daily size, profitability, and investment Q factors of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015).22
                                                                  2
   The total risk of stock i is measured by the variance of Ri,d (i ), calculated as the sum of
squared daily returns in a month. Idiosyncratic risk is measured by the variance of                 i,d   ( 2,i ).
                                                                                     2
Systematic risk is thus the difference between the total and residual variance, SR = i -  2,i .
Following Ang et al. (2006) and subsequent work on idiosyncratic volatility in the equity
  22
     The M KT , SM B , HM L, RM W , and CM A factors of Fama-French (2015) are obtained from the data
library (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/) for the longest sample period from July
1963 to June 2019. The Q factors (M EQ , ROEQ , and IAQ ) of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) are obtained
from the data library (http://global-q.org/index.html) for the long sample period from January 1967 to June
2019.



                                                    28
market, Eqs. (17) and (18) are estimated using daily returns over the past month, requiring
at least 15 daily return observations in a month.23
    Table 11 presents results from the value-weighted univariate portfolios of stocks sorted
separately by systematic risk and idiosyncratic risk. Consistent with the IVOL puzzle in the
equity market, systematic risk estimated either with Eq. (17) or (18) does not predict the
cross-sectional variation in equity returns, whereas the IVOL puzzle remains significant in the
equity market. One potential explanation is that investors hold concave preferences thus like
positive skewness. If positive skewness is a desirable characteristic of a return distribution,
then the fact that diversification destroys portfolio skewness makes investors to be willing to
hold a limited number of stocks in their portfolios.24
    Since individual investors do not hold a large number of stocks in their portfolios, they
are unable to diversify firm-specific risk. Thus, according to the theoretical models of Levy
(1978) and Merton (1987), stocks with higher idiosyncratic risk require higher returns to
compensate for imperfect diversification, justifying a positive (not negative) cross-sectional
relation between idiosyncratic risk and future equity returns. Since the IVOL puzzle is known
to be significant only in the sample of stocks largely held by individual investors (to be
confirmed in the next section), we conclude that retail investors' demand for positive skewness
dominates their aversion to volatility so that retail investors prefer to hold a small number
of lottery-like stocks with large positive skewness. Given that lottery stocks tend to have
high idiosyncratic volatility and low future returns, retail investors' preference for lottery-like
securities show some promise in solving the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle in the equity market
(e.g., Kumar, 2009; Bali et al., 2011; Hou and Loh, 2016).
   23
      We also use monthly data in estimating idiosyncratic volatility of individual stocks, to be consistent with
the method in Section 4. The findings remain similar to those obtained from the daily data.
   24
      The literature shows that the portfolios of individual investors are, in general, not well-diversified. For
example, Goetzmann and Kumar (2008) find that the median number of stocks in a portfolio of individual
investors is three in the 1991-1996 period. Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2001) also report the median
number of stocks in individual investors' portfolios as two to three.




                                                       29
5.2    The investor clientele effect in the equity and bond markets

The Flow of Funds report released by the Federal Reserve Board shows the composition of
investors in the U.S. equity and corporate bond markets. Over the period of 1986 to 2019, the
primary holders of corporate bonds are institutional investors (78% on average), in particular,
insurance companies, mutual funds, and pension funds, whereas the main holders of equities
are retail investors (household sector, 43%), then mutual funds (33%) and pension funds
(15%). Since equities and bonds are mainly held by different groups of investors, retail vs.
institutional investors, the difference in investor preferences and clienteles can be a plausible
cause for the significance of systematic risk (idiosyncratic risk) in the bond (equity) market.
   We first investigate the effect of the investor clientele on the predictive power of idiosyn-
cratic risk for future stock returns. To perform this task, we form quintile portfolios every
month from January 1980 to June 2019 by sorting individual stocks into portfolios based on
institutional ownership, then within each ownership portfolio, we further sort stocks into sub-
quintiles based on their idiosyncratic risk. Table 12 shows that the negative cross-sectional
relation between idiosyncratic risk and future returns is more pronounced among stocks with
low institutional ownership (i.e., stocks largely held by retail investors). More importantly,
the IVOL puzzle disappears among stocks with high institutional ownership. This result is
consistent with the evidence provided by Kumar (2009) and Han and Kumar (2013) that
retail investors tend to be more attracted to high volatility stocks because of their lottery-like
features, and such behavior leads to the negative cross-sectional relation between idiosyncratic
volatility and future stock returns.
   We conduct a similar analysis for corporate bonds using Thompson Reuter's eMAXX bond
holdings data. This dataset has a comprehensive coverage of quarterly fixed income holdings
for U.S. institutional investors such as insurance companies and mutual funds. For a given
bond i in quarter t, the measure of institutional ownership is defined as:

                                            Holdingijt
                        IN STit =                              =       hjt ,                 (19)
                                    j
                                         OutstandingAmtit          j



                                               30
where Holdingijt is the par amount holdings of investor j on bond i during quarter t,
OutstandingAmtit is bond i's outstanding amount, and hjt is the fraction of the outstanding
amount held by investor j , in percentage.
     We examine whether the idiosyncratic volatility effect in corporate bonds is uniform across
bonds with high and low institutional ownership.25 Specifically, we form value-weighted bi-
variate portfolios by sorting corporate bonds into 5×5 quintile portfolios based on institutional
ownership and idiosyncratic volatility estimated in Eq. (14). Table 13 reports the 10-factor
alpha for each of the 25 portfolios at month t + 1 and shows that the alpha spread between
high-IR and low-IR quintiles is economically small and statistically insignificant in all quin-
tiles of institutional ownership. Moreover, the magnitude of the alpha spreads is uniformly
insignificant across all INST quintiles.



6        Conclusion

This paper provides time-series and cross-sectional evidence on the significance of a risk-
return tradeoff in the corporate bond market. For the first time in the literature, we present
evidence of a significantly positive intertemporal relation between expected return and risk of
the aggregate bond market portfolio, while the literature has not yet reached an agreement
on the existence of such a positive risk-return tradeoff for the equity market. Moreover, we
show that the time-series predictability is driven solely by aggregate systematic risk instead
of aggregate idiosyncratic risk.
     The paper also proposes novel measures of systematic and idiosyncratic risk for individual
corporate bonds and tests their significance in the cross-sectional pricing of corporate bond-
s. The portfolio-level analyses and the bond-level cross-sectional regressions both indicate
that the newly proposed measure of systematic risk has a strong predictive power on future
bond returns, and the positive systematic risk premium is driven by the outperformance of
    25
     Our access to the eMAXX bond holdings data covers the period 2001-2017 so that our analysis on bond
holdings is based on the sample period January 2001-December 2017.



                                                  31
bonds with high systematic risk. Given the powerful presence of systematic risk in the cross-
sectional pricing of corporate bonds, the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle well-documented in
the stock market no longer exists in the bond market. This finding suggests that the institu-
tional investors dominating the bond market hold well-diversified portfolios with a negligible
exposure to bond-specific risk so that idiosyncratic volatility does not command a significant
risk premium in the bond market.
   The contradictory findings of the significance of systematic risk (idiosyncratic risk) in the
bond (equity) market is likely due to investor preferences and informational frictions in the
bond versus equity market given that the bond (equity) market is dominated by institutional
(retail) investors.




                                              32
References
Ang, A., Hodrick, R. J., Xing, Y., Zhang, X., 2006. The cross-section of volatility and expected
  returns. Journal of Finance 61, 259­299.

Auh, J. K., Bai, J., 2020. Cross-asset information synergy in mutual fund families, Working Paper,
  SSRN eLibrary.

Bai, J., Bali, T. G., Wen, Q., 2019. Common risk factors in the cross-section of corporate bond
  returns. Journal of Financial Economics 131, 619­642.

Bali, T. G., 2008. The intertemporal relation between expected returns and risk. Journal of Financial
  Economics 87, 101­131.

Bali, T. G., Cakici, N., Whitelaw, R. F., 2011. Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and the cross-section
  of expected returns. Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427­446.

Bali, T. G., Engle, R. F., 2010. The intertemporal capital asset pricing model with dynamic condi-
  tional correlations. Journal of Monetary Economics 57, 377­390.

Bali, T. G., Subrahmanyam, A., Wen, Q., 2020. Long-term reversals in the corporate bond market.
  Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

Barber, B., Odean, T., 2001. Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common stock invest-
  ment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261­292.

Bessembinder, H., Kahle, K. M., Maxwell, W. F., Xu, D., 2009. Measuring abnormal bond perfor-
  mance. Review of Financial Studies 22, 4219­4258.

Bollerslev, T., 1986. Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity. Journal of Economet-
  rics 31, 307­327.

Bollerslev, T., Engle, R. F., Wooldridge, J., 1988. A capital asset pricing model with time-varying
  covariances. Journal of Political Economy 96, 116­131.

Bollerslev, T., Zhou, H., 2006. Volatility puzzles: a simple framework for gauging return-volatility
  regressions. Journal of Econometrics 131, 123­150.

Brandt, M., Kang, Q., 2004. On the relationship between the conditional mean and volatility of
  stock returns: a latent var approach. Journal of Financial Economics 72, 217­257.

Campbell, J., 1991. A variance decomposition for stock returns. The Economic Journal 101, 157­179.

Campbell, J., Thompson, S., 2008. Predicting the equity premium out of sample: Can anything beat
  the historical average? Review of Financial Studies 21, 1509­1531.

Campbell, J. Y., 1987. Stock returns and the term structure. Journal of Financial Economics 18,
  373­399.

Campbell, J. Y., Hentchel, L., 1992. No news is good news: an asymmetric model of changing
  volatility in stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281­318.



                                                 33
Campbell, J. Y., Shiller, R. J., 1988. Stock prices, earnings, and expected dividends. Journal of
  Finance 43, 661­676.

Cao, J., Goyal, A., Xiao, X., Zhan, X., 2020. Implied volatility changes and corporate bond returns,
  Working Paper, SSRN eLibrary.

Carhart, M. M., 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance 52, 57­82.

Chen, N.-F., Roll, R., Ross, S. A., 1986. Economic forces and the stock market. Journal of Business
  59, 383­403.

Chordia, T., Goyal, A., Nozawa, Y., Subrahmanyam, A., Tong, Q., 2017. Are capital market anoma-
  lies common to equity and corporate bond markets? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Anal-
  ysis 52, 1301­1342.

Cochrane, J., 2005. Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., Uppal, R., 2009. Optimal versus naive diversification: How inefficient is
  the 1/n portfolio strategy? Review of Financial Studies 22, 1915­1953.

Edwards, A. K., Harris, L. E., Piwowar, M. S., 2007. Corporate bond market transaction costs and
  transparency. Journal of Finance 62, 1421­1451.

Elton, E. J., Gruber, M. J., Blake, C., 1995. Fundamental economic variables, expected returns, and
  bond fund performance. Journal of Finance 50, 1229­1256.

Engle, R. F., Lilien, D. M., Robins, R. P., 1987. Estimating time varying risk premia in the term
  structure: The arch-m model. Econometrica 55, 391­407.

Fama, E. F., 1990. Stock returns, expected returns, and real activity. Journal of Finance 45, 1089­
  1108.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1988. Dividend yields and expected stock returns. Journal of Financial
  Economics 22, 3­25.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1989. Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds.
  Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23­49.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal
  of Financial Economics 33, 3­56.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics
  116, 1­22.

Fama, E. F., MacBeth, J. D., 1973. Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal of
  Political Economy 81, 607­636.

Ferreira, M., Santa-Clara, P., 2011. Forecasting stock market returns: The sum of the parts is more
  than the whole. Journal of Financial Economics 100, 514­537.

Ferson, W. E., Harvey, C. R., 1991. The variation of economic risk premiums. Journal of Political
  Economy 99, 385­415.


                                                 34
French, K. R., Schwert, G., Stambaugh, R., 1987. Expected stock returns and volatility. Journal of
  Financial Economics 19, 3­29.

Ghysels, E., Santa-Clara, P., Valkanov, R., 2005. There is a risk-return trade-off after all. Journal of
  Financial Economics 76, 509­548.

Glosten, L., Jagannathan, R., Runkle, D., 1993. On the relation between the expected value and the
  volatility of the nominal excess returns on stocks. Journal of Finance 48, 1779­1801.

Goetzmann, W. N., Kumar, A., 2008. Equity portfolio diversification. Review of Finance 12, 433­463.

Goyal, A., Santa-Clara, P., 2003. Idiosyncratic risk matters! Journal of Finance 58, 975­1007.

Goyal, A., Welch, I., 2008. A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity premium
  prediction. Review of Financial Studies 21, 1455­1508.

Graham, J., Leary, M., Roberts, M., 2015. A century of capital structure: The leveraging of corporate
  america. Journal of Financial Economics 118, 658­683.

Guo, H., Whitelaw, R., 2006. Uncovering the risk-return relation in the stock market. Journal of
  Finance 61, 1433­1463.

Han, B., Kumar, A., 2013. Speculative retail trading and asset prices. Journal of Financial and
  Quantitative Analysis 48, 377­404.

Harrison, P., Zhang, H., 1999. An investigation of the risk and return relation at long horizons.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 399­408.

Harvey, C. R., 2001. The specification of conditional expectations. Journal of Empirical Finance 8,
  573­637.

Hirshleifer, D., 1988. Residual risk, trading costs, and commodity futures risk premia. Review of
  Financial Studies 1, 173­193.

Hou, K., Loh, R., 2016. Have we solved the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle? Journal of Financial
  Economics 121, 167­194.

Hou, K., Xue, C., Zhang, L., 2015. Digesting anomalies: an investment approach. Review of Financial
  Studies 28, 650­705.

Jostova, G., Nikolova, S., Philipov, A., Stahel, C., 2013. Momentum in corporate bond returns.
  Review of Financial Studies 26, 1649­1693.

Kandel, S., Stambaugh, R., 1996. On the predictability of stock returns: An asset allocation per-
  spective. Journal of Finance 51, 385­424.

Kapadia, N., Pu, X., 2012. Limited arbitrage between equity and credit markets. Journal of Financial
  Economics 105, 542­564.

Keim, D. B., Stambaugh, R. F., 1986. Predicting returns in the stock and bond markets. Journal of
  Financial Economics 17, 357­390.

Koijen, R., Lustig, H., Nieuwerburgh, S. V., 2017. The cross-section and time-series of stock and
  bond returns. Journal of Monetary Economics 88, 50­69.

                                                  35
Kumar, A., 2009. Who gambles in the stock market? Journal of Finance 64, 1889­1933.

Levy, H., 1978. Equilibrium in an imperfect market: a constraint on the number of securities in the
  portfolio. American Economic Review 68, 643­658.

Lin, H., Wang, J., Wu, C., 2011. Liquidity risk and the cross-section of expected corporate bond
  returns. Journal of Financial Economics 99, 628­650.

Maio, P., Santa-Clara, P., 2012. Multifactor models and their consistency with the icapm. Journal
 of Financial Economics 106, 586­613.

Merton, R. C., 1973. An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41, 867­887.

Merton, R. C., 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates. Journal
 of Finance 29, 449­470.

Merton, R. C., 1980. On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory investigation.
 Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323­361.

Merton, R. C., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information.
 Journal of Finance 42, 483­510.

Nelson, D., 1991. Conditional heteroskedasticity in asset returns: a new approach. Econometrica 59,
  347­370.

Newey, W. K., West, K. D., 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and autocor-
  relation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703­708.

Odean, T., 1999. Do investors trade too much? American Economic Review 89, 1279­1298.

Pastor, L., Stambaugh, R. F., 2003. Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of Political
  Economy 111, 642­685.

Roll, R., 1984. A simple implicit measure of the effective bid-ask spread in an efficient market.
  Journal of Finance 39, 1127­1139.

Whitelaw, R. F., 1994. Time variations and covariations in the expectation and volatility of stock
 market returns. Journal of Finance 49, 515­541.




                                                36
Fig.1. Systematic risk (SR) over time. This figure plots the monthly time-series of aggregate SR for
the period from January 1997 to June 2019 for the equal-, value-, and rating-weighted average of bond
systematic risk.




                                                 37
Table 1: The Intertemporal Risk-Return Tradeoff in the Corporate Bond Market

This table reports the significance of an intertemporal relation between expected return and risk of
corporate bond market returns,

                                                    2
                                     Rm,t+1 =  +  · m,t +        m,t+1 ,

and

                                                 2
                                  Rm,t+1 =  +  · m,t +  · Xt +        m,t+1 .

where Rm,t+1 is the monthly excess return of the bond market in month t + 1 and m,t       2   is the one-
month lagged realized variance of the bond market, proxying for the time-t expected conditional
variance of excess bond market returns at time t + 1. The table presents results from the monthly
predictive regressions with the value-weighted corporate bond market index (VWbond ) and the Merrill
Lynch bond index (MRLbond ). Panel A reports the univariate regression results. Panel B reports the
multivariate regression results after controlling for macroeconomic variables including the log earnings-
to-price ratio (EP), the log dividend-to-price ratio (DP), the book-to-market ratio (BM), the difference
between long-term return on government bonds and the one-month Treasury-bill (TERM), and the
difference between the return on a market portfolio of long-term corporate bonds and the long-term
government bond return (DEF). The sample period is from January 1997 to June 2019. t-statistics
are reported in parentheses and  ,  , and  indicate the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                      Panel A: Univariate regressions

                     Dependent variable       Intercept      2
                                                             m             Adj. R2 (%)

                           VWbond
                             t+1                -0.10      21.75                6.49
                                               (-0.53)      (2.55)

                          MRLbond
                             t+1                -0.08      17.53                3.50
                                               (-0.38)      (2.22)


 Panel B: Multivariate regressions

Dependent variable     Intercept       2
                                       m         EP        DP         BM          DEF     TERM     Adj. R2 (%)

      VWbond
        t+1              3.22        10.62      -0.63     1.39        1.67       0.12     0.14        19.48
                        (0.64)       (2.86)     (-1.93)   (1.50)     (0.63)      (2.15)   (1.71)

      MRLbond
         t+1             -0.55       11.18     -0.51      0.34        1.11       0.08     0.16        7.64
                        (-0.13)      (2.71)     (-2.08)   (0.42)     (0.52)      (2.14)   (1.69)




                                                    38
Table 2: Economic Significance of the Intertemporal Risk-Return Tradeoff in the
Bond Market

This table reports the portfolio performance measures for a mean-variance investor with a risk aversion
coefficient ( ) of 10, 15 and 20, who allocates monthly between corporate bonds and risk-free bills
using the out-of-sample forecasts of the excess bond market returns based on the bond market variance
(m 2 ). CER gain (%) is the annualized certainty equivalent return gain for the investor, defined as

the annual portfolio management fee that an investor would be willing to pay to have access to the
predictive regression forecast instead of the historical average forecast. The portfolio weights are
estimated recursively using the data available at the forecast formation time t.  ,  , and  indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


 Panel A: CER gain (%) from investing on VWbond
                   2
                   m               EP             DP              BM            DEF             TERM

 = 10            3.64             -2.23           -0.22          -4.38          -2.70           1.68
 = 15            4.34             -1.19           -0.15          -2.61          -1.50           1.94
 = 20            5.04             -0.67           -0.11          -1.72          -0.90           2.47




 Panel B: CER gain (%) from investing on MRLbond
                   2
                   m               EP             DP              BM            DEF             TERM

 = 10            2.69             -0.17           -1.00          0.21           -3.84           0.67
 = 15            3.24              0.17           -0.38          0.43           -2.26           0.74
 = 20            3.85              0.34           -0.07          0.54           -1.48           0.77




                                                  39
      Table 3: The Intertemporal Risk-Return Tradeoff in the Equity Market

This table reports the significance of an intertemporal relation between expected return and risk of
equity market returns,

                                                    2
                                     Rm,t+1 =  +  · m,t +        m,t+1 ,

and

                                             2
                              Rm,t+1 =  +  · m,t +  · Xt +              m,t+1 .

where Rm,t+1 is the monthly excess return of the equity market (i.e., the value-weighted CRSP index)
in month t + 1 and m,t 2  is the one-month lagged realized variance of the equity market. The table
presents results from the monthly predictive regressions for the common sample period January 1997
to June 2019 and an extended sample period from July 1926 to June 2019. Panel A reports the
univariate regression results. Panel B reports the multivariate regression results after controlling
for macroeconomic variables including the log earnings-to-price ratio (EP), the log dividend-to-price
ratio (DP), the book-to-market ratio (BM), the difference between long-term return on government
bonds and the one-month Treasury-bill (TERM), and the difference between the return on a market
portfolio of long-term corporate bonds and the long-term government bond return (DEF). t-statistics
are reported in parentheses and  ,  , and  indicate the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                 Panel A: Univariate regressions

                      Sample period                Intercept       2
                                                                   m              Adj. R2 (%)

                January 1997 ­ June 2019             0.21         1.91               -0.14
                                                    (0.38)       (0.76)

                  July 1926 ­ June 2019             0.47          0.53               0.05
                                                    (2.26)       (0.79)


 Panel B: Multivariate regressions

      Sample period         Intercept     2
                                          m           EP        DP          BM         DEF      TERM     Adj. R2 (%)

January 1997 ­ June 2019     36.57        4.27        2.14     6.55        -14.05      0.15      0.40       3.01
                              (2.33)     (1.34)      (1.55)    (2.24)      (-1.65)    (0.94)    (1.28)

 July 1926 ­ June 2019        10.11       -0.22       0.76      1.63        -3.06     0.23      0.54        2.89
                              (1.87)     (-0.12)     (0.67)    (1.35)      (-1.48)    (3.13)    (2.40)




                                                     40
                                         Table 4: Summary Statistics of the Cross-Sectional Variables

     Panel A reports the number of bond-month observations, the cross-sectional mean, median, standard deviation and percentiles for corporate bond
     monthly returns and bond characteristics including credit rating, time-to-maturity (Maturity, year), amount outstanding (Size, $ billion), downside risk
     (5% Value-at-Risk, VaR), illiquidity (ILLIQ), and systematic risk (SR). Ratings are in conventional numerical scores, where 1 refers to an AAA rating
     and 21 refers to a C rating. Higher numerical score means higher credit risk. Numerical ratings of 10 or below (BBB- or better) are considered investment
     grade. Downside risk is the 5% Value-at-Risk (VaR) of corporate bond return, defined as the second lowest monthly return observation over the past
     36 months. The original VaR measure is multiplied by -1 so that a higher VaR indicates higher downside risk. Bond illiquidity is computed as the
     autocovariance of the daily price changes within each month, multiplied by -1. Systematic risk is defined as the difference between total and idiosyncratic
     variance using a 36-month rolling window. The factor model used to generate systematic risk is the 4-factor model of Bai, Bali, and Wen (2019) including
     the excess bond market return (MKTBond ), the downside risk factor (DRF), the credit risk factor (CRF), and the liquidity risk factors (LRF) . Panel B
     reports the time-series average of the cross-sectional correlations. The sample period is from January 1997 to June 2019.

        Panel A: Cross-sectional statistics over the sample period of January 1997 ­ June 2019

                                                                                                                         Percentiles
                                                   N           Mean       Median             SD     1st        5th     25th       75th       95th       99th
41




      Bond return (%)                          1,318,058         0.77        0.57           3.62   -8.16      -3.61   -0.56       1.86       5.61      12.18
      Rating                                   1,315,405         8.09        7.54           3.64    1.53       2.64    5.57       9.99      15.12      17.94
      Time-to-maturity (maturity, year)        1,328,785        10.13        7.07           9.13    1.32       1.93    4.20      13.39      27.24      34.15
      Amount Out (size, $billion)              1,328,785         0.45        0.31           0.48    0.02       0.04    0.14       0.58       1.35       2.39
      Downside risk (5% VaR)                    797,761          4.80        3.40           4.77    0.58       0.96    2.03       5.77      13.63      23.69
      ILLIQ                                     913,665          1.57        0.60           3.79   -0.83      -0.24    0.08       1.59       6.99      16.23
      Systematic Risk (SR, %)                   764,548          0.13        0.04           0.27    0.00       0.00    0.01       0.10       0.70       1.10


        Panel B: Average cross-sectional correlations

                                Rating                  Maturity                     Size                  VaR                 ILLIQ                    SR

      Rating                       1                       -0.113                   -0.044                 0.400                0.091                  0.342
      Maturity                                                1                     -0.046                  0.176               0.096                  0.124
      Size                                                                             1                   -0.074              -0.145                 -0.083
      VaR                                                                                                     1                 0.228                  0.623
      ILLIQ                                                                                                                       1                    0.184
      SR                                                                                                                                                 1
                               Table 5: Univariate Portfolios of Corporate Bonds Sorted by Systematic Risk
     Quintile portfolios are formed every month from January 1997 to June 2019 by sorting corporate bonds based on systematic risk (SR), defined as the
     difference between total and idiosyncratic variance from regression (14). The benchmark model used to generate systematic risk is BBW 4-factor model
     with the excess bond market return, the downside risk factor, the credit risk factor, and the liquidity risk factor. Quintile 1 is the portfolio with the
     lowest SR and Quintile 5 is the portfolio with the highest SR. The portfolios are value-weighted using amount outstanding as weights. Table reports
     the average SR, the next-month average excess return, the 5-factor alpha from stock market factors, the 5-factor alpha from bond market factors, the
     10-factor alpha for each quintile. The last six columns report average portfolio characteristics including bond beta ( M KT ), illiquidity (ILLIQ), downside
     risk (VaR), credit rating, time-to-maturity (years), and amount outstanding (size, in $billion) for each quintile. The last row shows the differences in
     monthly average returns, the differences in alphas with respect to the factor models. The 5-factor model with stock market factors includes the excess
     stock market return (MKTStock ), the size factor (SMB), the book-to-market factor (HML), the momentum factor (MOMStock ), and the stock liquidity
     factor (LIQStock ). The 5-factor model with bond market factors includes the excess bond market return (MKT), the default factor (DEF), the term
     factor (TERM), the bond momentum factor (MOMBond ), and the bond liquidity factor (LIQBond ). The 10-factor model combines the five stock and
     five bond market factors. Average excess returns and alphas are defined in monthly percentage terms. Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given in
     parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
42




      Quintiles       Average      Average     5-factor stock     5-factor bond     10-factor                   Average portfolio characteristics
                        SR         return          alpha              alpha           alpha        M KT      ILLIQ      VaR       Rating     Maturity      Size

         Low            0.01         0.19           0.15               0.06            0.06        0.34       0.53      1.84       7.33         4.48       0.51
                                    (3.57)         (2.50)             (2.08)          (1.20)
          2             0.02         0.35           0.28               0.14            0.13        0.60       0.88      2.86       7.86         6.38       0.50
                                    (4.10)         (3.12)             (3.37)          (2.65)
          3             0.04         0.43           0.33               0.16            0.15        0.86       1.16      3.84       8.05         8.75       0.53
                                    (3.73)         (2.78)             (3.39)          (2.70)
          4             0.08         0.56           0.40               0.29            0.23        1.18       1.77      5.73       8.46        13.16       0.51
                                    (3.80)         (3.03)             (4.74)          (3.10)
        High            0.51         1.03           0.76               0.80            0.68        1.93       3.11      11.93      10.90       14.51       0.47
                                    (4.00)         (3.05)             (3.77)          (2.38)

     High - Low                    0.85            0.61              0.73             0.62
                                    (3.64)         (2.51)             (3.25)          (2.46)
                             Table 6: Univariate Portfolios of Corporate Bonds Sorted by Idiosyncratic Risk
     Quintile portfolios are formed every month from January 1997 to June 2019 by sorting corporate bonds based on idiosyncratic risk (IR), defined as the
     residual variance from regression (14). The benchmark model used to generate idiosyncratic risk is BBW 4-factor model with the excess bond market
     return, the downside risk factor, the credit risk factor, and the liquidity risk factor. Quintile 1 is the portfolio with the lowest IR and Quintile 5 is the
     portfolio with the highest IR. The portfolios are value-weighted using amount outstanding as weights. Table reports the average IR, the next-month
     average excess return, the 5-factor alpha from stock market factors, the 5-factor alpha from bond market factors, the 10-factor alpha for each quintile.
     The last six columns report average portfolio characteristics including bond beta ( M KT ), illiquidity (ILLIQ), downside risk (VaR), credit rating, time-
     to-maturity (years), and amount outstanding (size, in $billion) for each quintile. The last row shows the differences in monthly average returns, the
     differences in alphas with respect to the factor models. The 5-factor model with stock market factors includes the excess stock market return (MKTStock ),
     the size factor (SMB), the book-to-market factor (HML), the momentum factor (MOMStock ), and the stock liquidity factor (LIQStock ). The 5-factor
     model with bond market factors includes the excess bond market return (MKT), the default factor (DEF), the term factor (TERM), the bond momentum
     factor (MOMBond ), and the bond liquidity factor (LIQBond ). The 10-factor model combines the five stock and five bond market factors. Average excess
     returns and alphas are defined in monthly percentage terms. Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given in parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate the
     significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
43




      Quintiles       Average     Average      5-factor stock    5-factor bond      10-factor                  Average portfolio characteristics
                        IR         return          alpha              alpha           alpha       M KT      ILLIQ      VaR5      Rating      Maturity     Size

         Low            0.01        0.23            0.05              0.20            -0.06       0.60       0.31       1.71       6.57        4.17       0.76
                                   (3.47)          (1.47)            (1.89)          (-1.56)
          2             0.02        0.37            0.13              0.31             0.13        0.76      0.77       2.71       7.68        7.26       0.50
                                   (3.93)          (3.46)            (3.12)          (3.35)
          3             0.05        0.41            0.09              0.29             0.06        0.96      1.36       3.91       8.00        11.19      0.47
                                   (3.14)          (1.40)            (2.13)          (0.99)
          4             0.12        0.48            0.23              0.31             0.09        1.11      1.87       5.64       8.56        12.98      0.43
                                   (3.08)          (3.13)            (2.07)          (1.20)
        High            0.72        0.69            0.50              0.29             0.10       1.49       3.25      12.27      11.89        11.68      0.36
                                   (2.93)          (3.21)            (1.54)          (1.45)

     High - Low                    0.45            0.44               0.10            0.17
                                   (2.14)          (2.73)            (0.58)          (1.16)
             Table 7: Bivariate Portfolios of Corporate Bonds Sorted by Systematic Risk and Idiosyncratic Risk
     In Panel A, quintile portfolios are formed every month from January 1997 to June 2019 by first sorting corporate bonds based on their idiosyncratic risk.
     Then, within each IR portfolios, corporate bonds are sorted into subquintiles based on their systematic risk. Quintile SR,1 is the portfolio of corporate
     bonds with the lowest SR within each IR quintile portfolio, and Quintile SR,5 is the portfolio of corporate bonds with the highest SR with each IR
     quintile portfolio. Panel A reports the average SRs within each IR quintile as well as the next month average return of corporate bonds for each quintile.
     The last four rows present the differences in the monthly returns, the 5-factor stock alpha, the 5-factor bond alpha, and the 10-factor alpha between
     Quintile SR,5 and Quintile SR,1. Average returns and alphas are defined in monthly percentage terms. Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given in
     parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Panel B replicates the same procedure for quintile portfolios
     of corporate bonds sorted by IR after controlling for SR.

        Panel A: Corporate bonds sorted by SR after controlling for IR              Panel B: Corporate bonds sorted by IR after controlling for SR

                                                  Avg SR in       Next month                                                       Avg IR in       Next month
       SR quintiles after controlling for IR   each IR quintile   avg returns         IR quintiles after controlling for SR     each SR quintile   avg returns
44




                       SR,1                          0.02             0.44                           USR,1                            0.04             0.32
                       SR,2                          0.06             0.50                           USR,2                            0.08             0.33
                       SR,3                          0.10             0.53                           USR,3                            0.14             0.36
                       SR,4                          0.17             0.70                           USR,4                            0.22             0.38
                       SR,5                          0.31             1.21                           USR,5                            0.44             0.43

             SR,5 - SR,1 return diff.                                0.77                  USR,5 - USR,1 return diff.                                  0.11
                                                                     (2.73)                                                                           (0.78)
      SR,5 - SR,1 5-factor stock alpha diff.                         0.71           USR,5 - USR,1 5-factor stock alpha diff.                           -0.07
                                                                     (2.52)                                                                           (-0.61)
      SR,5 - SR,1 5-factor bond alpha diff.                          0.65           USR,5 - USR,1 5-factor bond alpha diff.                            0.17
                                                                     (2.43)                                                                           (1.25)
         SR,5 - SR,1 10-factor alpha diff.                           0.59             USR,5 - USR,1 10-factor alpha diff.                              0.02
                                                                     (2.37)                                                                           (0.03)
                                      Table 8: Bond-level Fama-MacBeth Cross-Sectional Regressions
     This table reports the average intercept and slope coefficients from the Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of one-month-ahead corporate
     bond excess returns on systematic risk and idiosyncratic risk with and without control variables. Bond characteristics include credit rating, illiquidity,
     time-to-maturity and the natural logarithm of amount outstanding. Other control variables consist of the bond market beta ( M KT ), the default beta
     ( DEF ), the term beta ( T ERM ), and bond return in previous month (REV). Fama-MacBeth regressions are run each month for the period from January
     1997 to June 2019. Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The last column reports the average adjusted R2 values. Numbers in
     bold denote statistical significance at the 5% level or better.


             Intercept       SR         IR        M KT        DEF        T ERM      Rating      ILLIQ      Maturity       Size       REV        Adj. R2 (%)

     (1)       0.395       1.828                                                                                                                    6.61
45




               (2.97)      (4.33)
     (2)       0.361                  0.405                                                                                                         4.99
               (3.03)                 (2.26)
     (3)       0.328       1.319      -0.445                                                                                                        8.80
               (2.63)      (4.31)     (-0.45)
     (4)       0.079       1.686                  0.054      -0.100       0.073      0.022      0.024        0.006       0.047      -0.083         20.83
               (0.43)      (2.69)                 (0.85)     (-1.04)     (-0.61)     (0.93)     (4.93)      (1.46)       (0.61)     (-6.34)
     (5)       0.498                   0.185      0.027      -0.118       0.129      0.013      0.019       -0.017       0.023      -0.111         21.15
               (1.27)                 (0.72)      (0.41)     (-1.34)     (1.11)      (0.58)     (4.06)      (-0.72)      (0.41)     (-6.54)
     (6)       -0.030      1.333      -0.374      0.012      -0.117       0.120      0.027      0.018        0.006       0.038      -0.103         21.89
               (0.30)      (2.46)     (-0.34)     (0.30)     (-1.17)     (0.94)      (1.65)     (4.19)      (1.32)       (0.30)     (-7.76)
Table 9: Predicting Aggregate Bond Market Returns and Bond Market Volatility
Using Aggregate Systematic Risk
This table reports the time-series predictive power of aggregate systematic risk (SR) in predicting
N-month ahead aggregate bond market returns and bond market volatility for alternative horizons
from month 1 to 12. VWbond is the excess return on the value-weighted bond market index. MKTV ol
is the aggregate monthly bond market variance defined in Eq. (4). The benchmark model used
to generate systematic risk is the 4-factor model with the excess bond market return (MKT), the
downside risk factor (DRF), the credit risk factor (CRF), and the liquidity risk factor (LRF). Aggregate
systematic risk is the value-weighted average of the corporate bond systematic risk for each month.
Control variables include the log earnings-to-price ratio (EP), the log dividend-to-price ratio (DP),
the aggregate book-to-market ratio (BM), the term spread (TERM), the default spread (DEF), and
the equity market variance (SVAR). The Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given in parentheses.


 Panel A: Dep. var = VWbond

Forecasting   Intercept     SR       EP        DP        BM        TERM       DEF      SVAR      Adj.R2 (%)
Horizon

N=1             -4.55     2.78***    -0.41     -0.69     1.59      0.09**    0.20**     0.49**     13.10
              (-0.51)      (2.84)   (-0.99)   (-0.37)    (0.64)    (2.32)     (2.25)    (2.53)
N=2             -9.78      3.18**    -0.78     -1.58     3.40       -0.03      -0.07   0.72***     11.35
              (-0.68)      (2.50)   (-1.12)   (-0.55)    (0.91)    (-0.67)   (-1.13)    (2.95)
N=3              1.30     3.37***    -0.45      0.79     1.56       -0.05      -0.06     -0.00      5.63
               (0.11)      (2.91)   (-0.70)   (0.36)     (0.39)    (-0.96)   (-0.76)   (-0.03)
N=4              9.17     2.80***    -0.08      2.38     0.23       -0.03       0.03     -0.19      6.08
               (1.22)      (2.98)   (-0.21)   (1.53)     (0.08)    (-1.07)    (0.49)   (-0.81)
N=5            12.14*     2.94***     0.11    2.97**     -0.19       0.05      -0.03     -0.13      7.34
               (1.77)      (3.22)   (0.33)    (2.07)     (-0.06)   (1.07)    (-0.65)   (-0.78)
N=6             11.90     3.03***     0.40     2.57*     -2.04      -0.01       0.00    0.30**      6.47
               (1.39)      (3.47)   (0.75)    (1.69)     (-0.51)   (-0.20)    (0.02)    (2.07)
N=7              6.60     2.34***     0.22     1.45      -0.86      -0.03       0.02    0.54**      6.59
               (0.69)      (2.76)   (0.44)    (0.80)     (-0.26)   (-1.52)    (0.37)    (2.45)
N=8           14.15**     2.72***   0.73**    2.71**     -4.34*     -0.01      -0.01   0.51***      7.68
               (2.28)      (3.03)   (2.30)    (2.29)     (-1.96)   (-0.46)   (-0.21)    (4.34)
N=9           13.59**      2.05**     0.63    2.77**     -2.50      -0.01       0.01   0.37***      4.79
               (2.04)      (2.09)   (1.57)    (2.04)     (-1.13)   (-0.67)    (0.20)    (2.62)
N=10            11.76       1.75      0.30      2.69     -0.52      -0.05     -0.10*      0.16      4.62
               (1.07)      (1.64)   (0.51)    (1.18)     (-0.16)   (-1.54)   (-1.94)    (0.75)
N=11             7.27       1.42     -0.14      1.99     1.03       -0.02     -0.14*     -0.05      3.97
               (0.66)      (1.23)   (-0.23)   (0.90)     (0.29)    (-0.40)   (-1.93)   (-0.27)
N=12             7.31       1.47     -0.13      1.89     -0.27      -0.03    -0.10**     -0.12      0.86
               (0.75)      (1.18)   (-0.25)   (0.98)     (-0.06)   (-1.32)   (-2.31)   (-0.80)




                                                    46
                                        Table 9. (Continued)

 Panel B: Dep. var = MKTV ol

Forecasting   Intercept     SR        EP       DP            BM      TERM        DEF       SVAR      Adj.R2 (%)
Horizon

N=1             9.76      1.80***     -0.37   5.52***       -2.05      -0.05      -0.18    0.86***     30.24
               (0.75)      (2.77)   (-0.79)    (3.55)      (-0.81)    (-0.97)    (-1.27)    (2.68)
N=2            13.92       1.59**     0.09    5.85***       -4.82      -0.03      -0.02      0.79*     20.64
               (0.78)      (2.21)    (0.17)    (3.27)      (-1.54)    (-0.72)    (-0.41)    (1.93)
N=3            20.02       1.45**     0.44    6.51***     -5.94**       0.04      -0.05       0.65     19.94
               (1.04)      (2.11)    (0.92)    (3.56)      (-2.00)    (0.92)     (-0.81)    (1.62)
N=4            18.55       1.55**     0.55    6.26***     -6.10**      -0.02    -0.17***    0.70**     19.09
               (1.08)      (2.38)    (1.36)    (3.77)      (-2.17)    (-0.42)    (-3.01)    (2.02)
N=5            20.36       1.43**    1.03**   6.57***     -8.32**      -0.07      -0.05    0.79***     11.93
               (1.21)      (2.03)    (2.00)    (3.81)      (-2.22)    (-1.52)    (-0.53)    (3.32)
N=6            29.67       1.38*    1.56***   7.36***    -11.82***     -0.03      -0.00      0.57      11.24
               (1.36)      (1.94)    (2.65)    (3.69)      (-2.73)    (-0.69)    (-0.01)    (1.47)
N=7            29.50       1.27*    1.71***   7.34***    -13.00***      0.02      -0.02      0.62*     10.99
               (1.21)      (1.76)    (2.98)    (3.58)      (-3.14)    (0.57)     (-0.25)    (1.71)
N=8            23.77        1.21    1.65***   6.57***    -12.35***     -0.03      -0.02    0.76***      7.62
               (1.03)      (1.64)    (2.89)    (3.31)      (-3.13)    (-0.83)    (-0.45)    (2.63)
N=9            18.54       1.28*    1.35***   5.26***    -12.61***   -0.09***    -0.10*    0.71***      7.99
               (1.05)      (1.84)    (2.90)    (3.47)      (-3.25)    (-2.69)    (-1.68)    (3.32)
N=10           20.65       1.19*    1.23***   4.28***    -14.45***     -0.02      -0.04      0.36       6.46
               (1.51)      (1.76)    (2.84)    (3.46)      (-3.65)    (-0.47)    (-0.53)    (1.20)
N=11           21.82       1.22*    1.24***   3.90***    -15.78***      0.02      -0.03       0.23      7.33
               (1.55)      (1.81)    (2.69)    (2.90)      (-3.84)    (0.52)     (-0.41)    (0.67)
N=12           20.18        1.14     1.24**    3.56**    -16.17***      0.00       0.02       0.26      6.50
               (1.48)      (1.65)    (2.40)    (2.51)      (-3.40)    (0.02)     (0.31)     (0.86)




                                                        47
Table 10: Does Aggregate Idiosyncratic Risk Predict Bond Market Returns and
Volatility?
This table reports the time-series predictive power of aggregate idiosyncratic risk (IR) in predicting
N-month ahead aggregate bond market returns and bond market volatility for alternative horizons
from month 1 to 12. VWbond is the excess return on the value-weighted bond market index. MKTV ol
is the aggregate monthly bond market variance defined in Eq. (4). The benchmark model used
to generate idiosyncratic risk is the 4-factor model with the excess bond market return (MKT), the
downside risk factor (DRF), the credit risk factor (CRF), and the liquidity risk factor (LRF). Aggregate
idiosyncratic risk is the value-weighted average of the corporate bond idiosyncratic risk for each month.
Control variables include the log earnings-to-price ratio (EP), the log dividend-to-price ratio (DP),
the aggregate book-to-market ratio (BM), the term spread (TERM), the default spread (DEF), and
the equity market variance (SVAR). The Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given in parentheses.


 Panel A: Dep. var = VWbond

Forecasting   Intercept     IR       EP         DP         BM       TERM       DEF      SVAR      Adj.R2 (%)
Horizon

N=1             -0.29       1.30     -0.33     -0.38**      2.14    0.16***    0.19**      0.21     21.87
               (-0.55)    (1.20)    (-0.18)    (-2.03)    (1.07)     (2.81)    (2.14)    (0.71)
N=2             -0.95       1.10      1.61       -0.30      3.83      -0.03     -0.05   0.89***     20.56
               (-1.53)    (1.13)     -0.67     (-1.46)    (1.53)    (-0.59)   (-0.59)    (2.96)
N=3             -0.78       1.16     -0.52     -0.45**     4.38*     -0.09*     -0.09     0.21      12.41
               (-1.34)    (1.11)    (-0.40)    (-2.41)    (1.89)    (-1.73)   (-1.00)    (0.66)
N=4             -0.33       1.33    -3.51*    -0.51***      3.27      0.00       0.03     -0.25     10.80
               (-0.54)    (1.36)    (-1.81)    (-3.03)    (1.57)    (-0.10)    (0.46)   (-0.54)
N=5             -0.53       0.84     -2.38    -0.44***      3.39    0.08**       0.04      0.17     14.06
               (-0.73)    (0.89)    (-1.58)    (-2.75)    (1.32)     (1.98)    (0.49)    (0.75)
N=6             -0.45       0.58     -1.15     -0.32**      2.64      -0.01      0.00   0.74***     16.69
               (-0.64)    (0.61)    (-0.98)    (-1.97)    (1.04)    (-0.38)    (0.01)    (4.83)
N=7             -0.47       0.54     -2.00    -0.41***      3.11      -0.05     -0.07   0.49***     14.69
               (-0.73)    (0.58)    (-1.35)    (-3.15)    (1.49)    (-1.48)   (-0.99)    (2.72)
N=8              0.18       0.64      0.17       -0.14      0.23      -0.02      0.00    0.72**      7.70
                -0.25     (0.65)     -0.17     (-0.89)    (0.09)    (-0.76)   (-0.06)    (2.54)
N=9             -0.42      -0.26      1.08       -0.23      2.75      0.01       0.01   0.65***      6.75
               (-0.56)    (-0.26)    -0.93     (-1.57)    (1.07)     (0.32)    (0.12)    (4.85)
N=10            -0.66      -0.19      0.38     -0.33**      3.98     -0.05*   -0.12**    0.41**      7.09
               (-0.82)    (-0.19)    -0.35     (-2.22)    (1.42)    (-1.85)   (-2.26)    (2.21)
N=11            -0.18       0.19      0.10      -0.26*      2.12      -0.04   -0.12**   0.32***      3.96
               (-0.19)    (0.20)     -0.08     (-1.81)    (0.70)    (-1.16)   (-2.29)    (2.67)
N=12             0.81       1.26     -1.92       -0.14     -1.56      -0.04     -0.07     0.14       0.62
               (0.71)     (1.32)    (-1.37)    (-0.89)    (-0.40)   (-1.58)   (-1.12)    (0.83)




                                                     48
                                      Table 10. (Continued)

 Panel B: Dep. var = MKTV ol

Forecasting   Intercept    IR       EP        DP           BM    TERM       DEF       SVAR      Adj.R2 (%)
Horizon

N=1             11.60      2.20     -0.65     3.06       -0.66    -0.07**    -0.14    0.86***     34.46
               (0.85)     (1.41)   (-1.23)   (1.10)    (-0.14)    (-2.06)   (-1.17)    (2.61)
N=2             15.44      1.84     -0.21     3.47       -3.41    -0.04**     0.01     0.80*      23.96
               (0.87)     (1.33)   (-0.34)   (0.96)    (-0.61)    (-2.11)   (0.28)     (1.89)
N=3              21.7      1.81      0.22     4.61       -4.99       0.03    -0.02       0.65     22.10
               (1.12)     (1.35)   (0.30)    (1.18)    (-0.84)     (0.99)   (-0.39)    (1.59)
N=4             20.42     1.96*      0.30     4.22       -5.14      -0.03   -0.14*     0.70**     21.64
               (1.20)     (1.73)   (0.48)    (1.21)    (-0.94)    (-1.08)   (-1.68)    (1.98)
N=5             21.94      1.69      0.73     4.10       -7.08      -0.08    -0.01    0.79***     15.25
               (1.33)     (1.40)   (1.06)    (1.27)    (-1.08)    (-1.58)   (-0.16)    (3.24)
N=6             32.00      2.02      1.41     5.79      -11.53      -0.04     0.02       0.56     13.03
               (1.47)     (1.57)   (1.46)    (1.37)    (-1.39)    (-1.64)   (0.46)     (1.44)
N=7             32.04      2.01      1.55      5.6       -12.8       0.02     0.01      0.61*     13.36
               (1.31)     (1.59)   (1.36)    (1.20)    (-1.45)     (0.33)   (0.16)     (1.67)
N=8             26.01      1.80      1.41     4.24      -11.82      -0.04     0.01     0.75**     11.00
               (1.12)     (1.56)   (1.26)    (0.97)    (-1.38)    (-1.53)   (0.18)     (2.57)
N=9             21.07      1.98      1.14     3.15      -12.28   -0.10***    -0.07    0.70***     10.99
               (1.17)     (1.59)   (1.28)    (0.95)    (-1.46)    (-2.83)   (-1.32)    (3.20)
N=10           23.26*      2.00     1.19*     3.47     -14.71*      -0.02    -0.03      0.35       7.26
               (1.69)     (1.45)   (1.85)    (1.34)    (-1.87)    (-0.79)   (-0.43)    (1.16)
N=11           24.04*      1.89     1.23*     3.52     -15.99*       0.01    -0.02       0.22      7.39
               (1.67)     (1.35)   (1.79)    (1.26)    (-1.94)     (0.39)   (-0.31)    (0.64)
N=12            21.82      1.59      1.18     2.98     -16.05*       0.00     0.03       0.25      6.39
               (1.56)     (1.14)   (1.54)    (1.11)    (-1.76)    (-0.10)   (0.58)     (0.83)




                                                      49
                                       Table 11: Confirming the IVOL Puzzle in the Equity Market
     This table investigates the IVOL puzzle in the equity market. Systematic risk and idiosyncratic risk of individual stocks are estimated based on the
     Fama-French (2015) 5-factor model (MKTStock , SMB, HML, RMW, and CMA) in Panel A and the Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) Q-factor model
     (MKTStock , ME, IA, and ROE) in Panel B. Quintile portfolios are formed every month by sorting stocks based on systematic risk and idiosyncratic risk.
     The estimation is based on daily returns in a month, requiring at least 15 daily observations in a month. The sample period is from July 1963 to June
     2019 for the Fama-French (2015) 5-factor model and from January 1967 to June 2019 for the Q-factor model. Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given
     in parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                            Panel A: SR and IR estimated using Fama-French (2015) 5-factor model

                                   Avg         FF 5-factor       Q-factor                                        Average       FF 5-factor      Q-factor
                        SR        return         alpha            alpha                  Low           IR         return         alpha           alpha
         Low           0.00        0.54            0.54            0.58                  Low           0.01         0.55           0.58           0.63
                                  (3.55)          (3.49)          (3.59)                                          (3.51)         (3.59)          (3.78)
           2           0.01        0.62            0.66            0.70                   2            0.02         0.59           0.65            0.66
                                  (3.83)          (3.99)          (4.08)                                          (3.05)         (3.39)          (3.02)
           3           0.02        0.63            0.68            0.70                   3            0.04         0.66           0.74            0.74
                                  (3.26)          (3.52)          (3.29)                                          (2.71)         (3.13)          (2.64)
           4           0.04        0.60            0.70            0.69                   4            0.08         0.42           0.47            0.47
                                  (2.45)          (2.94)          (2.46)                                          (1.39)         (1.63)          (1.31)
         High          0.13        0.13            0.24            0.17                 High           0.29        -0.11          -0.09           -0.08
50




                                  (0.39)          (0.72)          (0.42)                                          (-0.30)        (-0.26)         (-0.19)
     High - Low                    -0.41           -0.30          -0.41              High - Low                  -0.65           -0.67           -0.70
                                  (-1.47)         (-1.08)        (-1.17)                                         (-2.41)         (-2.44)         (-2.32)

                                       Panel B: SR and IR estimated using Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) Q-factor model

                                 Average       FF 5-factor       Q-factor                                        Average       FF 5-factor      Q-factor
                        SR        return         alpha            alpha                                IR         return         alpha           alpha
         Low           0.00        0.55            0.55            0.52                  Low           0.01         0.56           0.59           0.55
                                  (3.46)          (3.42)         (3.30)                                           (3.43)         (3.53)          (3.28)
           2           0.01        0.62            0.67            0.59                   2            0.02         0.58           0.65            0.55
                                  (3.67)          (3.86)         (3.49)                                           (2.83)         (3.18)          (2.68)
           3           0.02        0.63            0.68            0.58                   3            0.04         0.64           0.72            0.59
                                  (3.08)          (3.35)         (2.90)                                           (2.48)         (2.89)          (2.35)
           4           0.05        0.56            0.67            0.50                   4            0.09         0.39           0.44            0.30
                                  (2.19)          (2.67)         (2.01)                                           (1.22)         (1.44)          (1.02)
         High          0.15        0.15            0.16           0.20                  High           0.32        -0.17          -0.15           -0.10
                                  (0.13)          (0.45)         (-0.15)                                          (-0.45)        (-0.43)         (-0.19)
     High - Low                    -0.45           -0.40          -0.30              High - Low                  -0.73           -0.74           -0.65
                                  (-1.47)         (-1.38)        (-1.10)                                         (-2.59)         (-2.63)         (-2.02)
          Table 12: Institutional Ownership and Equity Idiosyncratic Risk
Quintile portfolios are formed every month from January 1980 to June 2019 by first sorting individual
stocks based on institutional ownership. Then within each institutional ownership quintile, individual
stocks are further sorted into sub-quintiles based on their idiosyncratic risk. The benchmark model
used to generate idiosyncratic risk is the Fama-French 5-factor model (MKTStock ), SMB, HML, RMW,
and CMA). The estimation is based on daily returns in a month, requiring at least 15 daily observations
in a month. "INST,1" is the portfolio of stocks with the lowest institutional ownership and "INST,5"
is the portfolio of stocks with the highest institutional ownership. The portfolios are value-weighted
using market cap as weights. Table reports the next-month average excess return, the Fama-French
5-factor alpha, and the Q-factor alpha between the highest and lowest quintile within each institutional
ownership quintile. Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given in parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate
the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                                             FF 5-factor      Q-factor
            IR,1     IR,2      IR,3     IR,4      IR,5      IR,5 - IR,1        alpha           alpha

INST,1      0.72     0.64      0.66     -0.08     -1.28       -2.01            -1.82          -1.87
                                                               (-5.23)          (-4.71)        (-4.15)
INST,2      0.63     0.65      0.52     -0.05     -0.58       -1.21            -1.03          -1.07
                                                               (-2.74)         (-2.38)        (-2.22)
INST,3      0.87     0.69      0.58     0.33      -0.19       -1.07            -1.04          -1.08
                                                               (-2.88)          (-2.81)       (-2.49)
INST,4      0.82     0.73      0.76     0.81      0.40         -0.41            -0.47           -0.40
                                                              (-1.51)          (-1.56)         (-1.12)
INST,5      0.85     0.81      0.85     0.78      0.75         -0.10            -0.09           -0.09
                                                              (-0.41)          (-0.32)         (-0.30)




                                                  51
           Table 13: Institutional Ownership and Bond Idiosyncratic Risk
Quintile portfolios are formed every month from January 2001 to December 2017 by first sorting
corporate bonds based on institutional ownership. Then within each institutional ownership quintile,
individual bonds are further sorted into sub-quintiles based on their idiosyncratic risk. The benchmark
model used to generate idiosyncratic risk is the BBW 4-factor model (MKT, DRF, CRF, and LRF).
"INST,1" is the portfolio of bonds with the lowest institutional ownership and "INST,5" is the portfolio
of bonds with the highest institutional ownership. The portfolios are value-weighted using bond
amount outstanding as weights. Table reports the 10-factor alpha between the highest- and lowest-IR
quintile within each institutional ownership quintile. Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given in
parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



              IR,1       IR,2       IR,3       IR,4       IR,5       IR,5 - IR,1        10-factor alpha

INST, 1       0.18       0.41       0.33        0.65       0.63           0.45                0.12
                                                                         (1.27)              (0.29)
INST, 2       0.18       0.33       0.47        0.48       0.49           0.32                -0.01
                                                                         (1.63)              (-0.05)
INST, 3       0.19       0.31       0.44        0.52       0.48           0.29                0.05
                                                                         (1.57)              (0.36)
INST, 4       0.20       0.33       0.41        0.47       0.52           0.31                0.17
                                                                         (1.37)              (1.47)
INST, 5       0.21       0.38       0.45        0.52       0.53           0.32                0.01
                                                                         (1.38)              (0.08)




                                                  52
 Is There a Risk-Return Tradeoff in the Corporate Bond Market?
                  Time-Series and Cross-Sectional Evidence


                                      Online Appendix


To save space in the paper, we present the robustness check results in the Online Appendix.
Table A.1 tests if our findings in Table 1 are sensitive to an alternative approach to estimating
the risk-return tradeoff using the GARCH-in-Mean model. Table A.2 presents results from u-
nivariate portfolios of corporate bonds sorted by total variance (VOL). Table A.3 examines the
univariate portfolio results separately for bonds with investment-grade and non-investment-
grade ratings. Table A.4 reports the quintile portfolios of corporate bonds sorted by system-
atic risk (SR) for different subperiods from January 1997 to June 2019 (including the crisis
and the postcrisis/recovery periods). Table A.5 presents results from the firm-level univariate
portfolios of corporate bonds sorted by SR using the median size bond or the most liquid
bond as the representative for the firm. Table A.6 presents results from the firm-level Fama
and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of one-month-ahead corporate bond excess
returns on the SR, with and without controls. Table A.7 replicates Table 9 by replacing the
value-weighted aggregate systematic risk (SR) with the equal-, and rating-weighted system-
atic risk of individual bonds. Table A.8 reports the time-series predictive power of the value-,
                                                       2
equal-, and rating-weighted average of total variance (m ) of individual bonds in predicting
one-month-ahead returns on the value-weighted corporate bond market index (VWbond ) and
the Merrill Lynch bond index (MRLbond ).




                                               1
Table A.1: Estimating the Intertemporal Risk-Return Tradeoff in the Corporate
Bond and Equity Markets Using the GARCH-in-Mean and GJRGARCH-in-Mean
Models

This table investigates the intertemporal relation between expected return and risk of bond and stock
market returns based on the following GARCH-in-Mean and Threshold GARCH (GJR-GARCH)
models:

                                                 2
                                  Rm,t+1 =  +  · m,t +1|t +            m,t+1

                                       2                2                        2         2
                      GARCH: Et        m,t+1 |t       = m,t +1|t = 0 + 1         m,t   + 2 m,t
                                   2                2                      2         2               2
            GJR-GARCH: Et          m,t+1 |t       = m,t +1|t = 0 + 1       m,t   + 2 m,t, + 3 D t    m,t

                             Dt = 1 if      m,t   < 0, and Dt = 0 otherwise

where Rm,t+1 is the monthly excess return of the bond or stock market in month t + 1 and m,t     2
                                                                                                    +1|t
is the time-t expected conditional variance of excess bond or stock market returns at time t + 1;
  2
m,t             2
    +1|t = Et m,t+1 . t denotes the information set available at time t and the one-month-ahead
conditional variance of bond or stock market returns, m,t+1|t , is defined as a function of the current
unexpected news in the bond or stock market ( 2                                    2
                                                m,t ) and the current variance (m,t ).




 Panel A: GARCH-in-Mean model

                                                  0           1        2           3       Adj-R2          Sample Period

Value-Weighted          -0.0005   20.132     0.00002        0.2012   0.7045
                                                                                       ­    5.96%     Jan 1997 ­ June 2019
Bond Index              (-0.34)   (2.62)      (1.55)        (2.71)   (6.06)

Value-Weighted CRSP     0.0067    1.2409     0.00011        0.2226   0.7418
                                                                                       ­    -0.83%    Jan 1997 ­ June 2019
Stock Index             (1.47)    (0.47)      (1.50)        (3.21)   (9.05)

Value-Weighted CRSP     0.0061    1.1319     0.00008        0.1414   0.8369
                                                                                       ­    -0.10%   July 1926 ­ June 2019
Stock Index             (3.31)    (1.50)      (3.93)        (7.37)   (49.45)



 Panel B: GJRGARCH-in-Mean model

                                                  0           1        2           3       Adj-R2          Sample Period

Value-Weighted          -0.0002   18.120      0.0002        0.1953   0.7025      0.0238
                                                                                            5.52%     Jan 1997 ­ June 2019
Bond Index              (-0.12)   (2.47)      (1.52)        (1.88)   (6.01)      (0.26)

Value-Weighted CRSP     0.0079    -0.9768     0.0002        0.0116   0.7040      0.4088
                                                                                            -0.53%    Jan 1997 ­ June 2019
Stock Index             (1.84)    (-0.38)     (2.36)        (0.14)   (7.20)      (3.25)

Value-Weighted CRSP     0.0059    0.7242      0.0001        0.0645   0.8328      0.1235
                                                                                            0.05%    July 1926 ­ June 2019
Stock Index             (3.38)    (1.03)      (4.84)        (2.61)   (47.11)     (3.86)




                                                        2
                     Table A.2: Univariate portfolios of corporate bonds sorted by total variance (VOL)
    Quintile portfolios are formed every month from January 1997 to June 2019 by sorting corporate bonds based on the total variance.
    Quintile 1 is the portfolio with the lowest VOL and Quintile 5 is the portfolio with the highest VOL. The portfolios are value-weighted
    using amount outstanding as weights. Table reports the average VOL (%), the next-month average excess return, the 5-factor alpha
    from stock market factors, the 5-factor alpha from bond market factors, and the 10-factor alpha for each quintile. The last six columns
    report average portfolio characteristics including bond beta ( M KT ), illiquidity (ILLIQ), downside risk (5% Value-at-Risk), credit rating,
    time-to-maturity (years), and amount outstanding (size, in $billion) for each quintile. The last row shows the differences in monthly
    average returns, the differences in alphas with respect to the factor models. The 5-factor model with stock market factors includes the
    excess stock market return (MKTStock ), the size factor (SMB), the book-to-market factor (HML), the momentum factor (MOMStock ), and
    the stock liquidity factor (LIQStock ). The 5-factor model with bond market factors includes the excess bond market return (MKT), the
    default factor (DEF), the term factor (TERM), the bond momentum factor (MOMBond ), and the bond liquidity factor (LIQBond ). The
    10-factor model combines the five stock and five bond market factors. Average excess returns and alphas are defined in monthly percentage
    terms. Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given in parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
    respectively.



     Quintiles     Average     Average    5-factor stock    5-factor bond    10-factor              Average portfolio characteristics
                     VOL        return         alpha            alpha         alpha       M KT     ILLIQ     VaR     Rating    Maturity     Size
3




        Low          0.02        0.18          0.16             0.04           -0.02      0.46      0.33     1.52     6.77        3.70      0.64
                                (3.24)        (2.56)           (1.43)         (-0.73)
         2           0.05        0.33          0.26             0.09            0.08      0.70      0.78     2.68     7.68        6.49      0.55
                                (3.52)        (2.64)           (1.92)         (0.90)
         3           0.09        0.42          0.33             0.13            0.13      0.87      1.23     3.84     8.10        9.80      0.48
                                (3.44)        (2.55)           (2.46)         (2.33)
         4           0.21        0.56          0.39             0.27            0.22      1.20      1.90     5.75     8.38       14.46      0.47
                                (3.40)        (2.60)           (3.67)         (2.77)
       High          1.22        1.14          0.81             0.96            0.78      1.68      3.32    12.46     11.71      12.81      0.40
                                (4.30)        (3.52)           (5.08)         (3.28)

    High - Low                 0.96           0.65             0.92           0.73
                               (3.99)         (3.01)           (4.76)         (3.05)
 Table A.3: Investment-Grade Versus Non-Investment-Grade Corporate Bonds
This table repeats the univariate portfolio analyses in Tables 5­6 by sorting corporate bonds based
on the systematic risk (SR) and idiosyncratic risk (IR) for investment-grade corporate bonds in Panel
A and non-investment-grade bonds in Panel B.

 Panel A: Investment-grade bonds

                                   SR                                               IR

                       Average           10-factor                     Average            10-factor
                        return            alpha                         return             alpha
    Low                  0.15              0.05                          0.15               0.03
                        (3.48)            (0.23)                        (3.21)             (1.26)
     2                   0.30              0.12                          0.28               0.09
                        (4.35)            (2.16)                        (3.98)             (3.06)
     3                   0.38              0.15                          0.35               0.10
                        (4.05)            (2.32)                        (3.71)             (2.53)
     4                   0.52              0.22                          0.47               0.15
                        (4.23)            (2.60)                        (3.85)             (3.19)
   High                  0.63              0.35                          0.50               0.12
                        (3.97)            (2.96)                        (3.16)             (1.01)
High - Low             0.48                0.30                          0.35                0.09
                       (3.50)              (2.18)                        (2.66)             (0.69)

 Panel B: Non-investment-grade bonds

                                   SR                                               IR

                       Average           10-factor                     Average            10-factor
                        return            alpha                         return             alpha
    Low                  0.43              0.25                          0.36               0.16
                        (4.00)            (2.78)                        (3.43)             (1.76)
     2                   0.48              0.19                          0.50               0.21
                        (2.95)            (1.68)                        (3.04)             (2.02)
     3                   0.55              0.15                          0.46               0.08
                        (2.43)            (1.32)                        (2.04)             (0.74)
     4                   0.64              0.22                          0.51               0.05
                        (1.99)            (0.96)                        (1.71)             (0.26)
   High                  1.36              0.94                          0.69               0.21
                        (3.00)            (2.32)                        (1.85)             (0.73)
High - Low             0.94                0.71                           0.33               0.06
                       (2.78)              (2.54)                        (1.12)             (0.19)




                                                    4
                               Table A.4: Subperiod Analyses
This table repeats the univariate portfolio analyses in Tables 5­6 by sorting corporate bonds based
on the systematic risk (SR) and idiosyncratic risk (IR) for three subperiods (i) the first pre-crisis
subperiod from January 1997 to July 2007, (ii) the second subperiod including the crisis from August
2007 to December 2012, and (iii) the third most recent subperiod from January 2013 to June 2019.

 Panel A: Corporate bonds sorted by SR

                Average      10-factor         Average      10-factor         Average     10-factor
                 return       alpha             return       alpha             return      alpha

                     Subperiod I                     Subperiod II                 Subperiod III

    Low            0.08         0.06             0.33         -0.02             0.13         0.01
                  (0.93)       (0.78)           (2.46)       (-0.32)           (4.63)       (0.90)
     2             0.18         0.14             0.63          0.11             0.21         0.16
                  (1.44)       (1.41)           (2.94)       (1.75)            (3.23)       (2.64)
     3             0.21         0.16             0.77          0.08             0.27         0.19
                  (1.61)       (1.79)           (2.58)       (0.95)            (2.73)       (2.03)
     4             0.36         0.29             0.90          0.37             0.35         0.22
                  (2.09)       (2.74)           (2.53)       (2.81)            (2.21)       (1.35)
   High            0.59         0.46             1.54         1.12              0.67         0.47
                  (2.12)       (3.19)           (2.48)       (2.99)            (2.60)       (1.69)

High - Low       0.51         0.41              1.21         1.14              0.54         0.46
                 (2.20)       (3.01)            (2.16)       (2.82)            (2.27)       (2.14)




 Panel B: Corporate bonds sorted by IR

                Average      10-factor         Average      10-factor         Average     10-factor
                 return       alpha             return       alpha             return      alpha

                     Subperiod I                     Subperiod II                 Subperiod III

    Low            0.10        0.05              0.43          0.10             0.16        0.05
                  (0.69)      (0.38)            (2.94)        (0.32)           (2.63)      (0.29)
     2             0.19         0.11             0.65          0.09             0.24         0.06
                  (1.34)      (0.73)            (2.81)        (1.06)           (2.58)      (0.35)
     3             0.16        -0.19             0.70          0.01             0.32        0.00
                  (0.85)      (-0.89)           (2.25)        (0.08)           (2.15)      (0.00)
     4             0.26         0.10             0.69          0.10             0.38        -0.02
                  (1.68)      (0.81)            (1.77)        (0.58)           (2.16)      (-0.40)
   High            0.63         0.29             0.64          0.34             0.69        0.28
                  (2.72)      (1.00)            (1.09)        (1.08)           (2.51)      (1.54)

High - Low       0.54           0.25             0.21          0.23            0.53          0.24
                 (2.30)        (0.79)           (0.40)        (0.77)           (2.13)       (1.21)



                                                 5
 Table A.5: Firm-level Univariate Portfolios of Corporate Bonds Sorted by SR
This table repeats the univariate portfolio analyses in Table 5 by sorting corporate bonds based on
the systematic risk (SR) at the firm-level. To control for bonds issued by the same firm, for each
month in our sample, we pick one bond with the median size (Panel A) or the most liquid bond
(Panel B) as the representative for the firm.



                Panel A: Using the median size bond           Panel B: Using the most liquid bond

               Average              10-factor                Average             10-factor
                return               alpha                    return              alpha

    Low          0.19                 -0.06                    0.19                 0.03
                (3.56)               (-0.92)                  (3.57)               (0.65)
     2           0.34                 0.13                     0.35                 0.13
                (4.09)               (1.06)                   (4.10)               (1.13)
     3           0.42                 0.15                     0.42                 0.15
                (3.70)               (2.02)                   (3.71)               (2.05)
     4           0.54                 0.20                     0.54                 0.21
                (3.76)               (3.76)                   (3.77)               (3.86)
   High          0.83                 0.42                     0.78                 0.45
                (3.51)               (1.81)                   (3.66)               (2.99)

High - Low      0.64                 0.49                     0.60                 0.45
                (3.06)               (2.48)                   (3.23)               (2.26)




                                                6
                                  Table A.6: Firm-level Fama-MacBeth Cross-Sectional Regressions

    This table repeats the Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of one-month-ahead corporate bond excess returns on systematic risk and
    idiosyncratic risk with and without control variables in Table 8 at the firm-level. To control for bonds issued by the same firm, for each month in our
    sample, we pick one bond with the median size (Panel A) or the most liquid bond (Panel B) as the representative for the firm.

     Panel A: Using the median size bond

           Intercept       SR         IR        M KT       DEF        T ERM       Rating     ILLIQ      Maturity       Size       REV        Adj. R2 (%)

    (1)      0.387       1.224                                                                                                                   6.52
            (2.93)       (3.74)
    (2)      0.361                  0.405                                                                                                        5.03
            (3.03)                  (1.26)
    (3)      0.331       1.243      0.370                                                                                                        8.81
            (2.65)       (2.46)     (0.44)
    (4)      0.035       1.511                 0.020      -0.039      -0.044      0.031      0.027         0.007      0.040      -0.102         21.60
            (0.20)       (2.49)                (0.32)     (-0.58)     (-0.44)     (1.40)     (3.26)       (0.63)      (0.45)     (-8.45)
    (5)      0.485                  0.819      0.012      -0.112       0.110      0.014      0.049        -0.017      0.027      -0.122         20.41
7




            (1.24)                  (0.75)     (0.21)     (-1.33)     (0.98)      (0.66)     (3.05)       (-0.71)     (0.59)     (-9.88)
    (6)     -0.047       1.492      0.066      0.015      -0.102       0.084      0.028      0.031         0.004      0.051      -0.097         22.06
            (-0.46)      (2.27)     (0.06)     (0.18)     (-1.14)     (0.73)      (1.50)     (2.93)       (0.97)      (0.83)     (-7.20)



     Panel B: Using the most liquid bond

           Intercept       SR         IR        M KT       DEF        T ERM       Rating     ILLIQ      Maturity       Size       REV        Adj. R2 (%)

    (1)      0.391       1.434                                                                                                                   6.65
             (2.95)      (4.06)
    (2)      0.376                  0.620                                                                                                        4.91
             (3.17)                 (2.25)
    (3)      0.335       0.617      0.431                                                                                                        8.76
             (2.67)      (2.44)     (0.65)
    (4)      0.057       1.434                 0.033      -0.053      -0.027      0.029      0.030         0.008      0.032      -0.114         20.43
             (0.33)      (2.71)                (0.55)     (-0.79)     (-0.28)     (1.36)     (3.09)       (0.85)      (0.26)     (-9.65)
    (5)      0.422                  0.428      0.082      -0.090       0.065      0.017      0.076        -0.019      0.055      -0.097         21.14
             (1.06)                 (0.64)     (1.24)     (-1.06)     (0.55)      (0.74)     (3.02)       (-0.80)     (0.65)     (-7.69)
    (6)      0.021       1.034      0.073      0.012      -0.098       0.031      0.019      0.054         0.014      0.027      -0.076         22.39
             (0.23)      (2.14)     (0.12)     (0.05)     (-0.84)     (0.21)      (0.96)     (3.38)       (1.27)      (0.36)     (-6.27)
    Table A.7: Robustness Check: Predicting Aggregate Bond Market Returns and Volatility Using Aggregate
    Systematic Risk

    This table replicates Table 9 by replacing the value-weighted aggregate systematic risk (SR) with the equal-, and rating-weighted average of systematic
    risk of individual bonds. The table presents results from the monthly predictive regressions with the value-weighted corporate bond market index
    (VWbond ) in Panel A and aggregate monthly bond market variance (MKTV ol ) in Panel B. The sample period is from January 1997 to June 2019.
    t-statistics are reported in parentheses and  ,  , and  indicate the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

      Panel A: Dep. var = VWbond
    Forecasting horizon     t=1        t=2          t=3              t=4            t=5          t=6          t=7        t=8        t=9         t = 10    t = 11    t = 12
                                                                                               Equal-weighted SR
         Intercept          3.24       -6.24        0.31           8.82         10.15             6.96        4.43      14.79*     17.24**      15.26*    11.66     11.70*
                           (0.46)     (-0.76)      (0.04)         (1.00)        (1.20)           (0.72)      (0.53)     (1.77)      (2.20)      (1.83)    (1.61)    (1.70)
            SR            1.47***     1.65***      1.56***       1.25**         1.09**           1.07**      0.95*      1.05**       0.78        0.78      0.76      0.78
                           (2.96)      (3.10)       (3.03)       (2.32)         (2.25)           (2.10)      (1.86)     (2.25)      (1.58)      (1.52)    (1.61)    (1.56)
         Controls            Y           Y            Y            Y              Y                Y           Y          Y           Y           Y         Y         Y
       Adj. R2 (%)          22.82      21.49        15.84          12.65            15.63        16.94       12.98       10.09       8.87        9.06      6.22      2.52


                                                                                               Rating-weighted SR
         Intercept          3.32       -6.37        0.40           9.07         10.30             7.09        4.46      14.86*     17.27**      15.37*    11.84     12.00*
                           (0.47)     (-0.76)      (0.05)         (1.03)        (1.22)           (0.73)      (0.53)     (1.78)      (2.20)      (1.84)    (1.63)    (1.74)
8




            SR            2.37***     2.51***      2.57***       2.22**         1.88**           1.82**      1.55*      1.75**       1.30       1.37*      1.20      1.18
                           (2.87)      (2.81)       (2.96)       (2.58)         (2.40)           (2.20)      (1.89)     (2.28)      (1.61)      (1.67)    (1.34)    (1.38)
         Controls            Y           Y            Y            Y              Y                Y           Y          Y           Y           Y         Y         Y
       Adj. R2 (%)          22.76      21.08        15.93          13.03            15.81        17.07       13.00       10.15       8.90        9.19      6.40      2.78



      Panel B: Dep. var = MKTV OL
    Forecasting horizon    t=1       t=2        t=3          t=4            t=5              t=6           t=7         t=8        t=9         t = 10     t = 11    t = 12
                                                                                               Equal-weighted SR
         Intercept          9.76     13.92      20.02*       18.55*        20.36**          29.67***      29.50**     23.77**    18.54**     20.65***    21.82**   20.18**
                           (1.25)    (1.26)     (1.77)       (1.83)         (2.25)           (2.69)        (2.44)      (2.07)     (2.15)      (2.63)      (2.50)    (2.19)
            SR            1.61***    1.42**     1.31**       1.40**        1.25*             1.26*        1.14*        1.05      1.14*         1.12      1.18*      1.09
                           (2.63)    (2.16)     (2.00)       (2.26)        (1.88)            (1.84)       (1.66)      (1.53)     (1.70)       (1.65)     (1.73)    (1.55)
         Controls            Y         Y          Y            Y             Y                 Y            Y           Y          Y            Y          Y         Y
       Adj. R2 (%)         34.63     24.24      22.18        21.72          15.39            12.70         12.82       10.61      10.49        6.70       7.09      6.33

                                                                                              Rating-weighted SR
         Intercept         10.16     14.39      20.45*       18.84*        20.56**          29.86***      29.52**     23.70**    18.55**     20.50**     21.68**   20.20**
                           (1.30)    (1.29)     (1.80)       (1.86)         (2.27)           (2.71)        (2.44)      (2.06)     (2.16)      (2.60)      (2.47)    (2.18)
            SR            2.85***    2.67**     2.48**       2.50**        2.18**            2.19**       1.86*        1.63      1.86*         1.69       1.78      1.73
                           (2.89)    (2.55)     (2.38)       (2.53)        (2.00)            (1.98)       (1.66)      (1.46)     (1.72)       (1.51)     (1.58)    (1.52)
         Controls            Y         Y          Y            Y             Y                 Y            Y           Y          Y            Y          Y         Y
       Adj. R2 (%)         35.03     24.79      22.68        22.04          15.57            12.88         12.82       10.53      10.50        6.55       6.92      6.27
Table A.8: Robustness Check: The Intertemporal Risk-Return Tradeoff in the
Corporate Bond Market

This table reports the time-series predictive power of the value-, equal-, and rating-weighted average of total
            2
variance (m   ) of individual bonds in predicting one-month-ahead returns on the value-weighted corporate
bond market index (VWbond ) and the Merrill Lynch bond index (MRLbond ). Panel A reports the univariate
regression results. Panel B reports the multivariate regression results after controlling for macroeconomic
variables used in Table 1. The sample period is from January 1997 to June 2019. t-statistics are reported in
the parentheses and  ,  , and  indicate the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

 Panel A: Univariate regressions

            Value-weighted                            Equal-weighted                               Rating-weighted
               2
Intercept      m       Adj. R2 (%)        Intercept      2
                                                         m        Adj. R2 (%)            Intercept      2
                                                                                                        m      Adj. R2 (%)
          Dep. Var = VWbond                     Dep. Var = VWbond                              Dep. Var = VWbond
  0.03       2.00***         7.77           0.12        1.00**          7.37               0.12      1.53**          7.37
 (0.18)       (2.61)                       (0.86)       (2.51)                            (0.88)     (2.28)

       Dep. Var = MRLbond                      Dep. Var = MRLbond                             Dep. Var = MRLbond
  0.02       1.63**          4.38           0.09        0.83**          4.29               0.08      1.30**          4.29
 (0.11)      (2.48)                        (0.59)       (2.48)                            (0.56)     (2.28)



 Panel B: Multivariate regressions
                   2
Intercept          m                EP        DP               BM               DEF           TERM            Adj. R2 (%)

                                                    Value-weighted

                                                Dep. var = VWbond
                                                             t+1

  6.47           1.34***         -0.32       1.85*             -0.43           0.18***        0.16***            23.40
 (1.24)           (4.68)        (-0.98)      (1.81)           (-0.22)           (2.97)         (2.72)

                                               Dep. var = MRLbond
                                                             t+1

  4.06           1.13***         -0.22        1.21             0.17            0.18**         0.10**             11.42
 (0.75)           (3.30)        (-0.61)      (1.18)           (0.07)           (2.18)         (2.38)

                                                    Equal-weighted

                                                Dep. var = VWbond
                                                             t+1

  5.52           0.63***         -0.38        1.66             -0.15           0.18***        0.16***            22.99
 (1.01)           (4.63)        (-1.17)      (1.55)           (-0.07)           (2.99)         (2.71)

                                               Dep. var = MRLbond
                                                             t+1

  3.33           0.55***         -0.27        1.06             0.35            0.18**         0.10**             11.27
 (0.61)           (3.50)        (-0.77)      (1.02)           (0.14)           (2.19)         (2.37)

                                                    Rating-weighted

                                                Dep. var = VWbond
                                                             t+1

  5.20           1.00***         -0.46        1.64             -0.04           0.18***        0.16***            22.82
 (0.90)           (4.48)        (-1.36)      (1.46)           (-0.02)           (2.97)         (2.70)

                                               Dep. var = MRLbond
                                                             t+1

  3.14           0.91***         -0.32        1.06             0.37            0.18**         0.10**             11.31
 (0.57)           (3.55)        (-0.96)      (1.01)           (0.15)           (2.18)         (2.34)
                                                          9
