                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TIME PREFERENCE AND THE GREAT DEPRESSION:
            EVIDENCE FROM FIREWOOD PRICES IN PORTLAND, OREGON.

                                       Nicholas Z. Muller

                                       Working Paper 25997
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25997


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




The author thanks Wayne Gray, Michael Greenstone, Matteo Maggiori, Erin Mansur, and other
participants at the NBER EEE 2018 spring meetings; participants at the 2018 Northeast
Workshop on Energy Policy and Economics; Karen Fisher-Vanden, Seth Blumsack, and Joel
Landry and seminar participants at Penn State University, for helpful and instructive suggestions
as well as Daniel Nagin, Akshaya Jha and Karen Clay for early input. Thanks to Marcos Barrozo-
Filho for excellent research assistance. Any remaining errors are the responsibility of the author.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Nicholas Z. Muller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Time Preference and the Great Depression: Evidence from Firewood Prices in Portland, Oregon.
Nicholas Z. Muller
NBER Working Paper No. 25997
June 2019
JEL No. D15,N12,N72,Q23,Q41

                                         ABSTRACT

The present study gathers prices for firewood and estimates the premium paid for dry fuel,
relative to green wood, on a monthly basis from 1922 to 1935. This premium conveys consumers'
willingness-to-pay for a good available for immediate consumption relative to the same good
ready for use after roughly one year. Embedded in this premium are consumers' time preferences.
The paper documents time series variation in the dry fuel premium and associated time
preference spanning the macroeconomic shocks before, during, and after the Great Depression.
The dry fuel premium increased by a factor of four during the recession of 1923 to 1924, and fell
by a factor of two following the Great Crash of October 1929. Key factors in determining the
premium for dry fuel were variation in wages, inflation, stock market returns, and bond yields.
This paper supports the uncertainty hypothesis as an explanation for the precipitous fall in
consumption expenditures following the Great Crash of 1929.


Nicholas Z. Muller
Department of Engineering, and Public Policy
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
4215 Tepper Quad
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
nicholas.muller74@gmail.com
   1. Introduction.


This paper brings together two topics that have individually received considerable

attention in the economics literature, but have not yet been explored together: the Great

Depression and intertemporal choice. New primary data on the relative prices of seasoned

and green firewood between the years 1922 and 1935 facilitates this synthesis. These two

goods are nearly perfect substitutes in all respects except that dry fuel is ready for current

consumption, whereas green wood must cure before use. The relative prices of dry and

green fuel reflects the value placed on consumption at different points in time. The

differential embodies time preferences. For most types of fuel wood, the time required for

proper seasoning is about one year. Thus, the comparison of dry and green fuel prices in

any given time period is one between willingness-to-pay (WTP) for consumption in the

present relative to WTP for consumption delayed by one year.


The novel approach to gleaning information about rates of time preference from market

data over this particular time-period affords a series of unprecedented empirical exercises.

First, temporal stability in time preference is tested by estimating premiums for dry fuel on

a monthly basis from 1922 to 1935. Second, the paper examines the sensitivity of apparent

time preferences to macroeconomic shocks such as the Great Crash of October 1929, the

Banking Crises of 1931 and 1932, and the recessions that occurred earlier in the 1920's.

Third, the paper tests associations between dry fuel premiums and indicators of financial

conditions such as bond yields, returns on equity, and inflation as well as microeconomic

measures including local wages, coal prices and costs-of-living. Doing so over such a long

time series during a period of macroeconomic and social upheaval is also new. Finally, the


                                               2
paper qualitatively contributes to the literature probing causes and factors that

exacerbated the Great Depression by framing the discussion of time preference in the

broader "uncertainty hypothesis" developed by Romer (1990).


The present paper exploits a newly constructed dataset of historic energy fuel prices. Price

data for firewood are gathered from classified advertisements in the Portland Oregonian

from 1922 to 1935 (Oregonian, various). In all, the data consist of over 14,000 price quotes

from 168 months spanning 1922 to 1935. All price quotes from one day in the middle of

each month are included in the data. The ads often specify the following fuel attributes: cut,

type, and species of wood, quantity for sale, and whether the wood is dry or green. It is the

last attribute that the paper uses to elicit time preferences. It is important to note that the

present paper cannot control for all possible confounding factors that may affect the

relative prices of dry and green fuel1. However, typical usage patterns of green fuel

(namely, buying the fuel, storing the fuel until it is seasoned, and then consuming it)

suggest that rates of time preference are central to the WTP for dry relative to green fuel.


There are three reasons why this empirical setting is a fortuitous context in which to study

intertemporal choice. First, fuel wood comprised a significant share of household budgets.

Purchases of fuel, electricity, and ice comprised 6.2 percent of household expenditures in

the 1930's (BLS, 1941). Second, firewood was the dominant source of energy at this time.




1 The claim that the dry fuel premium offers an estimate of consumers' time preference is
tempered by consideration of the cost of storage. Clearly purchasing green fuel and
stockpiling it for, say, a year until it seasons requires the use of space. Use of scarce space
by homeowners comes at some opportunity cost, especially given that the fuel must be
kept in a dry location. Because storage comes at cost, the true premium paid for dry fuel is
likely lower than the price differential gleaned from market data.
                                                3
In 1935, over 20 percent of energy consumption in the United States was derived from

firewood (Schurr et al., 1960). And, in 1940, over 70 percent of households in Oregon relied

on wood as the primary heating fuel (U.S. Census, 2000). Clearly, purchases of wood as a

home heating and cooking fuel were central to home production and welfare. As such,

consumers likely weighed such decisions heavily. That households devoted considerable

thought to their fuel wood purchases strengthens the link between the relative prices for

dry and green fuel and market participants' time preferences. Third, from the times of early

European settlement (and even among Native American communities) until the period

under study, in a timber-rich region like the Pacific Northwest, wood was the historically

dominant source of energy. Household choice with respect to firewood reflected years of

accumulated knowledge. Well-formed habits would have included how much wood to

purchase and when to buy it, what type of wood to purchase, how to season firewood, and

from whom to procure it. This accumulated knowledge permeated the markets observed in

the present analysis. It would reduce uncertainty about the quantity of fuel needed, how to

season wood, and pricing dynamics. Mitigating household uncertainty enhances the

present analysis' ability to recover time preferences.


In this fortuitous context, the paper conducts three sets of empirical exercises. First, a

series of hedonic pricing models estimate the marginal implicit price of dry fuel relative to

green fuel. Second, the fitted dry fuel premiums are regressed on a series of controls and

indicators for macroeconomic shocks that occurred between 1922 and 1935. Third, to

assess conditions on the supply side of the market, convenience yields are estimated, and

the effect of timber harvests on convenience yields is explored.



                                               4
1.1 Hedonic Estimation of Time Preferences.


The hedonic models describe prices of firewood as a function of fuel attributes and the

models estimate the implicit price of these attributes (Griliches, 1961; Rosen, 1974).

Firewood is comprised of several characteristics including the cut, species, and season

status. Provided sufficient variation within the product class (that is, assuming there are

many different types of firewood with different bundles of attributes) it is possible to

recover the hedonic price function. Then, the partial derivative of the hedonic price

function with respect to an attribute provides its marginal implicit price (Rosen, 1974).


A critical assumption undergirding this estimation strategy is that the prices observed and

collected in this study reflect equilibrium outcomes in firewood markets. Equilibrium

prices in the hedonic framework reflect tangencies between buyers bid curves, suppliers

offer curves, and the double envelope between them that is the hedonic price function. As

such, the hedonic price function and prices depend on both supply side and demand side

characteristics. The empirical analysis that follows explores both supply and demand side

conditions, though most of the empirical analysis interpret the relative prices through the

lens of consumers' intertemporal choice and time preferences.


Central to the hypothesis tests in this paper is the estimate of the marginal implicit price of

dry fuel, expressed relative to green fuel. It is important to ask what the dry premium

measures. At one end of the spectrum is the argument that the premium paid for dry fuel

relative to green fuel reveals the consumers' pure rate of time preference. At the other is

the position that there are too many confounding factors inherent in the hurly burly of

market activity to claim elicitation of time preference from the firewood price data. The

                                               5
paper adopts a circumspect stance between these two extremes; while rates of time

preference are surely embedded in consumers' WTP for dry fuel, other factors on both the

supply and demand side of the market are quite likely at play. This position also prompts

the emphasis on variation in the dry fuel premium over the 168 months covered by the

analysis rather than the level of the dry fuel premium. Concern about factors confounding

the elicitation of consumers' time preferences motivates the exploration of the supply side

of the market and the inclusion of other covariates in the hedonic models that are

potentially pertinent to individual time preference, consumption decisions and market

conditions, more generally.


1.2 Determinants of Estimated Time Preferences.


Data spanning 168 months from 1922 to 1935 uniquely enable tests of how time

preferences vary according to both discrete macroeconomic shocks and continuously

measured variables. Specifically, dry fuel premia are estimated by month-of-sample. These

parameter estimates are regressed on indicators for discrete events and other controls that

may plausibly affect the dry fuel premium. In terms of events, the paper tests whether time

preferences were affected by the recessions of 1923 ­ 1924 and 1926 ­ 1927, the stock

market Crash of October 1929, and the Banking Crises of 1931 through March 1933. The

paper also examines how time preferences respond to general measures of inflation (such

as the Consumer Price Index ­ CPI), returns on stocks, using monthly returns on the Dow

Jones Industrials Index, and yields on 10-year U.S Treasury Bonds. In addition, these

descriptive regressions control for monthly wages using data gathered from classified ads

in the Portland Oregonian.


                                             6
The regressions described above position the paper to inform the literature on the causes

and exacerbating forces of the Great Depression. Prior authors examined the effect of

uncertainty over future economic conditions on consumption decisions during the 1920's

and 1930's (Bernanke, 1983; Romer, 1990). The argument undergirding Romer's (1990)

uncertainty hypothesis leveraged Bernanke's (1983) intuition regarding the irreversibility

of certain investments; uncertainty in income may cause consumers to delay purchases,

especially of durables. One interpretation of this is a temporary increase in patience. To

enable a test of Romer's (1990) uncertainty hypothesis in the context of a household staple,

the regressions include both means and standard deviations of income, inflation, cost-of-

living, returns on equity, and bond yields. Bernanke (1983) and Romer (1990) argued such

uncertainty was pivotal in explaining the sustained downturn that following the Crash of

October 1929. The present paper tests this hypothesis.


1.3 Convenience Yields.


To provide a more complete analysis of the firewood markets, this paper estimates

convenience yields for producers of firewood. Convenience yields are typically defined as

the return to investors of holding inventory of a storable commodity (Pindyck, 1994). This

return may stem from the ability of investors to reap profits during shortages (when prices

are high) and to avoid costly disruptions to production processes (stock-outs), Pindyck

(1994). Convenience yields depend on relative spot and futures prices: the analysis treats

green fuel prices as forward fuel prices and dry wood prices as spot prices.


Residuals from the lumber industry primarily supplied the markets for firewood in

Portland, Oregon. Whether and precisely when lumber companies decided to sell fuel wood

                                              7
depended on firms' expectations about price movements in both the lumber and firewood

markets as well as storage costs. Thus, the return to firms holding inventories relative to

bringing wood to market may be an important time-varying factor affecting both fuel prices

and the relative prices of dry and green wood. Convenience yields, described in more detail

in section 2.3, are estimated on a month-of-sample basis.


1.4 Related Literature.


Frederick, Loewenstein, and O'Donoghue (FLO, 2002) provides the benchmark reference

for laboratory and field studies on empirical discount rates. As noted above, the present

analysis focuses on how rates of time preference vary over time, rather than their level. As

such, this summary of the literature focuses on papers exploring temporal stability in time

preferences. Intertemporal stability in time preferences comprises a gap in the otherwise

well-trodden ground of studies on discount rates and time preference, (FLO, 2002). Absent

entirely from this literature are studies over as long a time series as featured in the present

paper. For example, a recent paper examining intertemporal stability in time preference

explored just three years of data (Krupa and Stephens, 2013). Importantly, Giglio et al.,

(2015) estimate long-run discount rates using variation in housing prices driven by

differential lengths in leasing structures. A distinguishing feature of the present analysis is

the focus on relatively high-frequency variation in estimates of time preference as opposed

to long-run discount rates extracted over a long time series.


Extant papers in this space yield conflicting results as to whether individual discount rates

respond to changing financial circumstances. For example, Harrison et al., (2002) report

that discount rates are not affected by economic outcomes, either at the household level or

                                               8
in terms of respondents' expectations. Similarly, Meier and Sprenger (2015) find that

discount rates are not responsive to changes in household income or the provision of

unemployment benefits. In contrast, Krupka and Stephens (2013) report that discount

rates systematically vary over time. These authors argue that discount rates are positively

correlated with measures of inflation and negatively related to household income (Krupka

and Stephens, 2013). Giglio et al., (2015) report declining discount rates with the length of

cash flow maturities. Any paper focusing on the estimation of individual discount rates in a

field setting builds on the work of Hausman (1979), who exploited differences in the

revealed preference for purchase prices and capital costs of air conditioners to estimate

discount rates.


As noted above, the specific time period over which pricing data was gathered implicitly

links this paper to work that probes the causes of, and behavior during, the Great

Depression. These include but are not limited to Romer, (1990) who offers the uncertainty

hypothesis regarding the stark drop in consumption of durable goods; Bernanke (1983)

who posited the intuition for the link between uncertainty and investment at the crux of

Romer (1990); Hall and Ferguson (1998) who summarize events and extant arguments as

to the roles of the Federal Reserve, consumers, and firms during the Depression; and

Friedman (1956) and Friedman and Schwartz (1963) who focus on the role of monetary

policy.


1.5 Summary of Results.


Over all months and wood types, the estimated premium for dry fuel is about 13 percent.

The dry fuel premiums are sensitive to macroeconomic shocks that occurred between 1922

                                              9
and 1935. During the recession that occurred from 1923 to 1924, dry fuel premiums rose

by a factor of between three and four. Following the stock market Crash of October 1929,

dry fuel premiums fell by one-half. The analysis finds that uncertainty in economic

conditions, as measured by inflation, wages, returns on equity investments and bond

yields, are significant determinants of the dry fuel premiums. As such, the findings herein

provide empirical support for Romer's uncertainty hypothesis (Romer, 1990). On the

supply side of the market, convenience yields differ significantly before and after the Crash.

Holding inventories after the Crash produced positive returns, implying greater scarcity,

whereas convenience yields were negative prior to the Crash. Convenience yields are

negatively associated with local timber harvests because such harvests produce copious

amounts of residual biomass which comprises fuel wood.


The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 focuses on the data and

empirical methodology. Section 3 presents the empirical results and section 4 concludes.


   2. Data and Methods.


The primary data used in the empirical econometric analyses consist of price quotes in

classified ads for fuelwood in Portland, Oregon, USA. The data were gathered from the

Portland Oregonian online archives over the period 1922 through 1935 ( Oregonian,

various). An example of classified ads that contain price quotes is found in figure A1. The

data consist of over 14,000 price quotes. Many of the advertisements list attributes of the

fuel including cut, type, and species of wood, amount of wood for sale, and the extent to

which the fuel is raw or seasoned. The data are monthly, with ads sampled from the 15 th

day of each month from 1922 through 1935. (If the images are illegible for the 15 th, data

                                              10
are gathered from the nearest day with suitable imagery.) All advertisements from each

sampled day are included in the estimation dataset ­ provided the images on the archives

were legible. Figure A2 in the appendix reports the total number of price quotes across the

14 years. The figure indicates that the number of price quotes grew from about 50 per day

in 1922 up to over 200 per day during the Great Depression. After 1932, the number of

quotes then fell back to between 50 and 100 per day.


Table 1 displays the summary statistics for the price data. While there are many types of

fuel wood contained in the sample of advertisements, table 1 reports summaries for those

that comprise 1 percent of the sample or more 2. These types of fuel collectively account for

the majority of all price quotes in the sample. The largest share of price quotes were for

slab wood: a residual from lumber production (see figure A3 in the appendix). The average

price per cord of slab was about $5. Nearly 30 percent of the advertisements for this wood

type were for dry (seasoned) fuel, another 18 percent were for partially seasoned fuel, and

3 percent of ads were for green, or raw, fuel. The remaining 50 percent of price quotes did

not specify the fuel's seasoning status. Another 8 percent of price quotes were for old-

growth fuel. The price of old growth fuel averaged about $5.9. Approximately one-quarter

of prices for old growth specify that the fuel was seasoned. Much smaller percentages of

ads denote either partially seasoned fuel or raw fuel. Table 1 indicates that about 8 percent

of the price quotes were in ads that did not designate the type of wood. Despite not

reporting type, about half of these ads did specify that the fuel was seasoned,




2The large number of different wood types lends credence to the claim that an hedonic
model applied to the data identifies the hedonic price function and the marginal implicit
prices of fuel attributes.
                                              11
approximately 4 percent were for partially seasoned wood, and 3 percent were for raw

fuel. Ads for block wood contributed another 7 percent of observations. Block wood is also

a residual from sawmills. This wood type was about 20 percent more expensive than slab.

Just under 20 percent of the price quotes were for dry fuel, 11 percent were for partially

seasoned wood, and 3 percent were for raw fuel. Fuel specified as fir comprised another 6

percent of ads. Average prices for fir were about $7 per cord, the second highest average

price of all types in table 1. About one-quarter of prices for fir were for seasoned fuel, and

between 4 and 5 percent were for partially dry and raw fuel.


Table 1 contains several additional types of wood that reveal that fuel was often derived

from other uses of wood. For example, ads for "mill" and "planer" fuel indicate by-products

of the lumber industry. (Planer ends are the unusable last few inches of boards that have

been planed down to specific dimensions for use in building or woodworking.) Ads for

"wreckage" often specify that the fuel came from demolished structures. Other wood types

refer to specific uses, such as "furnace" or "range" fuels. The only hardwood species that

contributes more than 1 percent of observations was oak. This fuel, presumably due to its

high energy content, had the highest average price at just over $8 per cord. For all types

with the exception of wreckage wood, the majority of advertisements did not specify

whether the fuel was raw or seasoned. Those ads that did report seasoning status most

commonly reported dry fuel. Fuel advertised as green was the least common of the

categories of seasoning status.


Figure 1 presents the ratios of concurrent prices for dry to green fuel. The left panel

includes all wood types. The right panel focuses on slab wood ­ the fuel type for which


                                               12
there were the greatest number of price quotes. For all wood types, dry fuel sold for about

25 percent more than green fuel, on a concurrent basis. For a small number of months

(mostly in the 1920's) green fuel prices exceeded those of dry. However, it is important to

note that, by including all price quotes, the left-hand panel of figure 1 may compare green

and dry prices for very different products: oak and fir, for example. As such, the right panel

of figure 1 focuses on the dry fuel premium for just slab wood. One observes fewer cases in

which green fuel prices exceeded those of dry fuel. The relative prices rise through the

1920's before falling during the early 1930's. Prices reflect equilibrium outcomes in fuel

markets. This figure reveals that consumers were willing to pay a premium for dry fuel

available for current consumption.


Figure A4 presents monthly average firewood prices ($1982) for both green and dry fuel.

The figure provides evidence of a fundamental change in the Portland firewood markets

after the Crash. First, this figure clearly shows the dry fuel premium both before the Crash

and after the banking crises. However, between 1931 and 1933, the dry fuel premium

breaks down. Second, the price level for both types of firewood rises, and it remains higher

until the end of the sample.


Table 2 reports summary price statistics for the different seasoning grades of fuel for all

wood types, slab, old-growth, and all other wood types, conditional on there being a fuel

type specified in the price quote. This table provides further evidence of the premium for

dry fuel embodied in market prices. Across all wood types, dry fuel averaged about $5.9 per

cord, whereas green fuel averaged just $5.3. This suggests a dry fuel premium relative to

green fuel of about 10 percent. Dry fuel was also more expensive than either partially dry


                                              13
fuel or that without seasoned status denoted in the advertisement. Neither partially

seasoned fuel nor prices without information about seasoning status were priced

differently than green fuel.


The average price for dry slab was $5.7 per cord, which is about 22 percent higher than the

average price for green slab wood. Dry fuel also was about 23 percent more expensive than

partially seasoned fuel. The price for dry slab was 20 percent higher than prices for slab in

ads that did not specify whether the fuel was seasoned or green. The mean price of raw

slab wood is not statistically different from either partially seasoned wood or ads selling

wood without seasoning information.


The premium for dry old growth wood was considerably smaller in percentage terms. The

average price of dry old growth wood was just 8 percent higher than for green old growth

wood. The price of dry old growth wood was 3 percent smaller than fuel without reported

seasoning status. Counterintuitively, dry old growth fuel was 6 percent less expensive than

partially dry fuel, though this difference is not statistically significant. This may be due to

the timing of when the ads for partially dry old growth wood were posted ­ during times of

relatively higher prices, generally, for fuel wood. The right-hand column of table 2 suggests

that consumers were willing-to-pay a 7 percent premium for dry fuel for all types of fuel,

when the type of fuel is specified. The average price of dry wood was about 7 percent

higher than green wood, excluding all price quotes when there is no wood type information

in the advertisement. While just presenting price summaries, table 2 provides redolent

evidence of consumers' WTP for dry fuel that provides immediate gratification, relative to




                                               14
green fuel that requires seasoning before use. Thus, these average prices are suggestive of

consumer's time preferences.


Additional data gathered and used in the analysis include the monthly Consumer Price

Index (CPI), (McCusker, 1992), and monthly values for the Dow Jones Industrial Index

(Measuring Worth). Monthly yields on U.S. government bonds are provided by the U.S.

Federal Reserve (Federal Reserve, 1943). Cost-of-living indices (COLI) for Portland, Oregon

are provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS, 1941). Included in the analysis are

COLI indices for food, rent, and clothing. Hourly wages for occupations in the trades were

also gathered from classified advertisements in the Portland Oregonian (Oregonian,

various). Weather data, specifically temperature and precipitation anomalies, are provided

by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Weather

Service (NWS), (NOAA, 2018). These are cumulative monthly temperature and

precipitation anomalies. These measures are the sum of differences between monthly

temperature (precipitation) and average temperatures (precipitation) for each month of

year. The sum is calculated beginning in June of each year and it runs through May of the

following year. Data on timber harvests in the state of Oregon are provided by the Oregon

State Department of Forestry (2005).


Monthly retail prices of anthracite and bituminous coal are provided by the Federal

Reserve Economic Data (FRED, 2018a; 2018b). Figure A5 shows monthly average coal

prices plotted with firewood prices from 1922 to 1935. Both coal series are expressed in

$/U.S. short ton. Anthracite prices were higher than bituminous coal prices, presumably

because of its higher heat content. Both the bituminous coal and firewood series exhibit


                                             15
strong seasonality: the anthracite series less so. While firewood prices rose immediately

after the Great Crash, neither coal series did so. Tables A3 and A4 in the appendix reports

results from models that regress firewood prices on coal prices characterize the

relationships among these price series.


2.1 Estimation of Time Preferences.


The primary regression used to elicit time preference is a hedonic price model that

describes fuel prices as a function of attributes of the fuel. The specification of the hedonic

models begins with model (1) which includes seasonal fixed effects, denoted Sj, a time

trend, (), year ( ) and fuel type (Ti) fixed effects, and controls for seasoned status of the

fuel ( , ). The default model also controls for the CPI, monthly yields for U.S. Treasury

bonds, the Dow Jones Industrials Index, monthly coal prices, and hourly wages (expressed

as monthly averages), and cost-of-living indices for rent, food, and clothing (BLS, 1941) for

Portland, Oregon. These covariates are subsumed into (   ), in (1). Also included is the

quantity of fuel for sale in each ad (Qi,t). Finally, the temperature (At) and precipitation

anomaly (Pret) are encompassed by the models.


  ,     =  +   , +              +            , + () +  ...


+        +   +   +   +  ,                                                  (1)


The specification in (2) augments that in (1) with interactions between the linear and

quadratic functional forms fit to the month-of-year controls and temperature and

precipitation. Rather than re-writing (1), (2) simply shows the additional weather terms.


  +   +    +    +    +                                                                    (2)

                                               16
Finally, the expression in (2) is enhanced by the addition of interaction terms between the

temperature anomaly and season status of the fuel. Note that the summation operators

below reflect the four different season status indicators.


       , +           ,                                                                   (3)


The parameter estimates of interest in models (1) and (2) are the { } terms, the marginal

implicit prices of season status. In (3), the combination of the { } terms together with the

{ } coefficients are of interest since these parameters jointly reflect the implicit price of

seasoned wood. To facilitate interpretation of the parameter estimate for dry fuel as a rate

of time preference, the indicator for green (raw, unseasoned) fuel is the excluded case

among the four seasoned classes: dry, partially-dry, green, and no seasoned data. Given the

natural log form of price as the dependent variable, the parameter estimate corresponding

to the indicator for dry, seasoned fuel reveals the equilibrium percentage premium for dry

fuel. One interpretation is that the dry fuel coefficients reflect consumers' time preference.


2.1.1. Time Preferences and the Timing of Fuel Procurement.


Because hedonic models reveal equilibrium conditions, it is difficult to cleanly identify

demand-side versus supply-side forces at play in the determination of the marginal implicit

prices. Therefore, it is useful to attempt to invoke complementary approaches to the

elicitation of time preferences. One such strategy proposed here leverages the weather data

to obtain a sense of the timing or flow of fuel purchases throughout the year.


This paper contends that a typical wood consumption pattern for households features a

lump sum purchase of fuel well in advance of the projected time of use. Time preferences


                                               17
are embedded in such behavior; pre-season lump sum fuel procurement balances the risk

of running out of fuel against the opportunity cost of allocating funds that could be put to

some other productive use. Larger quantities of fuel obtained in advance of anticipated use

suggest a greater willingness to trade off current consumption against future liquidity risk,

ceteris peribus.


Consumers' expectations regarding fuel use for the coming season and liquidity risk at

season's end are likely to depend on cumulative temperature anomalies rather than the

month-of-sample temperature levels. Presumably, consumers making a lump sum

acquisition of fuel prior to use procure an amount of fuel appropriate for expected

conditions. The hypothesis is that households' expectations are conditioned on past

experience and on information about whether the coming season will be abnormally warm

or cold. Such updating likely depends on weather between the end of the previous heating

season and the time of lump sum purchases. Intuitively, liquidity risk at season's end

depends on whether the heating season manifest as especially warm or cold, a

phenomenon captured by the cumulative temperature anomaly. To explore whether

market participants make lump sum purchases, the analysis tests whether prices are

especially sensitive to temperature during these two times of the year.


2.2 Estimation of Temporal Stability in Time Preferences.


As stated above, equilibrium prices reflect supply and demand-side forces. Causally

eliciting changes in either demand or supply over time in this context is difficult. The

present section focuses on estimation of changes in demand side forces. Section 2.3

explores supply-side factors.

                                              18
Few empirical contexts in the literature facilitate testing for time series heterogeneity in

rates of time preference. The richness of the data employed herein enables tests of the

stability of time preferences over 14 years and 168 months, a scope of research not yet

conducted in the field or experimental literature. Further, probing whether there is time

series variation in time preferences is motivated by the fact that the sample period, 1922 ­

1935, spans several macroeconomic shocks: the stock market Crash of October 1929, the

banking panics of 1931 through 1933, and the recessions in 1923 ­ 1924 and 1926 ­ 1927.


To this end, in addition to the estimation of the hedonic models across the entire sample

period, a series of regressions fit model (2) to subsamples of the data to test whether and

how the parameter estimates of interest vary across time. This is executed in two ways.

First, dry fuel premiums are estimated by month-of-sample. The analysis conducts t-tests

of the fitted dry fuel premiums in "treatment" and "control" periods. For example, the full

sample (168 months' worth) of estimated dry fuel premiums are decomposed into two

groups: the months before (control) and after (treatment) the stock market Crash of

October 1929. T-tests are performed on the dry fuel coefficients to ascertain whether the

dry fuel premiums fitted to data before the Crash differ from those fitted to data

afterwards. This approach is repeated for each of the macroeconomic shocks listed above.


The month-of-sample estimated dry fuel premiums are then used in a regression-based test

of how macroeconomic covariates affect time preferences. Model (4) frames these tests, by

regressing the estimated dry fuel premiums, by month-of-sample, on a collection of

covariates including: a time trend (g(t)), month-of-year fixed effects (Mt), wages (Wt) in




                                              19
Portland, Oregon, the CPI, U.S. Treasury yields ( Bond), the Dow Jones Industrials Index

(Dow).


    ,   =  +   + () +  +   +   +   +                                            (4)


All covariates are included in concurrent and lagged values up to six-months. Both the

means and the standard deviations (over concurrent and lagged values) are included.




The second strategy used to test for temporal stability in time preference leverages the

temperature-price relationships described in section 2.1. Empirical evidence of bulk

purchases is found in heightened reactivity of prices to temperature during the late fall and

late spring months. To test for temporal heterogeneity in time preferences, the analysis

calculates the partial effect of temperature anomalies on prices by month-of-year before

and after the Crash. Differences in the responsiveness of prices to temperature throughout

the year may provide evidence of changes in intertemporal choice induced by the Crash.


   2.3 Supply Forces: Estimating Convenience Yields.


The literature on commodity prices identifies the return to investors of holding inventory

of a commodity as a convenience yield (Pindyck, 1994). This return may stem from the

ability of investors to reap profits during shortages (when prices are high) and to avoid

costly disruptions to production processes (stock-outs), (Pindyck, 1994). Convenience

yields are relevant in the present context: firewood is a storable commodity.




                                             20
Consider that residuals from the lumber industry primarily supplied the markets for

firewood in Portland, Oregon; slab wood comprises the most common wood type for sale

from 1922 to 1935, and slab is just wood left over from the conversion of saw logs into

dimensional lumber. Whether and when lumber companies decide to sell fuel wood

depended on firms' expectations about price movements in both the lumber and firewood

markets as well as storage costs. Thus, the return to firms holding inventories relative to

bringing wood to market may be an important time-varying factor affecting both fuel prices

and the relative prices of dry and green wood.


To frame the analysis of convenience yields, note that the price of a futures contract of

maturity (T), for a commodity (Ff,t) is defined as a function of spot prices (Sf,t), the cost of

storage (Kt), convenience yield (ct), and the risk-free interest rate as shown in (5).


 , =  ,  (           )
                                                                                    (5)


Rearranging (5), and assuming storage costs are negligible produces an expression for the

convenience yield at time (t):


                 ,
 =  -                                                                               (6)
                 ,




While there were not (to the author's knowledge) futures markets for firewood in Portland

during the 1920's and 1930's, the green fuel price in period (t) is a suitable proxy for the

forward price; green fuel is the same commodity as dry fuel, just separated by the time

needed to season wood ­ about one year. The utility in estimating the convenience yields

lies primarily in determining the periods of time when suppliers would have earned



                                                21
positive returns, that is, when convenience yields were positive (backwardation), and

when convenience yields were negative (contango).


These conditions reflect scarcity and abundance of the commodity. When inventories are

high, expected levels of scarcity in the near term are low, relative to some future period. In

this case, the convenience yield is low: r > ct. Conversely, when present inventories of the

commodity are low, scarcity is relatively high. This suggests S f,t > Ff,t and that ct may exceed

r.


Because the 1922 to 1935 period featured considerable variation in macroeconomic

conditions, it is useful to test for temporal stability in convenience yields. The framework

for convenience yields is essentially the same as that used to test for temporal

heterogeneity in consumer time preferences. The paper conducts t-tests of the estimated

convenience yields in the "treatment" and "control" periods defined above. These tests are

also intended to assess how supply side forces influenced fuel prices, and specifically the

relative prices of dry and green fuel.


To concretize the dynamics between inventories, convenience yields, and fuel prices, the

paper explores associations between estimated convenience yields and timber harvests in

Oregon. The analysis regresses the estimated convenience yields on county level timber

harvests and a series of temporal fixed effects.


Expression (7) depicts the regression specification that explores the determinants of

convenience yields. The model includes wood type fixed effects, (  ), controls for local

timber harvests (defined as west of the Cascade Mountains), (  ), non-local timber

harvests, (defined as east of the Cascade Mountains), ( ), and season, (Sj), and year ( )

                                               22
fixed effects3. The model also includes interactions between the season and harvest

controls.


 , =  +   +   +                             +               +                 +  +  +  ,

                                                                                                  (7)


       3. Empirical Results.


Table 3 presents the estimated dry fuel premiums using prices for four categories of wood:

all wood types, all types of wood fuel conditional on some type being reported, slab, and old

growth. Green fuel is the excluded case. The parameter estimate for dry fuel, inclusive of all

wood types, across all 14 years of data is 0.127 (p < 0.01). This result suggests that

consumers' are willing-to-pay about 13 percent more for fuel, on a btu-adjusted basis, that

is marketed as being dry and ready for immediate use relative to raw fuel. While there may

be unobservable confounding factors that affect the relative price of dry-to-green fuel,

given typical usage patterns, (green fuel is usually bought and held until it is seasoned)

consumers' time preferences likely play an important role in driving this premium for dry

fuel. Importantly, this estimate of the dry fuel premium controls for the monthly

temperature and precipitation anomalies and the interaction between the anomalies and

month-of-year. This model also includes wages, bituminous coal prices, the current CPI,

lagged measures of inflation, COLIs for Portland and alternative uses of funds (the Dow

Jones and bond yields). As noted in section 2, the models in table 3 also contain season,




3   The data for timber harvest in Oregon is provided by: Oregon Department of Forestry (2005).

                                                         23
month, and year fixed effects and a quadratic time trend. The model in the first column

includes wood type fixed effects.


The first column of table 3 also reports that prices for partially seasoned fuel are not

distinguishable from green fuel. This could stem from consumers' uncertainty over actually

how seasoned the fuel is when marketed as partially dry. Fuel without any information

about seasoning sells at a small (under 5 percent) premium over green fuel.


The second column of table 3 restricts the estimation sample to advertisements that report

some type of fuel. With this subsample, the coefficient on dry fuel falls to 0.110 (p < 0.01).

Partially seasoned fuel sells at a modest discount (3 percent) with respect to green fuel.

Prices for fuel without information on its seasoning status are not distinguishable from

green fuel. The coefficient for dry fuel, restricting the sample to prices for slab wood, is

0.170 (p < 0.01). The prices for partially seasoned fuel are indistinguishable from prices

for green fuel. Prices for slab wood without any seasoning information were about 2

percent higher than green fuel (p < 0.10).


When the sample is restricted only to ads for old-growth fuel, table 3 reports that

consumers are willing to pay a 12.2 percent premium for dry fuel (p < 0.01). In contrast to

slab wood, prices for partially seasoned old-growth fuel are significantly higher than green

fuel. And, further, prices for old-growth fuel reported in advertisements without seasoning

information are also higher than for green fuel.




                                               24
       3.1 Price Sensitivity to Temperature and Time Preference.


Table 4 explores different specifications with a focus on how the weather data are modeled.

Note that column (3) corresponds to the default specification reported in table 3. While

table 4 controls for bituminous coal prices, tables A5 and A6 in the appendix explores

different specifications of coal prices, and the inclusion of anthracite rather than

bituminous coal prices, respectively.


Each specification in table 4 contains the full array of non-weather controls. The focus here

is on treatment of weather covariates for two reasons. First, temperature and precipitation

are critical determinants of the demand for heating fuel. Second, the paper argues that

lump sum purchases of fuel provide information relevant to consumers' time preferences

and that a typical consumption pattern for households involved a bulk procurement of

green fuel well in advance of the intended time of use. If many market participants behaved

in this way, fuel prices should be most sensitive to temperature prior to the heating season

when making large purchases and late in the heating season when household stocks are

dwindling and liquidity risk is high. This conjecture is tested below by examining the

interactions between temperature anomalies and months of year controls.


In column (1), no weather covariates are included. In this naïve specification, the premium

for dry fuel is 12.5 percent (p < 0.01). In column (2), temperature is inversely associated

with fuel prices (p < 0.01). Positive anomalies suppress prices; the equilibrium prices for

heating fuel are lower when the temperature is abnormally warmer, and vice versa. The

coefficient for precipitation is positive (p < 0.05). The dry fuel premium remains effectively




                                              25
unchanged (0.128, p < 0.01), from column (1), as does the small premium on fuel without

seasoning information (0.044, p < 0.01).


Column (3) includes the temperature and precipitation anomalies and interactions

between each of these controls with month of year, which enters in both linear and

quadratic forms. The temperature anomaly-by-month interaction is significant in both the

linear (negative, p < 0.01) and quadratic (positive, p < 0.05) terms. Figure A6 facilitates

interpretation of the partial effects of temperature. The left panel of figure A6 plots the

fitted quadratic interaction between temperature and month of year. This shows that the

effect of temperature on price maximizes (in absolute value) in late spring and summer; a

one-unit increase in the cumulative temperature anomaly in May reduces price by about

0.3 percent. Intuitively, higher than typical temperatures reduce fuel prices, presumably

through an inward shift in demand for heat. The left-hand side of figure A6 suggests fuel

prices are least responsive to temperature anomalies during the months of January,

February, and March. This despite the fact that these are typically among the coldest

months of the year with high heating demand.


The right-hand panel of figure A6 evaluates the fitted quadratic function at the average

temperature anomaly by month of sample across the 14 years of data included in the

analysis. This plot indicates that temperature has the largest effect on the price of fuel at

two times of the year: during April and May when liquidity risk is high and in the late fall

prior to the start of the heating season.


One interpretation of this dual sensitivity of prices to temperature is as evidence of

consumers making bulk purchases of firewood prior to the heating season. Figure A6

                                               26
shows that during years with lower than average temperatures from June through

November, prices in the late fall tend to be high 4. Market participants appear to have

reacted to temperature anomalies during the summer and fall as they stockpiled fuel in the

fall for anticipated use. Prices are also reactive to temperature in late spring. For years with

negative temperature anomalies throughout the winter, consumers' fuel stocks would

dwindle earlier. Facing a binding fuel constraint, consumers' only option was to dip into the

spot market to replenish fuel supplies. If many consumers behaved in this manner, prices

would respond as shown in figure A6. Had consumers participated in spot markets all

winter (not stockpiling fuel), one would expect a more homogenous degree of sensitivity of

prices to temperatures, by month. The right-hand side of figure A6 provides evidence

supporting the hypothesis that households make lump sum purchases of firewood.


In column (3) of table 4, the precipitation interaction with the linear month-of-year term is

positive and significant (p < 0.01). The interaction with the quadratic term is significant

and negative (p < 0.05). To facilitate interpretation, figure A7 in the appendix displays the

fitted coefficients for the precipitation controls. The left-panel displays the fitted quadratic;

it shows that the cumulative precipitation anomaly has the greatest effect on fuel prices in

late spring and summer. As with temperature, this plot suggests prices are most sensitive

to weather conditions late in the heating season. When evaluated at the average

precipitation anomalies by month-of-year, the right-hand panel shows that prices are most

sensitive to the cumulative precipitation anomaly in late spring. The figure reveals that

low-moisture heating seasons suppress prices. One reason for this relationship is that drier



4Since the fitted quadratic is negative, negative anomalies produce the positive price effect observed in
November.

                                                        27
winters may allow for timber harvests through the winter, whereas wetter winters with

greater snowfall likely limits access to timberlands.


Column (4) of table 4 adds interactions among the fuel season status controls and the

temperature anomaly. The coefficients on temperature and precipitation and interactions

with month-of-year remain basically unchanged, though the quadratic term on the

temperature-by-month interaction is no longer significant. Intuitively, warmer weather

realizations suppress the differential between seasoned fuel and green fuel (the excluded

case). For warmer months and heating seasons, consumers are willing to pay a smaller

premium for dry fuel (p < 0.10). Temperature anomalies do not affect the relative prices of

partially dry fuel. However, temperature does attenuate the price differential between

green fuel and fuel without seasoning information (p < 0.01). These interaction terms

reveal that market participants are willing to pay a smaller premium for firewood relative

to green wood when it is abnormally warm. The coefficient on the direct control for dry

fuel exhibits a small reduction from 0.127 in column (3) to 0.120 (se = 0.013; p < 0.01). As

such, even when accounting for the differential effect of temperature through season status

of the fuel, the premium paid for dry fuel remains between 12 and 13 percent.


       3.2 Annual Variation in Time Preferences.


Figure 3 shows the estimated dry fuel premiums, by year, for all wood types (left panel)

and for slab wood (right panel) from 1922 to 1935. To construct the figures, observations

are restricted to a particular year, and the dry fuel premium is computed using the

specification in column (3) of table 4. Estimated dry fuel premiums for all wood types rose

from a statistical zero in 1922 to over 20 percent in 1924. From 1925 through 1928, the

                                              28
dry fuel premiums fell to about 10 percent before rising in 1929 to about 20 percent. In

1930, following the stock market Crash, and with the onset of deflation, the dry fuel

premium fell to zero. Then, the estimated premiums climbed back to 10 percent before

falling to zero again in 1935. Of particular note is the collapse in the premium paid for dry

fuel between 1929 and 1930. The right hand side of figure 3 presents the dry fuel premium

for slab wood. It suggests that consumers increasingly valued the immediate gratification

derived from purchasing dry fuel from 1922 through 1929. The estimated premium

increased (albeit non-monotonically) from about 10 percent in 1922 to 25 percent in 1929.

Then, after 1929, the estimated premium dropped to under 10 percent from 1930 to 1935.


Although the estimated premiums are not direct estimates of time preference, consumers'

rates of time preference are likely to be a primary driver of the WTP for fuel available for

immediate consumption, relative to fuel that requires one year of seasoning. As such, figure

3 provides suggestive evidence that consumers became more patient from 1929 to 1930.

That is, the extra value to market participants of having fuel for present consumption,

relative to fuel for future consumption effectively went away between 1929 and 1930. The

paper explores factors that may help to explain these changes in section 3.3.


       3.3 Responsiveness of dry fuel premiums to macroeconomic shocks.


Figure 4 plots the month-of-sample dry fuel premiums derived from pricing data for all

wood types. (These estimates derive from the specification in column (3) of table 4.) The

vertical lines demarcate both recessions during the 1920's, the stock market Crash of 1929,

and the banking crises in the early 1930's. During the first recession of 1923-1924, dry fuel

premiums spiked to over 60 percent. In the second recession, the estimated dry fuel

                                              29
premiums gyrated from below zero to over 20 percent. Then, following the Crash both the

level and the month-to-month variation in the dry fuel premiums declined.


Table 5 employs the month-of-sample dry fuel premiums to test whether and how the

relative prices respond to the severe macroeconomic shocks that occurred during the 1922

to 1935 period. The first and second rows of table 5 decompose the results according to the

first recession (May, 1923 to June, 1924), and the second recession (October, 1926 to

November, 1927). The estimated dry fuel premiums during the 1923-1924 downturn were

nearly four-times greater (p < 0.01) than dry fuel premiums estimated in months not

during this recession. The same comparison for the second recession reveals no statistically

significant difference in dry fuel premiums. Both of the recessions explored here are, ex

post, considered to have been mild recessions (Zarnowitz, 1992).


Table 5 also splits the sample into the months prior to and after the stock market Crash of

October 1929. The dry fuel premiums estimated using pricing data from before the Crash

average 11.8 percent. For the months after the Crash, consumers' impatience falls; the dry

fuel premium is estimated to be just about 5 percent during the months after the Crash (p <

0.01).


The final test in table 5 focuses on dry fuel premiums for months during the Banking Crises.

The estimated dry fuel premiums are lower during the Banking Crises months than for

other months. This contrasts with the months during both recessions in which the dry fuel

premiums were higher than for non-recessionary months. However, the t-test fails to reject

the null hypothesis of equivalent means for months during the Banking Crises and all other

months.

                                             30
If, the equilibrium prices for green and dry fuel reflect time preferences, both the 1923 to

1924 recession and the stock market Crash appear to have affected consumers' patterns of

intertemporal choice. However, the manner in which these disruptive events did so differs.

The paper now turns to the literature characterizing key events and policy changes during

the 1920's and 1930's to delve more deeply into potential causes, or explanations, for the

results in table 5: in particular, the apparently radical change in time preferences during

the recession of 1923-1924 and after the Crash.


One candidate explanation for the jump in rates of time preference during the recession of

1923-1924 is the hypothesized inversely oriented relationship between personal income

and impatience. This recession, although mild, was an adverse shock to income. Hence,

consumers responded by emphasizing consumption in the present over considerations of

future conditions. Many economists dating back to Fisher (1930) have argued this position.

More recently, Lawrance (1991) finds rates of time preference that are significantly lower

for higher income households than for households toward the bottom of the income

distribution. Extrapolating Lawrance's (1991) result from cross-sectional differences in

income to intertemporal income shocks suggests periods of lower income would yield

higher discount rates.


The reduction in the dry fuel premium after the Crash revealed in table 5 is more difficult

to parse. Hall and Ferguson (1998) note that following the Crash household consumption

expenditures fell because of the decline in household wealth. This fact, in and of itself,

would not explain a drop in individual discount rates. Temin (1976) and Romer (1990)




                                               31
argue that uncertainty in future economic conditions5 fueled this reduction. These authors,

particularly Romer (1990), press this case by noting that consumption of durable goods

decreased by a much larger percentage share than perishables. And, Hall and Ferguson

(1998) contend that purchases of durables, by nature of the goods, can be delayed.

Connecting this line of argument to the present context: if consumers' expectations about

future economic conditions changed due to perceptions of elevated uncertainty, and their

response was to reduce consumption of those goods the acquisition of which could be

delayed, this could show up as heightened demand for less expensive green fuel because

this essentially delays consumption of dry wood.


The results from table 5 herein certainly support this position. The Great Crash induced a

reduction in the extra amount consumers were willing-to-pay for fuel immediately

available relative to that which would become available after one year. The literature cited

above provides a possible explanation for this behavior. Consumers feared what the future

held. They elected to purchase less expensive green fuel and allowed it to season. By

stockpiling fuel that required seasoning, their measureable patience increased.


The stunning rate of deflation evident from 1929 through 1930 is also likely to have played

an important role in explaining the results in table 5. Hall and Ferguson (1998) propose

mechanisms that link deflation to reduced consumer expenditure: the rising burden of

household debt, the transfer of income (or wealth) from relatively poor borrowers to

relative rich lenders, and consumers' expectation about continued deflation. It is the third




5Temin (1976) and Romer (1990) employed volatility in stock prices as a measure of
uncertainty in future economic conditions, especially income.
                                             32
channel that is most relevant to the results in table 5. If consumers' expected the price level

to continue to fall, they are more likely to hoard cash so that they can consume later when

the cash that they currently hold increases in value. In the present context, purchasing

green fuel facilitates saving the extra cash that would be needed to consume dry fuel. That

saved increment of money appreciates in a deflationary environment. Many consumers

adopting this position would diminish the measurable premium for dry fuel, as observed in

table 5.


          3.4 Price Sensitivity to Temperature and Macroeconomic Events.


The discussion above posits a change in time preference induced by the macroeconomic

shocks of the late 1920's. This section probes whether macroeconomic events affected the

sensitivity of fuel prices to temperature and if such changes provide information related to

time preferences. Figure 5 plots the sensitivity of prices to temperature, by month-of-year.

What distinguishes figure 5 from figure A6 is that figure 5 decomposes the sensitivities for

dry fuel and green fuel. The left-hand panel limits the estimation sample to all months prior

to the Great Crash. The right side includes months of the sample after the Great Crash.


Both panels suggest that dry fuel prices were most sensitive to temperature shocks during

the late spring, when liquidity risk was high. Before the Crash, temperatures were colder

than average during the winter and spring months (see Figure A8). Intuitively, this caused

dry fuel prices to increase; when faced with a liquidity constraint consumers participated

in the spot market. After the Crash, temperatures were warmer. The unusual warmth

meant consumers had ample fuel throughout the season, which negatively affected dry fuel

prices.

                                              33
That dry fuel prices were most reactive to temperature in April and May further bolsters

the case that households made bulk fuel purchases prior to the heating season. Because

temperatures deviated from normal, actual fuel consumption over the season differed from

expected levels. And, the means by which households compensated for their mistakes in

prior procurement was reflected in the spot market. Before and after the Crash spot market

prices reveal outward and inward shifts in demand for heat, respectively, as temperatures

were colder (before) and warmer (after) than average.


Green fuel prices also exhibited sensitivity to temperature during the late spring months

before the Crash. However, the colder than average months induced a reduction in green

fuel prices. This may suggest that cash consumers would have used to purchase green fuel

for future use was instead allocated to seasoned wood for immediate consumption. Green

fuel prices were also quite sensitive to temperature in December before the Crash; colder

weather induced greater demand for green fuel in months when consumers stockpiled fuel.


The right panel of figure 5 shows that the reactivity of green fuel prices to temperature

changed markedly after the Crash. The partial effect of temperature was ten-times larger

after the Crash (than before) during the month of September, five-times larger in October

and November, two-times larger in December, and orders of magnitude greater in January.

The responsiveness of raw fuel prices to temperature then fell from February through June

despite a rising temperature anomaly.


Why would market participants behave in such a manner? Recall that temperatures during

the winter months after the Crash were warmer than average (see Figure A8). With less

liquidity risk, consumers may have purchased green fuel during the months of the year

                                             34
when they normally would purchase seasoned fuel to manage liquidity risk. Doing so does

not necessarily mean that households consumed unseasoned fuel to produce heat. Rather,

households may have bought more green fuel in advance of the intended time of

consumption. If demanders were substituting to an inferior good (raw fuel) because of an

adverse income shock, with the intent of consuming the fuel while still unseasoned, raw fuel

prices would exhibit greater sensitivity in late spring as liquidity risk rises. Instead, figure 5

reveals declining sensitivity of unseasoned fuel to temperatures in the late spring. Further,

if the market for dry fuel were dormant due to a wholesale substitution to green fuel, dry

fuel prices would not respond to temperatures. This was not the case. The right hand side

of figure 5 suggests consumers held a surplus of dry fuel after the Crash; dry fuel prices fell

due to warm weather in the winter and spring months. The continued reactivity of dry fuel

prices to temperature in late spring and the heightened responsiveness of green fuel prices

after the Crash supports the hypothesis that consumers changed the relative amounts of

dry and green fuel procured but that short-run demand was met with dry fuel. This speaks

to a change in timing and the mix of fuel purchased. Tilting the mix towards raw fuel

comports with a greater willingness to delay consumption. The reduced premium paid for

dry fuel after the Crash reported in table 5 also fits with this interpretation. It appears that

market participants became more willing delay consumption by purchasing unseasoned

fuel after the Crash.


       3.5 Determinants of the dry fuel premium.


In order to test how the dry fuel premiums were affected by the various economic forces at

work during the sample period, table 6 presents the results of the regression models that


                                               35
seek to explain the month-of-sample dry fuel premiums as a function of wage income,

returns on investment in stocks and bonds, and inflation.


Table 6 displays the results from five different models. In each, the dependent variable is

the estimated month-of-sample dry fuel premiums used in table 5. In addition to the

variables listed above, the models control for various combinations of time trends and

month-of-year fixed effects, an indicator for the stock market Crash of October 1929, the

two recessions, and the banking crises. For each continuous regressor, the models include

both the mean and the standard deviation over lags zero (current) through six months.


Model (1) includes only hourly nominal wages 6 (averaged across occupations, by month-of-

sample) in the regression. Mean wages are not significantly associated with the dry fuel

premium. In contrast, the six-month lagged standard deviation in wages is positively

associated with the dry fuel premium (p < 0.05); a one-unit increase in the standard

deviation is associated with a 0.77 percent increase in the dry fuel premium. Table 6 shows

that in four out of five models, the standard deviation of wages positively affects the dry

fuel premium. This result suggests that in times when consumers expect wage income to be

quite variable, based on variation in wages over the previous half-year, their degree of

impatience increased. They valued consumption of fuel in the present relatively more than

in the future, presumably, because their level of future income was uncertain.


Although not shown in table 6, the indicator variables for the Crash of 1929, and the

recession in 1926 ­ 1927 are not significantly associated with the dry fuel premiums. In



6The average wage across occupations and months of the sample is about 60 cents per
hour, and the average standard deviation is about 0.15 cents per hour.
                                              36
contrast, the 1923 ­ 1924 recession indicator is highly significant (p < 0.01). The coefficient

ranges between 0.19 and 0.27 in models (1) through (5). The banking crisis indicator is not

significantly related to the dry fuel premium.


Column (2) includes measures of inflation (mean and standard deviations over six month-

lagged values of month-over-month changes in the all goods CPI). Neither the mean nor the

standard deviation of inflation significantly affects the dry fuel premium. The coefficient on

the standard deviation in wages remains positive and significant.


Column (3) includes means and standard deviations (again, over six month lagged values)

of returns on the Dow Jones Industrials and yields on U.S. Treasury bonds. The standard

deviation of returns on the Dow Industrials is significant and negatively related to dry fuel

premiums (p < 0.05). The significance and orientation of this relationship is robust across

specifications in models (3), (4), and (5). This is the same measure that Romer (1990) used

to proxy for uncertainty in future economic conditions. Romer (1990) showed that

fluctuations in stock prices were a primary cause of reductions in consumer expenditures

on durables. In the present context, variability in stock returns is associated with a

reduction in the premium for dry fuel, and likely in consumers' degree of impatience. The

mean month-over-month change in the Dow Jones is significantly and positively associated

with the dry fuel premium in models (3), (p < 0.05) and marginally significant in model (4),

(p < 0.10).


The standard deviation in U.S. Treasury yields is positively associated with the dry fuel

premiums in models (3), (4), and (5), (p < 0.05). One interpretation of this is that U.S.

Treasury yields reflect consumer's expectations about inflation. As such, this result

                                              37
suggests that uncertainty about forecast inflation induces greater preference for current

consumption relative to that in the future. This is an intuitive finding since holding cash

during periods of high inflation effectively devalues the cash in future periods. Accordingly,

uncertainty in future inflation would likely induce current spending ­ raising the apparent

rate of time preference. The mean yields are negatively associated with dry fuel premiums

in model (3), (p < 0.05), and marginally significant in model (4), (p < 0.10).


In models (4) and (5), interaction terms between wages and inflation (both means and

standard deviations) are included. The mean interaction has no effect. The interaction of

standard deviations in wages and inflation is significant (p < 0.10) and negatively

associated with the dry fuel premiums. In (4) and (5), also estimated are the joint effects of

wages (both means and standard deviations) through both the wage controls and the

interactions with inflation. The combined effect of average wages is positive though not

significant. In contrast, the joint effect of the standard deviation of wages (both directly and

through inflation) is negatively related to rates of time preference in both models (4) and

(5), (p < 0.05). The difference between the models in column (4) and (5) is the inclusion of

the NVIX volatility measure gleaned from newspaper articles (Manela and Moreira, 2017).

In column (5), the effect of wages, inflation, and standard deviations in the Dow and bond

yields are effectively unchanged from column (4).


The results in table 6 suggest that uncertainty in economic conditions plays a central role in

shaping consumers' time preferences. Variability in wages, interacted with inflation, along

with returns on investment in equities suppress estimated dry fuel premiums. As noted

above, Romer (1990) argues that stock market volatility was a key factor driving down


                                               38
consumer expenditures. Table 6 comports with Romer's argument but from a very

different perspective. While Romer directly measured consumer expenditures, the present

paper bolsters her argument by finding that apparent rates of time preference fall, and

patience builds, during times of heightened uncertainty. This phenomenon appears to be

unique to the post-Crash period in the present study. That is, apparent rates of time

preference rise significantly during the recession of 1923 through 1924, in a manner that

suggests the tilting of time preference toward present needs argued by economists back to

Fisher (1930).


3.6 Convenience Yields.


Table 7 presents the results of a series of mean comparison tests for the estimated

convenience yields. The first row tests whether the convenience yields differ for months

during the 1923 ­ 1924 recession relative to all other months. While the signs of the

average yields between the two time-periods differ in a manner that suggests higher

scarcity during the recession, the t-test fails to reject the null hypothesis of equal means.

This is also the case for the test pertaining to the recession of 1926 and 1927. In contrast,

when the sample of estimated convenience yields is divided into the months before and

after the Great Crash of 1929, table 7 indicates significantly larger convenience yields after

the Crash; the average convenience yields before the Crash are -5.3 and 7.7 after the Crash

(p < 0.10). A positive convenience yield suggests current scarcity: spot prices in excess of

futures prices. This result in table 7 suggests greater scarcity in firewood markets after the

Crash. This could have occurred because of an inward shift in demand for construction

services after the Crash. Although the orientation of the average convenience yields during


                                               39
the banking crises (relative to not during the crises) is the same (higher yields during the

crises), the difference is not significant. Table 7 includes an additional test: whether

convenience yields estimated during the period of time when the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act

was in force (June, 1930 through 1934) differ from other months. The convenience yields

are higher during this four-year period (p < 0.10) than in other months.


Table A1 in the appendix presents the results of the model shown in (7). Column (1) of

table A1 features the most parsimonious specification in which monthly convenience yields

are regressed on timber harvests. The harvest data are reported by county. Because of

transportation costs, the data are subdivided into harvests local to Portland, Oregon and

extraction at greater distance. In table A1, local refers to harvests in counties west of the

Cascade Mountains (which is also where Portland is situated). Column (1) indicates that

local timber harvests reduced convenience yields (p < 0.05). This is intuitive in the sense

that firewood was a residual or by-product from timber production. Larger harvests would

correspond with greater supply of fuel wood and less scarcity. Harvests east of the

Cascades had no effect of convenience yields in this first specification. Column (2) adds

season and year fixed effects. The sign of the coefficients for local and non-local harvest

remain unchanged. However, local harvests no longer significantly affect yields, whereas

non-local harvests increase yields. The positive relationship between non-local timber

harvest and convenience yields requires some explanation. Distance, terrain, and costs

suggests that it is unlikely that raw timber harvested east of Cascade Mountains was

transported to mills near Portland for processing. As such, residuals from such harvests

probably did not affect firewood markets in Portland either. However, timber harvests east

of the Cascades may proxy for conditions in the construction sector (and housing markets).

                                               40
Greater demand for wood products may reduce the portion of harvest devoted to firewood

(that which is deemed waste) and thereby increase scarcity.


Column (3) adds interactions between harvests and season fixed effects. The interactions

between local harvests and the season fixed effects suggest convenience yields are

inversely associated with local harvest in all seasons except for winter. The largest effect

manifests during the autumn months (p < 0.01). Larger local harvests, all else equal, likely

result in more green firewood in the Portland market.


The interactions between harvests east of the Cascade Mountains suggest a positive effect

of regional timber harvest on convenience yields in the firewood markets in Portland. The

largest coefficient corresponds to the autumn interaction (p < 0.01). The parameter

estimates for spring and summer are considerably smaller (p < 0.05).


   4. Conclusions and Discussion.


Considerable research in economics explores intertemporal choice (FLO, 2002) and the

Great Depression (Hall and Ferguson, 1998). The present paper brings these two

literatures together by estimating the extra amount consumers were willing to pay for dry

fuel wood relative to green fuel wood, by month, over 168 months from January 1922

through December 1935. The long time series of estimated dry fuel premiums provides a

first-of-its-kind examination of how apparent rates of time preference respond to wages,

inflation, the returns of various investments, and the macroeconomic shocks during the

1920's and 1930's.




                                              41
Over 14,000 price quotes for firewood were gathered from classified ads placed in the

Portland Oregonian. A hedonic price model for firewood is specified, and the marginal

implicit price for seasoned fuel (relative to raw fuel) is estimated in a semi-log

specification. Estimation in the hedonic framework necessitates interpretation of fuel

prices as equilibrium outcomes between buyers and sellers. As is well known,

disentangling supply side forces from demand side forces in this context is challenging. The

paper does not claim to causally identify either consumers' time preferences or firms'

intertemporal behavior. Rather, it conducts empirical exercises that focus on both

consumers and suppliers, in turn, to provide a novel perspective on a behavior in a market

for a household staple during a critical time in U.S. economic history.


Controlling for time trends, monthly, seasonal, and wood type fixed effects, a battery of

microeconomic factors and macroeconomic indicators, the estimated dry fuel premium is

about 13 percent. The analysis of factors that determine or affect the dry fuel premium

reveals that variation, rather than mean levels, of the covariates are critical. For example,

the six-month standard deviation in wages is consistently associated with the estimated

rates of time preference. This is also true for monthly returns on the Dow Jones Industrials

and U.S. Treasury bond yields. The results herein suggest that fluctuations in wage and

capital income are critical in determining intertemporal choice. This supports the

uncertainty hypothesis (Romer, 1990) that argues uncertainty over future economic

conditions explains the dramatic reduction in consumer expenditures after the stock

market Crash of 1929.




                                              42
The paper also is in a unique position to document variability in apparent rates of time

preference over the macroeconomic shocks between 1922 and 1935. For example, during

the recession that occurred from 1923 to 1924 dry fuel premiums were four-times higher

than in other months. Similarly, the dry fuel premiums prior to the Great Crash were about

two-times larger than those estimated afterwards.


Many authors have offered explanations for the Great Depression, both in terms of its

occurrence and duration (Friedman, 1956; Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Bernanke, 1983;

Romer, 1990; Hall and Ferguson, 1998). While the goals of this paper do not include an

exhaustive treatment of the Depression, the time series estimation of relative fuel prices

during the 1920's and 1930's provides new insights into the behavior of market

participants during that time. The paper provides evidence that consumers became

significantly more patient after the Great Crash of 1929.


One source of evidence supporting this claim is the two-fold reduction in WTP for seasoned

fuel after the Crash. Another piece of evidence involves the interplay between prices and

temperature. The data reveals that firewood prices were most reactive to temperature in

late autumn when consumers made bulk purchases prior to the heating season, and in the

spring months late in the heating season when liquidity risk was high. That market

participants made lump-sum acquisitions of fuel is redolent of tradeoffs between current

consumption against future liquidity risk; this consumption pattern strongly suggests time

preference and intertemporal choice play a role in fuel purchases.


The importance of the Crash is evident in the enhanced sensitivity of prices to temperature

after 1929. In particular, consumers shifted their mix of fuel toward unseasoned fuel.

                                             43
Crucially, it appears they are doing so without the intention of consuming the fuel while

still unseasoned. Procuring more green fuel prior to use suggests a greater willingness to

tradeoff current and future consumption, or an increase in patience. Exactly why market

participants became more patient remains an open question. The paper provides

suggestive evidence that a central factor was uncertainty in economic futures; variability in

both capital and wage income appear to have suppressed impatience. This position

comports with Romer's (1990) uncertainty hypothesis. The paper augments this literature

by demonstrating a behavioral mechanism undergirding the observed precipitous fall in

consumption in the early 1930's.


The evidence reported here may spur further research in other cities during this period to

elicit consumers' time preferences. Such broadly based research may prove critically

important in deepening our understanding of the myriad forces that shaped the Great

Depression. The paper also demonstrates a new approach to gathering pricing data for an

energy fuel that was central to the development of the American economy. Firewood was

the dominant fuel used in early American households and industry. Yet, very little

empirical work exists specifically focusing on this fuel. (The informality of firewood

markets is one reason for this dearth of studies: Cole, 1970). By examining ads for fuel

prices placed in newspapers, the present study shows how to access these historically

important markets to researchers in economics and other disciplines.




                                              44
References.

   1) Bernanke, Ben, S. 1983. Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment.
      Quarterly Journal of Economics. 98(1): 85 ­ 106.
   2) Cole, Arthur, H. 1970. "The Mystery of Fuel Wood Marketing in the United States."
      The Business History Review, Vol. 44, No. 3, pp. 339-359.
   3) Fisher, Irving. 1930. The Theory of Interest As Determined by Impatience to Spend
      Income and Opportunity to Invest It. The Macmillan Company. New York, U.S.A.
   4) Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED). 2018a. "Retail Price of Bituminous Coal for
      United States, Average Price per Short Ton in Dollars, Monthly, Not Seasonally
      Adjusted." Database Number: M04047USM238NNBR. https://fred.stlouisfed.org
   5) Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED). 2018b. "Retail Price of Anthracite Coal for
      New York, NY, Average Price per Short Ton in Dollars, Monthly, Not Seasonally
      Adjusted." Database Number: M04045US35620M238NNBR.
      https://fred.stlouisfed.org
   6) Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, Ted O'Donoghue. 2002. "Time Discounting
      and Time Preference: A Critical Review." Journal of Economic Literature. XL: 351 ­
      401.
   7) Friedman, Milton. 1956. "The Demand for Money: Some Theoretical and Empirical
      Results." Reprinted in Milton Friedman, ed., The Optimum Quantity of Money and
      Other Essays. Chicago: Aldine Publishing, 1969.
   8) Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United
      States, 1867 ­ 1960. Princeton University Press. Princeton, New Jersey.
   9) Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel. 2015. "Very Long-Run Discount
      Rates." Quarterly Journal of Economics. 130(1): 1 ­ 53.
   10)Griliches, Zvi. 1961. "Hedonic Prices for Automobiles: An Econometric Analysis of
      Quality Change." In The Price Statistics of the Federal Government. New York: General
      Series No. 73. Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic
      Research.
   11)Hall, Thomas, E. and J. David Ferguson. 1998. The Great Depression: An International
      Disaster of Perverse Economic Policies. University of Michigan Press.
   12)Harrison, Glenn W., Morten I. Lau, and Melonie B. Williams. 2002. "Estimating
      individual discount rates in Denmark: A field experiment." American Economic
      Review. 92.
   13)Hausman, Jerry A. 1979. "Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization
      of Energy-Using Durables." The Bell Journal of Economics. 10(1): 33 ­ 54.
   14)Krupka, Erin L., and Melvin Stephens. 2013. "The Stability of Measured Time
      Preferences." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization. 85: 11 ­ 19.
   15)Lawrance, Emily, C. 1991. "Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from
      Panel Data." Journal of Political Economy. 99(1): 54 ­ 77.

                                            45
16)Manela, Asaf, and Alan Moreira. 2017. "News Implied Volatility and Disaster
   Concerns." Journal of Financial Economics. 123(1): 137 ­ 162.
17)Measuring Worth (https://www.measuringworth.com/).
18)McCusker, J.J. 1992. How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for
   Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States. American
   Antiquarian Society. Worcester, MA, USA.
19)Meier, Stephan, and Charles D. Sprenger. 2015. "Temporal Stability in Time
   Preferences." The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2015, 97(2): 273­286.
20)National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 2018.
   https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cag/statewide/time-series
21)Oregon State Department of Forestry. 2005. "Oregon Timber Harvests: 1849 ­
   2004." Salem, Oregon.
22)Oregonian. 1922 ­ 1935. Accessed: http://nl.newsbank.com/nl-
   search/we/Archives?p_product=HA-ORGB&p_theme=histpaper&p_action=keyword
23)Pindyck, R. 1994. ""Inventories and the Short-Run Dynamics of Commodity Prices,"
   RAND Journal of Economics, March.
24)Romer, Christina D. 1990. "The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression."
   Quarterly Journal of Economics. 105(3): 597 ­ 624.
25)Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation
   in Perfect Competition." Journal of Political Economy. 92(1): 34 ­ 55.
26)Schurr, Sam H., Bruce C. Netschert, Vera F. Eliasberg, Joseph Lerner, Hans H.
   Landsberg. 1960. Energy in the American Economy: 1850 ­ 1975. Johns Hopkins
   Press. Baltimore, MD, U.S.A.
27)Temin, Peter. 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? W.W. Norton
   and Co., Inc. New York, U.S.A.
28)United States Bureau of the Census. 2000. Historical Census of Housing Tables.
   House Heating Fuels:
   https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/census/historic/fuels.html
29)United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1941. Changes in
   Cost of Living in Large Cities in the United States: 1913 ­ 1941. Prepared by Cost of
   Living Division and Retail Price Division. Bulletin No. 699. United States
   Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
30)United States Federal Reserve. 1943. Banking and Monetary Statistics. 1914 ­ 1941.
   Washington, D.C. USA.
31)Zarnowitz, Victor (1992), Business cycles: theory, history, indicators and
   forecasting. The University of Chicago press. In Studies in business cycles. vol 27.




                                         46
Tables.

Table 1: Summary Statistics by Fuel Types.

 Type              Count Fraction Price             Fraction Fraction Fraction
                   of Ads of Ads       ($/cord)A Dry           Partial    Green
 Slab              6,782 0.4535             4.993      0.284       0.181     0.030
 Old Growth        1,161 0.0776             5.894      0.237       0.023     0.003
 No Type           1,126 0.0753             6.729      0.456       0.038     0.029
 Block             1,074 0.0718             6.036      0.171       0.111     0.033
 Fir               896      0.0599          7.366      0.265       0.049     0.042
 Mill              788      0.0527          4.464      0.060       0.119     0.001
 Cordwood          487      0.0326          6.154      0.472       0.025     0.004
 Planer            487      0.0326          5.330      0.437       0.000     0.000
 Second Growth 435          0.0291          5.228      0.198       0.018     0.002
 Wreckage          413      0.0276          5.065      0.775       0.000     0.000
 Box               230      0.0154          4.540      0.396       0.043     0.000
 Oak               220      0.0147          8.537      0.241       0.000     0.005
 Furnace           205      0.0137          5.483      0.239       0.073     0.005
 Range             175      0.0117          4.877      0.337       0.137     0.000
A = prices expressed in ($1982) are adjusted for btu content by seasoned status.




                                           47
Table 2: Prices by Season Status for Major Types of Wood.

                   All Types          Slab              Old Growth        OtherB
 Dry               5.867              5.692              5.779            5.754
                   (1.352)A           (1.058)           (1.195)           (1.276)
 Partially-Dry     4.796              4.620             6.132             4.782
                   (1.071)            (0.899)           (0.801)           (1.056)
 Green             5.269              4.687             5.347             5.282
                   (1.457)            (0.906)           (0.139)           (1.434)
 No Season         5.467              4.751             5.926             5.369
 Information       (1.521)            (0.917)           (1.112)           (1.462)
A = prices expressed in ($1982), standard deviations in parenthesis

B = Other includes all prices quotes excluding those without a wood type specified.




                                            48
Table 3: Implicit Prices of Seasoned Status.

                         All           OtherA         Slab       Old Growth

 Seasoned                0.127***      0.110***       0.174***     0.122***
                       (0.0128)      (0.0117)       (0.0114)     (0.0329)
 Partially              -0.0119       -0.0319***     0.00266       0.112***
 Seasoned              (0.0131)      (0.0121)       (0.0117)     (0.0356)
 No Season               0.0441***     0.0165        0.0216*       0.155***
 Data                  (0.0125)      (0.0114)       (0.0113)     (0.0284)

 Season, Month,            X              X             X             X
 Year F.E.
 Macro Controls            X              X             X             X

 Coal Prices               X              X             X             X

 Weather Controls          X              X             X             X

 Weather x Month           X              X             X             X

 adj. R2                0.433          0.446         0.430         0.543
 N                      14363          13246         6541          1091

Standard errors in parentheses
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Green fuel is the excluded case.
Dependent variable is natural log of price.
A = Other includes all prices quotes excluding those without a wood type specified.




                                              49
Table 4: Cumulative Temperature Anomaly and Dry Fuel Premiums

                                (1)               (2)         (3)             (4)

 Seasoned                      0.125***       0.128***      0.127***         0.120***
                             (0.0127)       (0.0128)      (0.0128)         (0.0134)
 Partially                    -0.0145        -0.0117       -0.0119          -0.0196
 Seasoned                    (0.0131)       (0.0132)      (0.0131)         (0.0137)
 No Season                     0.0412***      0.0443***     0.0441***        0.0364***
 Information                 (0.0125)       (0.0126)      (0.0125)         (0.0132)
 Cumulative Temp.                           -0.00254*** -0.000191           0.00212
 Anomaly (Temp.)                           (0.000274)   (0.000830)        (0.00141)
 Cumulative Precip.                          0.00160**    -0.00379*        -0.00365*
 Anomaly (Pre.)                            (0.000677)    (0.00208)        (0.00208)
 Pre. x Month                                              0.00198***       0.00191**
                                                        (0.000757)       (0.000756)
 Pre. x Month2                                           -0.000129**      -0.000122**
                                                        (0.0000550)      (0.0000550)
 Temp. x Month                                           -0.000786***     -0.000622**
                                                        (0.000297)       (0.000300)
 Temp. x Month2                                          0.0000486**      0.0000372
                                                        (0.0000231)      (0.0000232)
 Seasoned x                                                                -0.00218*
 Anomaly                                                                  (0.00117)
 Partially Seasoned x                                                      -0.00152
 Anomaly                                                                  (0.00119)
 No Season Information x                                                   -0.00339***
 Anomaly                                                                  (0.00115)

 adj. R2                      0.430          0.433          0.433           0.434
 N                            14363          14363          14363           14363

Standard errors in parentheses
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Dependent variable: ln(Price)

In model (4), linear combination of dry fuel coefficient plus the dry fuel x temperature
anomaly interaction evaluated at the mean temperature anomaly value = 0.123 (0.013).




                                             50
Table 5: Sensitivity of the dry fuel premiums to macroeconomic conditions.

 Event              Dry Premium        Dry Premium        T-Statistic of
                    During Event1      Not During         Difference
                                       Event

 May, '23 ­         0.246              0.073              -2.752***
 June, `24          (0.062)2           (0.009)            [0.009]3
 Recession

 Oct., '26 ­        0.101              0.087              -0.338
 Nov., `27          (0.040)            (0.011)            [0.370]
 Recession

 Crash of           0.0494              0.118             3.708***
 Oct., 1929         (0.008)            (0.017)            [0.000]

 Banking            0.073               0.091             1.010
 Crises             (0.013)             (0.013)           [0.158]


1 = Average partial effect of dry fuel category on price. Green fuel is the excluded case.
Derived from regression model with natural log of price as dependent variable, hence
coefficient of 0.25 implies dry fuel premium of 25%.
2 = Standard errors in parenthesis.
3 = p-value in brackets.
4 = For the Crash of October, 1929, during is counted as all months following October,
1929.




                                              51
Table 6: Determinants of the dry fuel premium.

                         (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)       (5)

 Wage                   0.770**      0.753**          0.314       1.758**      1.893**
 SD1                   (0.299)     (0.294)          (0.275)     (0.840)      (0.930)
 Wage                   0.0237      0.0312           0.0906      0.0936       0.0750
 Mean2                 (0.108)     (0.106)          (0.199)     (0.213)      (0.218)
 Inflation                           0.994           -1.236      -11.50       -10.68
 SD                                (1.611)          (2.713)     (10.62)      (11.13)
 Inflation                          -2.368           -0.806       24.90*       26.88*
 Mean                              (3.705)          (4.121)     (13.68)      (14.71)
 Wage x Inflation                                                 16.70        14.83
 Mean                                                           (20.88)      (21.99)
 Wage x Inflation                                                -247.4*      -254.1*
 SD                                                             (128.5)      (137.0)
 Dow Jones                                           -0.813**    -0.863**     -0.842**
 SD                                                 (0.411)     (0.407)      (0.423)
 Dow Jones                                            1.051**     0.864*       0.760
 Mean                                               (0.511)     (0.497)      (0.522)
 U.S. Treasury Yield                                  4.115**     3.950**      3.383**
 SD                                                 (1.592)     (1.531)      (1.627)
 U.S. Treasury Yield                                 -2.791**    -2.133*      -2.173
 Mean                                               (1.371)     (1.282)      (1.336)

 Quadratic Trend         X            X                X           X              X
 Month of year FE        X            X                X           X              X
 Macro Events                                          X           X
 NVIX                                                                             X

 adj. R2                 0.179        0.169      0.330           0.352        0.348
 N                        150          150        149             149          149
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10              ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01"
1 = Standard deviations over 0 to six month lags
2 = Means over 0 to six month lags.




                                               52
Table 7: Sensitivity of Convenience Yields to Macroeconomic Events.

 Time              Convenience       Convenience        t-stat of
 Period            Yield During      Yield Not          difference
                   Event             During Event

 Recession of      7.043             -2.679             -0.809
 1923 ­ 1924       (4.225)1          (4.397)            [0.210]2

 Recession of      -6.492            -1.035             -0.391
 1926 ­ 1927       (8.839)           (4.200)            [0.348]

 Stock Market      7.736             -5.338             -1.532*
 Crash3            (5.677)           (4.959)            [0.064]

 Banking           9.012             -2.079             0.627
 Crises            (12.928)          (4.063)            (0.266)

 Smoot-            11.675            -4.251             1.546*
 Hawley4           (6.211)           (4.501)            (0.062)

1 = Standard errors in parenthesis.
2 = p-value in brackets.
3 = For the Crash of October, 1929, during is counted as all months following October,
1929.
4 = Inclusive of months from passage (June, 1930) to passage of Reciprocal Trade
Agreements Act of 1934 (June, 1934).




                                            53
Figures.

Figure 1. Ratio of Dry Fuel to Green Fuel Prices.




Left panel: all wood types. Right panel: slab wood.

Source: Portland Oregonian, Various from 1922 ­ 1935.

Vertical lines indicate:

R 1 = Recession of 1923 to 1924

R 2 = Recession of 1926 to 1927

Crash = Great Crash of October, 1929

Bank Crises = Banking Crises using time demarcations from Friedman and Schwartz
(1963).




                                              54
Figure 2: Share of Price Quotes by Season Status.




Source: Portland Oregonian, Various from 1922 ­ 1935.

Vertical lines indicate:

R 1 = Recession of 1923 to 1924

R 2 = Recession of 1926 to 1927

Crash = Great Crash of October, 1929

Bank Crises = Banking Crises using time demarcations from Friedman and Schwartz
(1963).




                                             55
Figure 3: Annual Premium for Dry Wood.




Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals.

Source: Portland Oregonian, Various from 1922 ­ 1935. Author's calculations.




                                             56
Figure 4: Dry Fuel Premium by Month of Sample.




Source: Portland Oregonian, Various from 1922 ­ 1935.

Vertical lines indicate:

R 1 = Recession of 1923 to 1924

R 2 = Recession of 1926 to 1927

Crash = Great Crash of October, 1929

Bank Crises = Banking Crises using time demarcations from Friedman and Schwartz
(1963).




                                          57
Figure 5: Partial Effect of Temperature on Fuel Price for Before (Left) and After (Right) the
Great Crash.




Squares: prices for dry fuel. Triangles: prices for green fuel.




                                               58
Appendix.

This supplementary appendix covers three topics: a systematic comparison of the apparent

rate of return on green fuel investments relative to other common investments, an

exploration of the correlations between coal and wood prices, and a series of robustness

exercises focusing on how coal prices are included in the hedonic models.


   1. Comparison of Yield on Purchase of Green Fuel to Alternative Investments.


As FLO (2002) note, consumer choice regarding expenditures at different points in time

may not reveal time preference, but rather consumers' ability to arbitrage through access

to capital markets. Unpacking these two factors (time preference and intertemporal

arbitrage) in a field setting in which only market prices are observed (along with attributes

of the fuel), without any follow-up interview as to motivations for the choices made is

clearly challenging. However, if consumers do have access to capital markets and observed

choices actually reflect arbitrage behavior, then the estimated discount rates should align

with the market interest rate (FLO, 2002). As stated numerous times in the main text, the

paper does not claim to cleanly identify individual discount rates. Rather, the premium paid

for dry fuel is argued to embody time preference along with other potential confounding

attributes of green and seasoned fuel.


The following exercise compares yields on 10-year U.S. Treasuries with the dry fuel

premiums. This test, assuming that the dry fuel premiums embody rates of time preference,

explores convergence between market interest rates and rates of time preference of the

sort hypothesized by FLO (2002). Table A2 presents the result of this comparison. What

table A1 shows is that the differences between estimated discount rates, as embodied by


                                             59
the dry fuel premiums, and returns on alternative investments fall toward zero over the

course of the 1922 to 1935 sample. The reduction in the spread is largest (in percentage

point terms) and results in the spread being closest to zero for 10-year bonds. Considering

the limitations of working in an empirical context some 95 years in the past, the yield on

10-year bonds is probably the best estimate of the extant market rate of interest. However,

it is unclear whether the diminished spread reflects arbitrage or a reduction in time

preference from the events that occurred during the Great Depression.


Figure A9 tests another potential confound to the interpretation of dry fuel premiums as

revelatory about consumers' time preferences. Specifically, if households and other

consumers viewed green fuel as a financial investment opportunity, returns should

converge to the returns to other investments. Figure A9 reveals that, when viewed as an

investment opportunity, purchasing green fuel and letting it mature for one year to be sold

at the extant price for dry fuel generates very high, but quite volatile, returns; the average

rate of return is over 22 percent, but the standard deviation of over 21 percent. In contrast,

the average rate of interest on the 10-year bond is just 3 percent with a standard deviation

of 0.3. And, the spread between the yields on these two investments grows throughout the

sample. Both before and after the Crash of 1929, the return on investment in green fuel was

about 24 percent. If speculative investors were capitalizing on the exorbitant returns

offered by green fuel, prices for raw fuel would rise, relative to dry fuel one year hence.

This would align the returns with those offered by competing investments, such as the 10-

year bonds. The data reveals no convergence with bond yields falling over the 1921 to

1935 period.



                                               60
   2. Coal Prices.


Table A3 explores the sensitivity of wood fuel prices to bituminous coal prices. The values

in table A3 are parameter estimates on the natural log of coal prices, and because the

natural log form of the dependent variable (wood prices) these estimates are elasticities.

The table emphasizes changes to these elasticities as a function of the macroeconomic

shocks occurring between 1922 and 1935. Table A3 indicates that wood and coal prices

were positively correlated and that this positive correlation is mainly between dry fuel

prices and coal prices.


The first column of table A3 focuses on the 1923-1924 recession. The top panel indicates

that coal and wood prices were positively correlated in months not during this recession.

For all fuel prices, the elasticity is 0.436 (p < 0.01). This relationship is driven by dry fuel

prices. Green fuel prices appear to be uncorrelated with bituminous coal prices in non-

recession months. During this recession, the elasticity estimate increases by about five-fold.

Neither dry fuel prices, nor green fuel prices are individually correlated with coal prices

during the 1923 ­ 1924 recession.


A similar pattern manifests for the 1926 ­ 1927 recession: in non-recession months, wood

and coal prices were positively correlated and this is primarily due to dry fuel prices.

During the recession, there is no evidence of a significant correlation between wood and

coal prices.


The third column of table A3 examines the months before and after the Great Crash. Prior

to the Crash, wood prices were relatively inelastic with respect to coal prices (0.236, p <

0.01). Again, it was dry fuel prices that were responsive to coal prices. After the Crash, the

                                                61
elasticity increased to 1.432 (p < 0.01). Unlike the two recessions, after the Crash, the

elasticity remains significant. This activity was concentrated in the market for dry fuel.


Table A4 employs anthracite prices rather than bituminous coal prices. For the two

recessions, the results using anthracite prices are quite similar to those for bituminous

coal; in non-recessionary months, wood and coal prices are significantly, positively

correlated and the relationship appears to be concentrated in the market for dry wood.


Unlike table A3, in table A4, wood and anthracite coal prices are only correlated in dry fuel

markets before the Crash. After the Crash, both dry and green fuel prices are significantly

correlated with anthracite coal prices.


Table A5 explores different specifications in terms of how bituminous coal prices are

included in the hedonic regression models. Column (1) corresponds to the results in table 4

in the main text. Across all months of the sample, the elasticity of firewood prices with

respect to coal prices is 0.548 (p < 0.01). Column (2) includes interactions between coal

prices and both the linear and quadratic month-of-year controls. Both terms are significant:

the interaction between coal prices and the linear month control is positive (p < 0.01) while

that for the quadratic term is negative (p < 0.01). The inclusion of these interaction terms

modestly reduces the firewood-coal price elasticity from 0.548 in column (1) to 0.489 (p <

0.01) in column (2). In addition, the dry fuel premium increases slightly to 0.132 (p < 0.01).

Column (3) replaces the interactions between coal prices and month-of-year with

interaction between the temperature and precipitation anomalies, coal prices, and month-

of-year. Only the quadratic term for temperature is significantly different from zero. In this




                                              62
specification, the firewood-coal price elasticity increases to 0.614 (p < 0.01), and the dry

fuel premium is 0.129 (p < 0.01).


Column (4) includes both coal-by-month and coal-by-anomaly-by-month interactions. The

coal-by-month interactions are significant and similar in magnitude to those in column (2).

Both the linear and quadratic interactions between month, temperature, and coal prices

are also significant (p < 0.01). In addition, the quadratic interaction between month,

precipitation, and coal prices is negative and significant (p < 0.05). The firewood-coal price

elasticity falls to 0.513 (p < 0.01), and the dry fuel premium is estimated to be 0.132 (p <

0.01).


Table A6 replicates table 4 from the main text using anthracite coal prices instead of

bituminous coal prices. Column (1) indicates that using anthracite rather than bituminous

coal induces a small change in the dry fuel premium from 0.125 (p < 0.01) to 0.127 (p <

0.01). Similarly, the dry fuel premium and the coefficients for temperature and

precipitation in column (2) exhibit very little sensitivity to using anthracite coal when

compared to those reported in table 4. This pattern also holds for the dry fuel premium

reported in column (3). However, the interaction terms between month-of-year and both

precipitation and temperature all are larger (in an absolute sense) when using anthracite

relative to bituminous coal. This result also manifests in column (4). In contrast, the

coefficients for the interactions between temperature and firewood prices by season status

are quite similar whether using bituminous or anthracite prices.




                                              63
Tables and Figures.


Table A1: Determinants of Convenience Yields.

                           (1)           (2)         (3)

Harvest West of          -0.000181** -0.00183       -0.00112
Cascades                (0.0000696) (0.000933)     (0.00176)
Harvest East of           0.000173    0.00159*      0.000351
Cascades                (0.000169)   (0.000748)    (0.00152)
Spring                                  3.191          6.479
                                      (7.760)        (23.00)
Summer                                  4.570         -13.40
                                      (7.555)        (27.30)
Autumn                                  18.60          18.25
                                      (9.774)        (16.80)
Harvest West x Spring                              -0.000679**
                                                  (0.000190)
Harvest West x Summer                              -0.000563***
                                                  (0.000121)
Harvest West x Autumn                              -0.000953***
                                                  (0.000129)
Harvest East x Spring                                0.00115**
                                                  (0.000425)
Harvest East x Summer                                0.00118**
                                                  (0.000425)
Harvest East x Autumn                                0.00165***
                                                  (0.000244)

Year Fixed Effects                           X         X

adj. R2                   -0.005        0.031      -0.012
N                           82            82         82




                                        64
Table A2: Comparison of Dry Fuel Premiums to Yields on Alternative Investments.

                 Pre-Crash    Post-Crash    Full Sample

 10-Year Bond     7.810***     1.405***     5.100***
                 (1.648)      (0.741)      (1.030)
 Dow Jones        10.432***   5.856***      8.483***
                 (1.742)      (1.485)      (1.194)
 Commercial      11.817***    7.574***     10.022***
 Paper           (1.784)      (1.788)      (1.284)
 S&P             10.407***    5.834***     8.460***
                 (1.724)      (1.544)      (1.199)
 N                 90           67            157

Standard errors in parentheses
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
T-tests compare spread between monthly dry fuel premiums and returns (yields) on
alternative investments to zero.




                                           65
Table A3: Relationship Between Wood Fuel Prices and Bituminous Coal Prices.

 Not During 1923 ­ 1924       1926 ­ 1927     Great      Banking
 Event      Recession         Recession       Crash      Crises
 All          0.436***          0.735***      0.236***   0.562***
              (0.0649)          (0.0683)      (0.0708)   (0.0635)
 Dry          0.649***          0.721***       0.272**   0.683***
               (0.115)           (0.122)       (0.132)    (0.114)
 Green           0.372            0.633         0.376      0.630
               (0.461)           (0.481)       (0.513)    (0.427)
 During     1923 ­ 1924       1926 ­ 1927     Great      Banking
 Event      Recession         Recession       Crash      Crises
 All           2.365**           0.0304       1.432***     0.127
               (1.194)           (0.441)       (0.164)    (1.020)
 Dry            -1.146            0.407       1.722***     0.967
               (1.932)           (0.874)       (0.324)    (1.240)
 Green           1.500               0          0.962         0
               (1.242)              (.)        (1.822)       (.)


Values in table A3 are estimated coefficients from regression of natural log of wood prices
on the natural log of monthly bituminous coal prices. Regressions include wood type fixed
effects, season and year fixed effects.




                                             66
Table A4: Relationship Between Wood Fuel Prices and Anthracite Coal Prices.

 Not During 1923 ­ 1924       1926 ­ 1927     Great          Banking
 Event      Recession         Recession       Crash          Crises
 All            0.229***         0.234***       0.00379          0.402***
             (0.0431)          (0.0445)        (0.0778)       (0.0490)
 Dry            0.383***         0.432***         0.501***       0.615***
             (0.0772)          (0.0796)         (0.147)       (0.0866)
 Green         -0.249            0.111           -0.160         -0.113
              (0.319)           (0.323)         (0.348)        (0.309)
 During     1923 ­ 1924       1926 ­ 1927     Great          Banking
 Event      Recession         Recession       Crash          Crises
 All            2.993**          0.0379           0.582***       0.373
              (1.511)           (0.548)        (0.0597)        (0.336)
 Dry           -1.458            0.506            0.542***      -0.642
              (2.459)           (1.087)         (0.111)        (0.410)
 Green          1.899               0             2.041***         0
              (1.571)              (.)          (0.623)           (.)


Values in table A3 are estimated coefficients from regression of natural log of wood prices
on the natural log of monthly bituminous coal prices. Regressions include wood type fixed
effects, season and year fixed effects.




                                             67
Table A5: Specification of Bituminous Coal Prices in Hedonic Price Model.

                              (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)
 Seasoned                  0.127***       0.132***      0.129***        0.132***
                          (0.0128)        (0.0128)     (0.0128)       (0.0127)
 Partially                 -0.0119        -0.00780      -0.0104       -0.00748
 Seasoned                 (0.0131)        (0.0131)     (0.0131)       (0.0130)
 No Season                0.0441***      0.0474***     0.0451***        0.0475***
 Information              (0.0125)        (0.0125)     (0.0125)       (0.0125)
 Ln (Coal Price)           0.548***       0.489***      0.614***        0.513***
                          (0.0681)         (0.128)     (0.0728)        (0.124)
 Coal x Month                            0.0188***                      0.0212***
                                         (0.00393)                   (0.00389)
 Coal x Month2                          -0.00193***                   -0.00227***
                                        (0.000276)                  (0.000292)
 Coal x Temp x Month                                     0.000248     0.000524***
                                                        (0.000193)  (0.000193)
 Coal x Temp x Month2                                 -0.0000687*** -0.0000625***
                                                       (0.0000221) (0.0000220)
 Coal x Pre. x Month                                     -0.000729    0.000790
                                                        (0.000558)  (0.000583)
 Coal x Pre. x Month2                                   0.0000567    -0.000141**
                                                       (0.0000551) (0.0000600)

 adj. R2                      0.433       0.436          0.434        0.437
 N                           14363        14363          14363        14363
Standard errors in parentheses
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Dependent variable: ln(Price)




                                             68
Table A6: Cumulative Temperature Anomaly and Dry Fuel Premiums using
Anthracite Coal Prices.

                                (1)               (2)          (3)             (4)

 Seasoned                      0.127***       0.128***      0.128***          0.121***
                             (0.0127)       (0.0128)      (0.0127)          (0.0134)
 Partially                    -0.0129        -0.0114       -0.0116           -0.0192
 Seasoned                    (0.0130)       (0.0131)      (0.0131)          (0.0137)
 No Season                     0.0427***      0.0447***     0.0442***         0.0367***
 Information                 (0.0124)       (0.0125)      (0.0124)          (0.0131)
 Cumulative Temp.                           -0.00215*** 0.000367             0.00260*
 Anomaly (Temp.)                           (0.000273)   (0.000832)         (0.00139)
 Cumulative Precip.                          0.00254*** -0.00371*           -0.00358*
 Anomaly (Pre.)                            (0.000678)    (0.00208)         (0.00208)
 Pre. x Month                                              0.00235***        0.00227***
                                                        (0.000761)        (0.000761)
 Pre. x Month2                                           -0.000158***      -0.000151***
                                                        (0.0000553)       (0.0000553)
 Temp. x Month                                           0.0000677***      0.0000546**
                                                        (0.0000230)       (0.0000232)
 Temp. x Month2                                          -0.000930***      -0.000746**
                                                        (0.000297)        (0.000300)
 Seasoned x                                                                 -0.00211*
 Anomaly                                                                   (0.00115)
 Partially Seasoned x                                                       -0.00139
 Anomaly                                                                   (0.00117)
 No Season Information x                                                    -0.00342***
 Anomaly                                                                   (0.00113)

 adj. R2                      0.428          0.431          0.431           0.432
 N                            14363          14363          14363           14363

Standard errors in parentheses
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Dependent variable: ln(Price)

In model (4), linear combination of dry fuel coefficient plus the dry fuel x temperature
anomaly interaction evaluated at the mean temperature anomaly value = 0.119 (0.014).




                                             69
Appendix Figures:

Figure A1: Advertisement Showing Price Quotes and Grades of Wood Fuel.




Source: Portland, Oregonian December 14th, 1925.




                                       70
Figure A2: Month of Sample Counts of Price Quotes.

                250       200
      Count of Price Quotes
    50    100   0  150




                         2                      4               6                 8          0                2               4               6
                      192                    192             192               192        193             193              193             193
                   1,                     1,              1,             1   ,         1,              1,               1,              1,
      ry                             ry              ry             ry                ry          ry               ry              ry
   nua                            nua             nua            nua               nua         nua             nua             nua
 Ja                             Ja              Ja             Ja                Ja          Ja              Ja              Ja
                                                                                     Date




                                                                                       71
Figure A3: Slab wood.




                        72
Figure A4: Real Dry and Green or Partially-Dry Firewood Prices.




Prices expressed in ($1982). The left-hand most pair of vertical lines indicate the recession
from 1923 ­ 1924. The next pair of vertical lines indicate the recession from 1926 to 1927.
The third vertical line from the right marks the date of the stock market Crash of October,
1929. The next pair of vertical line span the banking crises.




                                             73
Figure A5: Coal and Firewood Prices.




Prices expressed in real 1984$. Triangles = anthracite coal in U.S. short tons; Circles =
bituminous coal in U.S. short tons; Squares = firewood in cords.




                                              74
Figure A6: Partial Effects of Temperature Anomaly by Month-of-Year.




Left panel: partial effect of cumulative temperature anomaly x month on fuel price; Right
panel: partial effect of cumulative temperature anomaly x month on fuel price evaluated at
mean temperature anomaly by month-of-year.




                                            75
Figure A7: Partial Effects of Precipitation by Month-of-Year.




Left panel: partial effect of cumulative precipitation anomaly x month on fuel price; Right
panel: partial effect of cumulative precipitation anomaly x month on fuel price evaluated at
mean precipitation by month-of-year.




                                             76
Figure A8: Partial Effects of Temperature Anomaly on Fuel Prices and Temperature
Anomaly Plots Before the Great Crash (top) and After the Great Crash (bottom).




Squares: fuel prices, circles: temperature anomaly. Top Panel: Before Great Crash; Bottom
Panel: After Great Crash.




                                            77
Figure A9: Rate of Appreciation of Green Fuel.




Left panel: All wood types. Right panel: Slab wood. Graphs depict the annual increase in the
real price of a cord of green fuel as determined by the real price of a dry cord, one year
after the purchase of the green cord. The left-hand most pair of vertical lines indicate the
recession from 1923 ­ 1924. The next pair of vertical lines indicate the recession from
1926 to 1927. The third vertical line from the right marks the date of the stock market
Crash of October, 1929. The next pair of vertical line span the banking crises.




                                             78
