                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  INFLATION AND EXCHANGE RATE TARGETING CHALLENGES UNDER FISCAL
                           DOMINANCE

                                      Rashad Ahmed
                                     Joshua Aizenman
                                      Yothin Jinjarak

                                    Working Paper 25996
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w25996


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




Financial support of the Dockson Chair of University of Southern California and Victoria
University of Wellington are gratefully acknowledged. Useful comments by Nigel McClung and
the participants at the 28-29 August IMF-RBNZ, Wellington NZ, the BIS seminar (Hong Kong),
Ken Kasa, the participants at the WCWIF University of Washington seminar, and two
anonymous referees are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Rashad Ahmed, Joshua Aizenman, and Yothin Jinjarak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inflation and Exchange Rate Targeting Challenges Under Fiscal Dominance
Rashad Ahmed, Joshua Aizenman, and Yothin Jinjarak
NBER Working Paper No. 25996
June 2019, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. F31,F33,F34,F36,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

Countries have significantly increased their public-sector borrowing since the Global Financial
Crisis. As a consequence, monetary authorities may face pressure to deviate from their policy
targets in ways designed to ease the debt burden. In this context, we test for greater fiscal
dominance over 2000-2017 under Inflation Targeting (IT) and non-IT regimes. We find that
evidence consistent with fiscal dominance varies across countries and debt configurations. Higher
ratios of public debt-to-GDP may appear associated with lower policy interest rates in advanced
economies. However, a declining natural rate of interest largely explains the pattern of lower
rates and higher debt in these countries. The most robust evidence of fiscal dominance lies among
emerging markets under non-IT regimes, composed mostly of exchange rate targeters. For these
countries, policy interest rates are non-linearly associated with public debt levels, depending on
both the level of hard-currency public debt-to-GDP and the currency composition of public debt.
We also show that emerging market economies with greater exchange rate volatility, inflation
volatility, and underlying commodity exposure exhibit stronger associations between public debt
and policy interest rates.

Rashad Ahmed                                    Yothin Jinjarak
University of Southern California               School of Economics and Finance
3620 South Vermont Ave.                         Victoria University of Wellington
Los Angeles, CA 90089                           PO Box 600
rashadah@usc.edu                                23 Lambton Quay, Wellington
                                                New Zealand
Joshua Aizenman                                 yothin.jinjarak@vuw.ac.nz
Economics and SIR
University of Southern California
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu
      1. Introduction

          A notable outcome of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) has been the search for yields by
OECD investors, manifested by their growing demand for debt issued by Emerging Market
Economies (EMEs). The QE policies adopted by the US and the Eurozone in the aftermath of the
GFC induced a sharp decline of interest rates and risk premia, propagating `yield chasing' by
institutional investors, increasing thereby the demand for EMEs' hard and local currency
sovereign debt. These developments mitigated the `original sin' concerns identified by
Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Panizza (2007) ­ the inability of most EMEs to borrow abroad in
their currency. 1 The resultant rise of the external debt of EMEs led to an unprecedented increase
in their debt/GDP, putting to the fore concerns about growing debt overhang and fragility,
including the possibility of fiscal dominance. This possibility is the case when growing
debt/GDP constrains the conduct of monetary policy, inducing the central bank to pay growing
attention to reducing the costs of serving the public debt, and the country's external debt
[Blanchard (2004)]. 2 Our paper investigates fiscal dominance channels, with a particular focus
on EMEs and Developing Countries before and after the GFC.




1
    The share of EMEs debt in local currency is estimated at 87.1 percent of total EMEs debt ($21.9 trillion)
in 2017. The local currency debt outstanding has also increased from 40 percent of GDP in the early
2010s to almost 60 percent of GDP recently (IMF, 2018).
2
    The distinction between fiscal and monetary dominance regimes is due to Sargent and Wallace (1981).
If the government adjusts the primary deficit to limit debt accumulation, the central bank is not forced to
inflate away the debt, allowing the central bank to focus on inflation targeting, in line with monetary
dominance. Long period of large fiscal deficits and high public debt-to-GDP ratios raises the concerns of
growing fiscal dominance by heightening the links between fiscal policy, monetary policy and
government debt management. This may be the case when higher policy interest rates or depreciating
currencies raise concerns about debt sustainability, limiting monetary independence.


                                                       2
       Fiscal dominance concerns have been manifested is several channels. The most
transparent one is when the government funds servicing domestic debt by using the printing
press, leading to accelerated inflation, and possibly hyperinflation. The more nuanced
manifestation may take place in in the open economy with hard and soft currency debt when
monetary policy focuses on keeping a government solvent as opposed to hitting the designated
domestic policy targets of Taylor rule - targeting inflation, unemployment and/or growth.
Instead, monetary policy is prioritizing sovereign debt management, like minimizing debt service
costs by keeping interest rates low and reassuring financial markets of the country's
creditworthiness. A clear example of these challenges include Inflation Targeting (IT) regimes in
countries with large hard currency external debt/GDP, possibly Turkey in recent years, and a fair
share of Latin American economies in past decades. Their policymakers may face growing `fear
of floating' (Calvo & Reinhart, 2002). Specifically, real exchange rate depreciation increases the
costs of serving their hard currency external debt by the debt/GDP times the depreciation rate
(the cost measured as a fraction of the country's GDP). This condition in turn may induce the
central bank to put a higher weight on stabilizing the real exchange rate, or to set interest rates in
such a way that lower the costs of servicing the debt, hence deviating from prescribed targets.
With the exception of Argentina, during our sample period, 2000-2017, inflating the debt is less
widespread concern among emerging markets than successful sovereign debt management.
Thereby, this paper focuses on tracing fiscal dominance in circumstance when the authorities
prioritizing sovereign debt management, attempting to reassure financial markets of the
country's creditworthiness.

       Research on the interaction of fiscal and monetary policy has a long history. Sargent and
Wallace (1981) reason that a fiscal policy that fixes an exogenous path for the real primary
government deficit may make inflation inevitable, regardless of the choice of monetary policy.
This would be the case in circumstances leading the public debt to reach a limit beyond which
further government borrowing is impossible, implying that monetary policy will be induced to
creation of sufficient seignorage revenues to finance the deficit, as may be the case if a central




                                                  3
bank's independence is in doubt. This configuration leads to `fiscal dominance,' where the
central bank is induced to accommodate the fiscal pressure. 3

          A follow up perspective on these issues is provide by Woodford's contributions.
Woodford (1998) outlined an example where even an independent central bank will choose to
react to fiscal news. Specifically, there are plausible circumstances where the fiscal authority
would change its policy when country's "debt limit" were reached. A central bank charged to
maintain price stability opt to be concerned about the conduct of fiscal policy as well. The
central bank might seek to ensure that the fiscal authority is committed to a Ricardian policy,
without then feeling any further need to participate in the year-to-year conduct of fiscal policy.
Alternatively, a central bank operating in a country where the fiscal policy is non-Ricardian
would be aware that unexpected changes in government's budget would affect the equilibrium
price level. This in turn may induce the central bank to influence fiscal policy decisions on an
ongoing basis.

          Woodford also shows that a policy deemed as achieving price stability in an environment
of Ricardian fiscal policy, might be disastrous in the case of a non-Ricardian fiscal policy. In
these circumstances, a conclusion that fiscal policy is non-Ricardian would concern the Central
Bank with debt management issues since the composition of the public debt matters for the
behavior of equilibrium inflation, as Cochrane (1996) illustrated. Specifically, the longer the
duration of the nominal bonds, the more sharply its value will decline with increases in inflation.
Thereby, inflation is unambiguously less affected by fiscal shocks when the public debt is of




3
    Specifically, if the government adjusts the primary deficit to limit debt accumulation, the central bank is
not forced to inflate away the debt, allowing the central bank to focus on inflation targeting, in line with
monetary dominance. Long period of large fiscal deficits and high public debt-to-GDP ratios raises the
concerns of growing fiscal dominance by heightening the links between fiscal policy, monetary policy
and government debt management. This may be the case when higher policy interest rates or depreciating
currencies raise concerns about debt sustainability, limiting monetary independence.
                                                        4
longer maturity. In the same vain, higher indexation of government debt affects inflation
variability in the case of non-Ricardian fiscal policy. 4

          The considerations outlined in Woodford (1998) led him to conclude that "rather than
simply implementing an interest-rate rule and letting the government budget evolve as it may, it
would be appropriate for the central bank to play an active role in commenting upon the
inflationary consequences of proposed changes in fiscal policy, and similarly in ensuring that the
composition of the public debt favors price stability, by maximizing the extent to which the
adjustment in response to fiscal shocks occurs through changes in long bond yields rather than
through variations in the inflation rate. Through such recognition on the part of the fiscal and
monetary authorities of the interconnectedness of their respective concerns, it may be possible to
enjoy the benefits of a tax policy aimed at microeconomic efficiency rather than budget balance,
without sacrificing the advantages that flow from stable prices." 5

          Against this background, our paper investigates the degree to which the observed patterns
of central bank's policies are affected by country's debt profile and find evidence that are
consistent with conditional fiscal dominance, akin to Woodford's interpretations.

          Fiscal dominance concerns have been manifested is several channels. The most
transparent one is when the government funds servicing domestic debt by using the printing
press, leading to accelerated inflation, and possibly hyperinflation. The more nuanced
manifestation may take place in in the open economy with hard and soft currency debt when



4
    While the above discussion focuses on a close economy, it also imply that Central Bank's policy may be
affected by the currency composition and the maturity of the hard currency sovereign debt [see Leeper
(1991), Loyo (1999) and Blanchard (2004)].
5
    Woodford (1998) also looks at optimal fiscal and monetary policy as a solution to dynamic Ramsey
taxation. He concludes that an optimal policy regime may involve a "non-Ricardian" fiscal policy, in
which increases in government purchases do not result in corresponding increases in the present value of
future tax collections, and so cause fluctuations in the equilibrium value of government bonds. At the
same time, an appropriate choice both of monetary policy and of the composition of the public debt can
make this sort of fiscal policy compatible with a substantial degree of price stability. See Christiano and
Fitzgerald (2000) and Woodford (2003) for further discussion and references.
                                                      5
monetary policy focuses on keeping a government solvent as opposed to the policy targets of
Taylor rule - targeting inflation, unemployment and growth. Instead, monetary policy is
prioritizing sovereign debt management, like minimizing debt service costs and reassuring
financial markets of the country's creditworthiness.        A clear example of these challenges is
Inflation Targeting (IT) regimes in countries with large hard currency external debt/GDP,
possibly Turkey in recent years, and a fair share of Latin American economies in past decades.
Their policymakers may face growing `fear of floating' (Calvo & Reinhart, 2002). Specifically,
real exchange rate depreciation increases the costs of serving their hard currency external debt by
the debt/GDP times the depreciation rate (the cost measured as a fraction of the country's GDP).
This condition, in turn, may induce the Central Bank to put a higher weight on stabilizing the
real exchange rate. With the exception of Argentina, during our sample period, 2000-2017,
inflating the debt is less widespread concern among emerging markets than successful
sovereign debt management. Thereby, this paper focuses on tracing fiscal dominance in
circumstance when the authorities prioritizing sovereign debt management, attempting to
reassure financial markets of the country's creditworthiness.

          While the original inflation targeting and Taylor Rule ignored the real exchange rate as a
policy goal in OECD countries, the research dealing with Emerging Market Economies put it to
the fore (Aizenman, Hutchison, Noy (2011); Berganza, Carlos, Broto (2012); Ghosh, Ostry,
Chamon (2016)). Indeed, exchange rate targeting (aka exchange rate stabilization) may be
accomplished in a hybrid Inflation Targeting regime by putting higher policy weight on
stabilizing the real exchange rate, possibly by proactive management of sizable buffers of
international reserves (IR) and sovereign wealth funds (SWFs). 6




6
    Russia provides vivid examples of such a policy before and after the GFC, hoarding IR at times of
improving terms of trade, mitigating thereby the real appreciation associated with higher oil prices. This
policy was reversed during the collapse of oil prices; Russia sold third of the accumulated IR at times of
deteriorating terms of trade, thereby mitigating the real depreciation induced by declining oil prices and
lowering the cost of serving Russia's large hard currency external debt. Such a policy stabilizes the real
exchange rate, reducing the odds of external debt crises in countries with large debt overhang and
                                                      6
          The impact of growing local currency debt overhang on Inflation Targeting countries and
managed flexible exchange rate regimes may be more intricate. One expects their policy interest
rates to go up with increasing debt overhang, reflecting higher risk premia. The higher interest
rate may also be associated with nominal depreciation and more significant inflationary pressure.
Countries with sizable IR may also opt to mitigate these effects by selling IR to lean against the
currency depreciation. 7

          We conclude this section with a road map of the main results. In section 2, using de jure
Inflation Targeting classification, we find evidence of fiscal dominance among Developed
Market Economies (DMEs) under IT, where interest rates tend to be negatively associated with
rising public debt levels. However, amid a battery of robustness tests, we find that this negative
association is primarily driven by the secular decline in risk-free rates. Among EMEs under non-
IT regimes, we find a negative interest rate effect accounted for by a higher foreign currency
public debt/GDP ratio. Additionally, for EMEs under non-IT regimes, the composition of public
debt matters, as larger proportions of debt denominated in foreign currency are associated with
higher interest rates: a risk premium effect. These offsetting effects imply that the fiscal
dominance effect among EMEs following non-IT regimes is non-linear and depends on both debt
composition and the hard currency public debt-to-GDP ratio.

          In Section 3, under a simple de facto classification binning groups of countries by their
nominal exchange rate volatility into low, moderate and high exchange rate volatility groups, we
find evidence of fiscal dominance among both DMEs and EMEs. Among DMEs, total public
debt/GDP tends to suppress policy rates on average, and the effect size is more substantial for
high NEER volatility countries, composed mostly of de facto inflation targeters. Among EMEs,
the channel is more nuanced. Again, the fiscal dominance effect transmits through the foreign-
denominated debt, and the impact on interest rates is non-linear as it also depends on the total



exposure to larger terms of trade shocks [see Edwards (1989), Aizenman, Edwards, Riera-Crichton
(2012), Aizenman and Sun (2012), Frankel (2017), Aizenman and Jinjarak (2020)].
7
    Alternatively, policy makers may opt for greater financial repression, as a funding mechanism that
increases the tax base associated with a given inflation, mitigating the possible interest rate and
depreciation pressure associated with growing debt overhang.
                                                      7
level of public debt/GDP and the composition of public debt, which themselves are both a
function of the level of foreign currency-denominated debt. A common feature of our results is
the salient impact of larger hard currency external debt overhang on the policy interest rate,
possibly mitigated by proper IR adjustment. Among EMEs, our de facto analysis highlights that
interest rates of high NEER volatility countries (de facto Inflation Targeting) are more sensitive
to the fiscal position of the country. This is at odds with the de jure analysis, though we show in
the following section that this effect is completely driven by EMEs with significant commodity
exposure, highlighting a key role of commodity fluctuations in fiscal dominance effects among
EMEs. As exchange rates are determined by many factors, this exercise highlights the
challenges brought with monetary regime classification. Ignoring the de facto analysis and solely
referencing the de jure classification would assume that central banks explicitly adhere to what
they express. As evidenced by `Fear of Floating,' we know this is not always the case.

        By stratifying EMEs further by commodity intensity in Section 4, we find that inflation
plays a much larger role in interest rate policy for commodity-intensive countries compared to
non-commodity EMEs. When we do not condition on the monetary regime, we find that
commodity-intensive EMEs also consider fluctuations in the real exchange rate and international
reserves when determining interest rates while non-commodity intensive EMEs do not. Under
the de jure classification, the output gap plays a noticeably larger role in interest rate setting for
commodity-intensive inflation targeters, but not for their non-commodity IT counterparts. We
also find that under the de jure classification, evidence of fiscal dominance is present among
non-commodity inflation targeting EMEs. De facto classification based on exchange rate
volatility tells a different story. Output gaps are associated with higher interest rates among high
NEER volatility non-commodity EMEs (de facto inflation targeters) but not among high NEER
volatility commodity-intensive EMEs. Changes in the real exchange rate are negatively
(positively) associated with interest rates in commodity (non-commodity) inflation targeting - or
high NEER volatility - EMEs. Finally, fiscal variables are highly significant among commodity-
based EMEs with high NEER volatility, but not among their non-commodity EME counterparts.
Non-linear effects of hard currency debt accumulation are present, as fiscal dominance effects of
lower interest rates offset risk premium effects of higher interest rates. We also observe that
commodity intensity is positively associated with exchange rate volatility. This association

                                                   8
makes it crucial to stratify the high volatility group of emerging market countries on commodity
intensity. Even among EMEs with high exchange rate volatility, it is those who are commodity-
intensive that show the most persuasive evidence of debt levels influencing policy interest rates.

           Section 5 focuses on analysis and discussion regarding the non-linear association
between public debt and policy rates in Emerging Markets. In Section 6, we provide a battery of
robustness tests. We consider alternative ways to measure fiscal space, the simultaneity issue
between public debt and policy rates, periods where countries suffered from collapsing currency
regimes, controlling for the secular decline in interest rates, and alternative regression
specifications. Finally, the final section concludes, and Appendix B provides a case study
specific to the Euro Zone.

      2.   Inflation Targeting and Fiscal Dominance

           We collect quarterly frequency data on a variety of macroeconomic variables across both
Developed and Emerging Market Economies. While this study pays particular attention to
EMEs, investigating the effects of limited fiscal space in developed countries provides for an
additional benchmark of comparison. The data among some (mostly DME) countries begin in the
mid 90's, and our baseline analysis spans the period 2000 Q1 to 2017 Q4. Data among EMEs
were sparsely populated until more recent decades and in large part the public debt and foreign-
currency-denominated public debt statistics start in the early 2000s. De jure Inflation Targeting
classifications are taken from the IMF. There are 23 IT de jure Targeters in our sample, of which
18 adopted the policy by 2002 (see Figure 1). While the United States began explicit Inflation
Targeting in 2012, we rely on the fact that the monetary authority has implicitly targeted
inflation since 1999. 8 In total, our data set is composed of 29 countries, 18 of which are classified
as EMEs (according to IMF WEO classification). The key dependent variable of interest is the
short-term nominal interest rate or policy rate, and covariates include inflation, real GDP gap,
real effective exchange rate (REER) changes, changes in international reserves, public
debt/GDP, foreign currency-denominated public debt/GDP and currency composition of public
debt (foreign currency-denominated debt/total public debt). All changes and growth rates are


8
    See Goodfriend (2003) and Rose (2007).
                                                   9
quarterly. Note that a positive change in the NEER/REER corresponds to exchange rate
appreciation. We've also collected data on government tax revenues, which we substitute for
GDP in debt ratio construction as a robustness check. Additional details, including sources of the
data, are provided in the appendix (Table A1).




2.1     Preliminaries

       Tables A2 and A3 describe and summarize the main variables across 4 strata: Developed
Market Inflation Targeting and Non-IT, and Emerging Market Inflation Targeting and Non-IT.
The IT statistics are constructed from country-quarter observations that fall within the IMF de
jure classification, while Non-IT statistics consist of data from countries that either never
pursued explicit inflation targeting or data preceding the beginning of Inflation Targeting for
countries that currently do. In our data, there are 11 countries that adopted IT within the sample
period (on or after 2000 Q1), including South Africa, Thailand, Mexico, Norway, South Korea,
Hungary, Indonesia, Turkey, Japan, Russia and India; in our estimation we use both de jure and
de facto measures to address such potential attrition bias in the analysis. Figures 2 and 3 provide
density plots for the main variables.

       Notice that there is an interesting heterogeneity between Emerging Market Inflation
Targeters and Non-Inflation Targeters. As shown in Figure 3 and corresponding t-tests (Table
A3), inflation and interest rates tend to be lower and less volatile in IT EMEs compared to Non-
IT EMEs. The output gap is about three times more volatile in Non-IT EMEs. International
reserves growth mean and variation are larger under Non-IT regimes. Both total public debt/GDP
ratios and foreign currency-denominated public debt/GDP ratios tend to be lower under IT
regimes. Similarly, the raw distributions across DME Inflation Targeters versus Non-Inflation
Targeters (Figure 2) show that interest rates and inflation rates tend to be higher in IT regimes.
International reserves are accumulated at a faster rate, and total public debt/GDP ratios are larger
under Non-IT regimes among DMEs.




                                                 10
          We conduct two separate panel unit root tests (Table A4) across each variable to assess
the time-series properties of our series and determine the appropriate estimation strategy. We
incorporate the test described in Levin, Lin, and Chu (2002) along with Im, Pesaran, and Shin
(2003) as each test offers different alternative hypotheses. Both tests reject the unit root
hypothesis for all variables except for the public debt/GDP ratio, which is rejected by the LLC
test at the 10% level while IPS fails to reject the null.




2.2       Baseline Results

          To establish our baseline results, we follow Aizenman et al. (2011) in which the authors
estimate augmented Taylor Rule regressions to investigate whether fluctuations in exchange
rates or international reserves factor into a country's monetary policy rule. 9 The literature on
Taylor Rules is extensive, originating from Taylor (1993). Consistent with the literature, we
assume that the monetary authority follows a policy reaction function in the form:

                                          )       )
                              = -1 +  ( -   + ( -   +  .

          The monetary authority sets the nominal (short-term) interest rate based on the output gap
and the inflation deviation from the target inflation rate. Additionally, we introduce policy inertia
in the form of a lagged interest rate variable, which incorporates the assumption that the
policymaker smooths the interest rate over time (see English and Sack (2002)). Finally, 
includes additional variables that may potentially enter the interest rate rule. For example, in
Aizenman et al. (2011), these variables included the real exchange rate and international
reserves. We include these international target variables and further augment the regressions with



9
    They find that IT emerging markets follow a "mixed strategy" whereby both inflation and real exchange
rates are important determinants of policy interest rates. However, the response of IT emerging markets to
real exchange rates is more constrained than in non-IT regimes. The response to real exchange rates is
strongest in those countries following IT policies that are relatively intensive in exporting basic
commodities.
                                                     11
debt-related measures mentioned previously to test for evidence of fiscal dominance (public
debt/GDP, foreign currency-denominated public debt/GDP, and currency composition of public
debt). Note that the above specification is a single time-series. Our panel consists of advanced
and developing economies, under both IT and Non-IT regimes. Therefore, we properly modify
the specification above:


                         , =  + ,-1 + , - ,  +  , + , + , ,


where the inflation target , is assumed to be time-invariant and therefore absorbed by the
country-specific fixed effect  . As such, our (baseline) sample is subject to sample attrition
corresponding to the de jure adoption of inflation targets , shown in Figure 1. This assumption
may be overly restrictive, so as a robustness check we later relax time-invariant inflation targets
using the approach of Aizenman et al. (2011). We estimate the following model via fixed-effects
least squares (LSDV), 10 and estimate the model on four subgroups of the data to allow for
flexibility across all coefficients: EME IT, EME Non-IT, DME IT and DME Non-IT. The results
are displayed in a format comparing EME IT versus EME Non-IT, and DME IT to DME Non-
IT, though interesting comparisons can be made between inflation targeting in Emerging
Markets and inflation targeting Developed Countries as well.

          Foreign currency denominated debt is a key risk factor and feature among EMEs. Hence
in the case of EMEs, we sharpen our analysis by including external variables for not just total
public debt but also foreign currency denominated public debt (reported in Table A7). Moreover,
we control for debt composition measured as the percent of hard currency public debt to total


10
     The specification taking the form of a dynamic panel model is well known to suffer from Nickell
(1981) bias when the time dimension is small. However, our quarterly sample provides  ranging from
mid-50 to mid-70 depending on the subsample and country. Judson and Owen (1999) show through
Monte-Carlo studies that the LSDV estimator performs well in comparison with GMM and other
estimators when =30. Alternatively, we estimate the baseline regression using only fixed effects, and
only lagged dependent variables, find that results remain broadly robust to different specifications (not
reported for brevity).


                                                     12
public debt. Including public debt/GDP, foreign currency denominated public debt/GDP, and
debt composition variables in the same regression then help identify whether the effect of hard
currency debt on interest rates is non-linear; statistically, debt composition can be viewed as an
interaction term between the public debt and foreign currency public debt variables.

           Tables A5 and A6 present the baseline results under inflation targeting and non-inflation
targeting for EMEs and DMEs, respectively. Regarding fiscal rules, these regressions examine
the impact of total public debt on interest rates. Columns 1 and 5 present the benchmark model
without the inclusion of any external variables. Columns 2 and 6 introduce changes in the REER
and international reserves as external variables 11, while columns 3 and 7 additionally include
both the ratio of Public Debt-to-GDP. To control for the effect of debt/GDP driven by output
growth, columns 4 and 8 include nominal GDP growth as a control. The high explanatory power
of these regressions can be accounted for by country-specific fixed effects and the inclusion of
the lagged policy, as the interest rate series display significant persistence. The contribution of
either feature varies by specification and subgroup, but the country fixed effects or lagged policy
rate can separately account for anywhere between 20% to 50% of the variation, depending on the
specification.

           Potential Biases due to Collinearity

           The EME specification has raised concerns in the discussion which we believe is worth a
brief clarification. By including FX public debt/GDP, total public debt/GDP, and FX public
debt/public debt, one may be concerned with collinearity issues. Consider what these variables
look like in the regression:

                                                
                              =  +     +     +    ,
                                                 




11
     For EMEs, we also consider testing USD exchange rates instead of the REER given the strong role of center
economies. Results are virtually unchanged in the baseline regressions, and REER and USD changes are highly
correlated.
                                                          13
Where the first, second and third term refers to the key variables of interest, respectively. Notice
that the product of the second and third term equal to the first term:

                                         
                      =  +   ×  +    +    .
                                         

Thus, the third regressor could be described as an interaction of the other two regressors. Here,
the term (1) = term (2) x term (3), equivalent to the general multiple regression model with
interaction:

                                  = 1  + 2  + 3   +  .

All interaction terms are multiplicatively dependent but not linearly dependent. Hence there is no
issue of induced collinearity here; rather, we are simply estimating a regression model with an
interaction term.



          Limitations of the Taylor Rule Specification

      Before moving on to the baseline results, it is crucial to discuss the limitations and potential
drawbacks of our econometric design. While we attempt to control for key determinants of
interest rate policy, bear in mind that our reported estimates should be considered associations.
Given the data limitations we face, our tests are not designed to identify a causal effect of public
debt on policy rates 12. Therefore, we wish to stress that the evidence we present maybe, at best,
consistent with the presence of Fiscal Dominance, and this is as far as our claims may go. We are
careful not to argue any causal claims. Three major issues we face which may cause our
estimates to be biased, are 1) simultaneity, 2) omitted variables and 3) model misspecification.
We do our best to reduce these risks but view it as crucial to acknowledge these limitations of
our study.

          Regarding simultaneity, there are several channels which enable debt levels to
contemporaneously influence policy interest rates, but also for policy interest rates to


12
     More data and a longer sampling period would be useful to sharpen identification. Debt
maturity profile, the extent, and effectiveness of capital controls, more detailed data on local
currency public and private debt would allow sharper identification of the forces at work.
                                                   14
contemporaneously influence debt levels. Low policy rates imply relatively cheap debt which
might fuel debt issuance by countries. Some may argue that this is not a severe issue in our
specific case under the assumption that policy rates are `fast moving' while public debt is `slow
moving' (Bernanke and Mihoff (1998)). Regardless, one can overcome this issue to some degree
by introducing public debt with a lag, which we do as a robustness check. Another concern is the
potential endogeneity between the real exchange rate and policy rates. Again, causality can run
both ways. Similarly, we attempt to mitigate this issue by omitting country-quarter periods of
currency collapses and crises as an additional robustness check. While this is not a guaranteed
way to cleanse the endogeneity issues between the exchange rate and policy rate, we continue to
keep the exchange rate as an independent variable as we know there have been several cases
throughout history where the monetary authority responds to exchange rate fluctuations with
interest rate changes.

       Regarding omitted variables, unobserved shocks may drive trends in the policy rate and
public debt jointly. A simple example: Aggregate supply/demand shocks may jointly influence
the price and quantity of public debt. Our panel specification is advantageous in this respect as
country-specific fixed effects allow us to control for unobserved time-invariant, cross-country
variation in policy rates. However, unobserved shocks that are common across countries but vary
over time may also jointly drive policy rates and debt dynamics. To account for such unobserved
common trends, we control for various measures of the natural rate of interest as an additional
robustness check.

       Finally, our regression model may mis-specified. While this is a relevant concern for
virtually every empirical study, testing for Fiscal Dominance specifically may be possible under
a variety of empirical designs. We choose a simple linear Taylor Rule specification due to its
parsimony. Our baseline specification tests for a direct association between public debt and the
policy rate. However, it may be that the effects of Fiscal Dominance operate indirectly by
affecting the way central banks respond to domestic objectives under limited fiscal space. As a
robustness check, we estimate alternative specifications that allow domestic objective
coefficients (inflation, output gap, real exchange rate, international reserves) to vary as a function
of the level of public debt. We also consider both de jure and de facto classifications of Inflation
Targeting.

                                                 15
2.3     Developed Market Economies

        Among DMEs, the coefficient on inflation (ranging from 0.148 to 0.217) is highly
significant under Inflation Targeting and contrasts starkly with the broadly insignificant effect of
inflation in the policy rule under the Non-IT regime. The short-run response of the interest rate to
a 1 percentage change in quarterly inflation (which would increase the annual inflation rate by
0.25 percentage points) is estimated to be a rise in the policy rate of about 0.20 percentage points
­ nearly a 1-to-1 response. Given the persistence in policy rates dynamics, the cumulative
response in the policy rate over 4 quarters ( through  + 3) after a 1% rise (0.25% increase in
annual inflation) in period  inflation is estimated to be 61 basis points (based on the short-run
coefficient of 0.181), indicating a considerably aggressive monetary policy over the following
year. Under the Non-IT regime, similar policy responses to inflation are absent. We find that
under Inflation Targeting, the output gap is significantly associated with interest rates, but this is
generally not the case for DME's under Non-IT regimes. Under IT, the coefficient on the output
gap is roughly half of that on inflation.

        External variables also show significant contrasts in importance under IT and Non-IT
regimes. For DMEs, interest rates are positively associated with REER appreciation under the IT
regime, while the coefficient on REER changes is negative and mostly insignificant under Non-
IT regimes. Under IT, over one year, a 1 percent appreciation in the REER is associated with
interest rates, which are 17 basis points higher before controlling for GDP growth. Conditional
on output growth, the same 1 percent appreciation in the REER is associated with a 5 basis point
rise in interest rates over one year. Once the control for GDP growth is included, the coefficient
on REER changes drops considerably (from 0.05 to 0.015), suggesting that underlying economic
growth is jointly influencing the co-movement of monetary policy and exchange rates in DMEs
undertaking IT. Alternatively, this effect is consistent with Uncovered Interest Rate Parity, as
higher interest rates (or the anticipation of) appreciate the nominal exchange rate today hence
lowering the expected return going forward. 13 Among non-IT DMEs, the evidence points slightly


13
  Alternatively, REER appreciation can also be driven by an increase in the country's price index and
therefore, a positive policy response could also be linked to REER appreciation as a response to inflation.
The facts 1) that short-term REER volatility is dominated by the nominal component and 2) our
                                                    16
to Fear of Floating, with REER depreciation associated with higher interest rates (a coefficient of
-0.022). DMEs consider international reserves when setting interest rates under both IT and non-
IT regimes. Among non-IT DMEs, reducing international reserves is associated with higher
interest rates (with estimates ranging from -0.010 to -0.008): A 10 percent reduction
(accumulation) of international reserves is associated with a cumulative 1-year increase
(decrease) in the policy rate of about 30 basis points. This response is consistent with the Fear of
Floating, where the policy rate and international reserves serve as tools for exchange rate
stabilization. In contrast, column 6 shows that DMEs under IT regimes respond about half as
aggressively as the non-IT group in terms of easing (tightening) monetary policy in response to
international reserve inflows (outflows).

          Column 3 documents evidence of fiscal dominance in developed countries under IT
regimes in the form of negative effects of public debt on interest rates ­ this is generally not the
case among non-IT DMEs. The effect remains significant after controlling for GDP growth
(column 4); hence the variation in the debt/GDP ratio that is influencing monetary policy is not
driven by the denominator. The ratio of public debt/GDP is statistically significant at the 5%
level under IT (coefficient estimate of -0.009) and these effects are economically significant:
Over a 4-quarter period, an increase in public debt/GDP ratio of 6% (1-standard deviation of
debt/GDP growth) is associated with a cumulative cut in interest rates of (-18 basis points). Note
that this is the effect of a one-period transitory fiscal shock. A permanent 6% rise in the
debt/GDP ratio would further impact monetary policy, with interest rates expected to be 46 basis
points lower after 4 quarters. The sensitivity to fiscal space under IT suggests debt matters for
monetary policy: The commitment to target inflation appears to loosen with rising debt levels.




2.4       Emerging Market Economies

          Table A6 reports analogous results for EMEs under IT and Non-IT regimes, focusing on
total public debt. Total public debt does not appear informative in the case of EMEs, whether


specification already controls for inflation, suggest that the former explanation is more consistent than the
latter.
                                                     17
under an IT or non-IT regime. Table A7 deepens the analysis and investigates the effects of
foreign currency-denominated public debt. The latter is of particular focus as hard-currency
borrowing through international capital markets is a distinctive feature of EMEs. Moreover,
borrowing in foreign currency adds layers of additional risk to the balance sheet associated with
exchange rate and interest rate fluctuations. Columns 1 and 7 introduce baseline Taylor Rule
variables, with columns 2 and 8 introducing changes in REER and international reserves for IT
and non-IT EMEs, respectively. Columns 3 and 9 introduce foreign currency-denominated
public debt/GDP, with columns 4 and 10 controlling for total public debt/GDP, columns 5 and
11 controlling for debt currency composition (foreign-denominated public debt/total public
debt), and finally columns 6 and 12 additionally controlling for nominal GDP growth.

        In Table A7, interest rate policy in EMEs under IT is significantly smoother than under
Non-IT regimes, with coefficient estimates (about 0.86) being well aligned with their DME IT
counterparts compared to Non-IT EMEs (coefficients ranging from 0.407-0.471). Unlike DMEs,
both IT and Non-IT regimes see significant importance put on inflation rates for interest rate
setting. Coefficient estimates are stable and range between 0.45 and 0.50 under IT, while
coefficients range between 0.70 to 1.13 under Non-IT regimes specifications. These estimates
suggest that short-run responses to a 1% increase in quarterly inflation (0.25% increase in annual
inflation) are particularly aggressive in EMEs relative to their DME counterparts, as the implied
policy response is greater than 1-for-1. The 4-quarter cumulative response to a 1% rise in
quarterly inflation translates to nominal interest rates approximately 1.5 and 1.36 percentage
points higher under IT and Non-IT, respectively (short-run response to a 1% rise in inflation are
+46 and +77 basis points, respectively). The aggressive response to combat inflationary
pressures in EMEs could result from several explanations. In EMEs where the expected inflation
is not well-anchored, risks of accelerated inflation, leading to out-of-control inflationary
processes, and capital flight warrant the aggressive interest rate responses to inflation observed
among EMEs compared to their DME counterparts. In the presence of significant foreign
currency balance sheet exposure, aggressive interest rate responses can additionally stabilize
financial conditions via valuation effects and this, in turn, can help reduce the risk of a vicious
cycle turning into a financial crisis.



                                                 18
       Under the Non-IT regime, the introduction of the exchange rate and international reserves
variables cut the coefficient on inflation in nearly half (from column 7 to 8), implying a
significant degree of exchange rate targeting in non-IT EMEs, which is generally not the case
under IT regimes. A real exchange rate depreciation of 1% is associated with an immediate rise
in the interest rate of 0.43 percentage points after controlling for GDP growth, with a 1-year
cumulative response of +76 basis points, offsetting three-quarters of the exchange rate
depreciation within 4 quarters. International reserves also play a significant role in policy rate
setting among Non-IT EMEs but not among EMEs under the IT regime. Interestingly, IR
accumulation plays a significant role among DMEs under Non-IT regimes as well (a negative
effect on interest rates), but the sign of the coefficient is switched: For EMEs under Non-IT
regimes, changes in international reserves are positively associated with higher interest rates. It is
important to note that the significance of IR is contingent on whether REER changes enter the
regression or not: When removing REER from the regression, the effect of IR becomes
statistically insignificant. Hence, the interaction of managing international reserves and exchange
rate stability must be taken jointly in the determination of policy rates under non-IT regimes.

       Foreign currency-denominated public debt bears negative effects across all regressions,
yielding significant estimates under non-IT regimes once total debt and composition are
controlled for (column 12, a coefficient estimate of -0.367). Among non-IT EMEs, controlling
for debt composition also has a significant and positive effect (coefficient of 0.213), implying
that the larger the proportion of public debt that is denominated in foreign currency, the higher
the interest rate, all else fixed. A one percentage point increase in the proportion of public debt
that is foreign currency-denominated is associated with a +21 basis point rise in the interest rate
in the same period and +37 basis points over 4 quarters. This finding can be interpreted as a
possible risk premium effect, as exchange rate exposure has first-order effects on the credit risk
of the institution; hence international lenders require additional compensation to bear such risks.
Countries most susceptible to rises in debt composition are those who do not hold a large amount
of hard currency debt initially. The hypothetical country which already holds all debt in hard
currency is not expected to be hit with this risk premium effect in the interest rate (since the
proportion cannot exceed 100% of total public debt). Once we control for this debt composition
effect, we see significant negative effects on non-IT EME interest rates associated with the total

                                                 19
hard currency debt held (in relation to GDP). Possible evidence of fiscal dominance is found
among non-IT EMEs, with a one percentage point increase in hard currency public debt
associated with interest rates which are 37 basis points lower the same period, and 63 basis
points lower after 4 quarters. Non-IT EMEs have significant coefficients on both foreign
currency public debt/GDP and the debt composition variables, hence through such interactions,
the overall impact on interest rates from hard currency debt is non-linear. While coefficient signs
are consistent among EMEs under de jure inflation targeting, we do not find statistical
significance.

       To summarize, extending the baseline Taylor Rule model is important in characterizing
the monetary reaction function, as observed by significant associations between variation in a
variety of external variables and interest rates among inflation targeters and non-IT countries
alike. Using de jure inflation targeting classification, we find evidence consistent with fiscal
dominance among DMEs under IT, where interest rates tend to be negatively associated with
rising public debt levels. In the case of EMEs under non-IT regimes, we also find that the
composition of public debt matters, as larger proportions of debt denominated in foreign
currency, are associated with higher interest rates: a risk premium effect. The interest rate effect
evidenced among EMEs following non-IT regimes is non-linear and depends on both debt
composition and total hard currency debt/GDP ratio. In the following section, we investigate
whether a different classification method of IT versus non-IT regimes paints a different picture.
Thus far, we have relied on the IMF's explicit de jure classification. In practice, however,
countries may target inflation, or operate hybrid monetary regimes without explicitly stating so.
The following section takes a de facto approach, ranking countries in terms of their Fear of
Floating manifested by their nominal exchange rate stability patterns. Classifying groups by
exchange rate stability provides an alternative approach for identifying groups of countries for
which debt overhang may interact with monetary policy.

       Moreover, we want to emphasize that the fiscal dominance and risk premium effects are
possible interpretations of the above results (and subsequent results), and more data and a longer
sampling period would be required to test these interpretations fully. For example, additional
data on debt maturity profile, sovereign spreads, and the extent of capital controls would be
necessary. Countries committed not to default will hold larger reserves and work harder to have
                                                 20
longer debt maturity. Also, data on local currency public and private debt would be necessary to
control for the effects of financial repression. 14



      3. IT, Exchange Rate Stability, and Fiscal Dominance

          In the previous section, we employ a de jure method of monetary regime classification
and uncovered mixed evidence of fiscal dominance across the sample. However, many countries
implicitly follow an inflation targeting rule without a public announcement. By taking a de facto
approach to monetary regime classification, we aim to circumvent this issue and provide an
additional set of results to complement those from the previous section.

          Our de facto approach involves classifying countries by the volatility of their nominal
effective exchange rate (NEER). Figure 4 shows sorted quarterly NEER return volatility by
country. The idea is that countries with low exchange rate volatility are more likely to follow a
de facto exchange rate targeting rule. Analogously, countries with high exchange rate volatility
are de facto currency floaters, which suggests that such countries target an alternative nominal
anchor ­ the interest rate to control inflation. Alternatively, and particularly for EMEs, countries
with volatile exchange rates are subject to greater variance in valuation effects when holding
foreign currency liabilities. Therefore, in these countries, monetary policy may be subject to
greater fiscal pressures in an effort to stabilize the balance sheet.

          It goes without saying that exchange rate volatility is determined by many things aside
from monetary regime, hence a clean de facto proxy for IT is difficult to identify. For example,
exchange rate volatility among EMEs is largely impacted by global commodity price fluctuations
(something we condition on in Section 4). Chief among unobserved factors are the actual foreign
exchange intervention (FXI) and the perceived credibility of the central banks. Several papers
highlight the impact of FXI on exchange rate volatility (See Boris and Shin (2019), Adler,



14
     The interdependence of active research management, foreign currency debt, and fiscal capacity could
also give rise to multiple equilibria in the financial stability; see Bocola and Lorenzoni (2018). Therefore,
while we keep these interpretations for consistency, it is important to keep an open mind to other possible
explanations.
                                                      21
Lisack, and Mano (2019), and Fratzcher et al. (2019)). Adler, Lama, and Medina (2019) show in
a small open economy model that where the central bank is perfectly credible, FXI can improve
macroeconomic outcomes by successfully stabilizing both output and inflation in response to
foreign disturbances, but without credibility, the FXI policies entail a trade-off by reducing
output volatility at the expense of inducing higher inflation volatility. Davis, Fujiwara, and Wang
(2018) provide reduced-form empirical results showing that as central banks become less
credible, they are more likely to adopt a pegged exchange rate, and the tendency to peg depends
on trade openness, while in a model with "loose commitment," as credibility falls, either an
inflation target or a pegged exchange rate is more likely to be adopted. Further research should
benefit from several case studies with detailed FXI data and institutional analysis of central bank
credibility. Because of the may factors driving exchange rate volatility, as a robustness test we
consider inflation volatility as another measure of de facto inflation targeting. These results are
provided in the Appendix.

       We first separate the sample into developed and emerging market countries. The second
step is to then sort within each group, countries into three quantiles based on their nominal
exchange rate volatility. This yields a low, medium, and high volatility "bin" of countries for
both DMEs and EMEs. Table A9a shows countries by volatility bin. Among DMEs, bins 1 and 2
(the low and mid-volatility bins) are comprised of four countries each. Bin 3, the high-volatility
bin, contains three countries: Australia, Japan, and New Zealand. Notably, Australia and New
Zealand are commodity-intensive DMEs. The United States is classified as a low-NEER
volatility country (bin 1) reflecting the challenges of de facto monetary regime classification as it
is debatable whether the U.S. is true de facto non-IT. Aside from being the dominant reserve
currency, the U.S. may not fit the standard IT model as more than 2/3rds of global GDP come
from countries that use the U.S. Dollar as a de facto anchor (See Carney (2019)). This may be a
key reason for the low REER volatility of the US.

       The three bins for EMEs contain six countries each. The low-volatility bin contains
China, Czech Republic, India, Israel, Malaysia, Thailand, while the high NEER volatility bin, bin
3, is composed of: Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Russia, South Africa, and Turkey. Table A9b
reports median statistics of key variables across respective volatility quantiles. An interesting
pattern among EMEs is that foreign currency-denominated public debt ratios, inflation, and

                                                 22
policy rates all rise monotonically with NEER volatility. Comparing statistics in the high-
volatility quantiles (bin 3) between EMEs and DMEs, median statistics are strictly larger in the
high-volatility EME group, as not only are they more leveraged compared to their high-volatility
DME counterparts, they also tend to experience higher inflation, interest rates, and nominal GDP
growth.

          With de facto groups in hand, we estimate the full Taylor Rule regression model, which
includes public debt variables. For the DMEs, we use public debt/GDP measures, analogous to
specifications 4 and 8 of Table A5. For the EMEs, we report results using foreign currency-
denominated debt measures and controls 15 similar to specifications 6 and 12 of Table A7. Tables
A8 and A9 (and Figures 5 and 6) report regression results by NEER volatility bins for DMEs and
EMEs, respectively.

3.1       Developed Market Economies

          In Table A8 (Figure 5), we report the results for developed market economies across
volatility bins. The persistence of the lagged interest rate is stable across groups while the
coefficients on inflation (ranging from 0.008 to 0.20) are highest for the high-volatility bin. The
interest rate response to a 1% increase in quarterly inflation over four quarters is 67 bps for this
group (high volatility). A 1 percent jump in quarterly inflation is equal to a 0.25 percent increase
in annual inflation, hence de facto "inflation targeters," or high-NEER volatility DMEs,
aggressively respond on a greater-than 1-for-1 basis. A statistically significant coefficient
(estimate of 0.09) is also reported for Bin 1, the low-volatility group. This group contains the
U.S. and Hong Kong ­which pegs its exchange rate to the U.S. Dollar and therefore also mimics
its inflation-targeting monetary policy. This group has a four-quarter response about half as
strong as the high volatility group: a 1 percent jump in quarterly inflation is met with a 31 basis
point rise in the interest rate over the following year, which is slightly greater than a 1-for-1
response. While bin 2, the mid-volatility DMEs do not show a significant coefficient on



15
     We also estimate the EME regressions using total public debt/GDP only, without foreign currency debt
variables, but results are not reported since it is not the focus of the study. As shown in the de jure
analysis, total public debt is not as important of a factor for Fiscal Dominance among emerging markets
relative to foreign currency denominated debt holdings.
                                                      23
inflation, they are the only group of countries with a highly significant estimate on the GDP gap
(estimate of 0.092).

        Changes in the real exchange rate show significant effects and interesting heterogeneity
across bins. DMEs with low exchange rate volatility (bin 1) tend to respond to exchange rate
depreciation with higher interest rates while DMEs in bin 2 respond to depreciation with lower
interest rates (coefficients on REER change are -0.027, 0.029, -0.005, for bin 1, 2 and 3,
respectively). The negative association between exchange rates and interest rates in bin 1 may be
due to the concentration of exchange rate targeters: Hong Kong, Singapore, and Switzerland all
have histories of intervening via policy to stabilize the currency. Bin 2, containing Canada,
Norway, and Sweden, all of which are oil-exporting countries, are more likely to see exchange
rate appreciation with a rise in commodity prices; therefore a positive interest rate response to
currency appreciation may be an attempt to curb future inflation and overheating related to a
positive terms-of-trade shock. A 1-year cumulative interest rate response to a quarterly REER
depreciation of 1 percent is +9.4 and -9.7 basis points for bin 1 and 2, respectively (the
coefficient is statistically insignificant for bin 3). While the coefficient on REER is insignificant
for bin 3, we do find a significant interest rate response to changes in international reserves
(estimate of -0.003). The negative effect suggests easing monetary policy in response to inflows
of international reserves. A 1-year cumulative interest rate response to a 10 percent increase in
international reserves would amount to a rate cut of -10 basis points.

        Among DMEs, the effect of the public debt/GDP ratio on interest rates is more negative
for higher volatility bins, with statistically significant coefficients among bins 2 and 3. It appears
monetary policy is most constrained by debt positions among de facto inflation targeters, or
countries lying in bin 3. For these high-NEER volatility DMEs, larger public debt/GDP ratios
tend to suppress interest rates, and the effect is statistically significant, consistent with the
analysis in Section 2 which finds the monetary policy of DMEs under de jure IT regimes
sensitive to debt levels. Public Debt/GDP ratios are insignificant among low-NEER volatility
DMEs, and statistically significant among the middle group (coefficients are 0.004, -0.009, -
0.011, respectively). Taking estimates from the high-volatility group (bin 3), the 4-quarter
interest rate response to a transitory 6% increase in the public debt/GDP ratio (1-standard
deviation) is -22 basis points. However, a permanent 6% increase in the debt ratio implies an

                                                   24
expected monetary easing of -59 basis points over a similar horizon. In contrast, the low-
volatility group has a coefficient on public debt/GDP, which is statistically indifferent from zero.

3.2     Emerging Market Economies

       Table A9 (Figure 6) reports the results of the de facto classification analysis for EMEs.
Again, the countries are sorted into three bins by NEER volatility, with bin 1 (3) containing
EMEs with the lowest (highest) NEER volatility over the sample period. While we do observe
coefficients on inflation monotonically increasing with NEER volatility (coefficients are 0.12,
0.36, 0.93, respectively and statistically significant), we don't observe similar patterns with GDP
Gap (coefficients are 0.018, 0.100, -0.034). Upon inspecting the countries within each bin, the
pattern in inflation coefficients is consistent with the country characteristics across bins: Bin 1
contains countries that are mostly manufacturing-based (China, India, Malaysia, Thailand, etc.),
with anchored inflation, with limited need for NEER changes. Bin 2 is composed of a mixed
composition (Chile, Indonesia, South Korea, Mexico, etc.) with greater exposure to terms-of-
trade shocks, and with lesser anchored inflation, while bin 3, the high-volatility bin, tend to be
countries with governance challenges (Argentina, Brazil, Russia, Turkey, etc.), with a history of
inflation and limited anchoring, constraining thereby reactions dealing with output (see Vegh et
al. (2017)). This view is supported in Table A9b, reporting that both median foreign currency-
denominated debt levels and inflation rates are highest among bin 3 (and lowest among bin 1).

       A 1% rise in quarterly inflation corresponds with a 4-quarter interest rate increase of +42,
+110, +200 basis points, for the low, medium and high NEER volatility bins, respectively
(contemporaneous, short-run responses are equivalent to the coefficient estimates: +12, +36, +93
basis points). More aggressive responses from high NEER volatility EMEs are consistent with
those countries following de facto inflation targeting, although these responses are considerably
larger than those of de facto inflation targeting DMEs. One explanation for this may be the
additional risk premium EMEs require to incorporate into their policy rates when battling higher
inflation rates. This scenario can be related to the relatively weaker anchoring of inflation
expectations in EMEs compared to DMEs, warranting both more aggressive responses by the
monetary authority and higher risk premia demanded by investors facing hyperinflationary risks.
GDP gaps enter statistically significant among bin 1 and bin 2 (coefficients of 0.018 and 0.100),
while bin 3, the high volatility bin, has an insignificant coefficient estimate. Bin 2, the set of

                                                  25
EMEs bearing relatively high terms-of-trade exposure, sensibly puts more importance on output
gap fluctuations when setting monetary policy compared to the other subgroups of emerging
markets.

           Changes in the REER enter as highly significant among high-volatility EMEs, but not
bins 1 or 2. The coefficient for bin 3 is -0.28, which implies that these EMEs tend to increase
interest rates by about 28 basis points for a 1% depreciation in the real exchange rate in the short-
run, with a 1-year interest rate response of +59 basis points. International reserves do not enter
significantly into any specification. Under de jure IT classifications, both the real exchange rate
and international reserves entered significantly for EMEs under non-IT regimes. It's interesting
to note that in contrast, the de facto analysis paints a different picture. We find that de facto
inflation targeters, or EMEs with high NEER volatility (bin 3), respond strongly to exchange rate
depreciation, compared to de facto non-IT (low NEER volatility) EMEs (bin 1).

           Foreign currency-denominated debt enters significantly and negatively across all bins
(i.e., significant fiscal dominance effects found in both de facto non-IT and IT EMEs) and is
increasing in exchange rate volatility with a large increase from bin 2 to bin 3 (coefficients of -
0.19, -0.21, and -0.45, respectively). Controls for total public debt/GDP (coefficients of 0.007,
0.014, 0.19) and the proportion of public debt denominated in foreign currency (coefficients of
0.066, 0.064, and 0.23) enter significantly and positively for bin 3, the high-volatility subgroup
of EMEs. Again, these results closely resemble those of the non-IT EME group under the de jure
classification. However, when we classify based on a simple de facto rule like binning by
exchange rate volatility, those more likely to act as inflation targeters (i.e., high-NEER volatility
EMEs) appear to have monetary policy more constrained by fiscal factors. 16 As noted before,
this result is at odds with the findings of the de jure analysis, where de jure IT EMEs exhibit no
evidence of fiscal dominance. In Section 4, we find that commodity-intensity is the primary
driver of fiscal dominance effects being found across high NEER volatility EMEs. Stratifying the




16
     A sharper identification of this possible channel requires additional data, including debt maturity
profile, sovereign spreads, the extent and efficacy of macro prudential regulations capital controls,
international reserve levels, etc.
                                                       26
high NEER volatility group by commodity intensity shows that non-commodity intensive EMEs
(with high NEER volatility) do not exhibit significant fiscal dominance effects.

        Total public debt and the composition of public debt, both having positive coefficients,
can be interpreted as a risk premium effect. Possible fiscal dominance effects of foreign
currency-denominated debt/GDP is negative and offsets the risk premium effect as the level of
hard currency debt rises. The significant coefficients across these debt variables reflect a non-
linear relationship between foreign currency-denominated debt and monetary policy among this
set of EMEs. As mentioned in the previous section, as the composition of total public debt
approaches 100% hard currency, the fiscal dominance effect tends to dominate any risk premium
effect on the interest rate. Under this scenario, a 1 percentage point increase in the hard currency
debt/GDP ratio would also increase the total public debt/GDP ratio by 1 percentage point.
Because the coefficient estimates on foreign currency debt are larger than that on total public
debt in absolute value, the net effect on the interest rate will be negative. In a later section,
simulations are run to estimate the total effect of a transitory increase in the hard currency
debt/GDP ratio for bin 3, the high NEER volatility group (see Figure 7). Bins 1 and 2 have
statistically significant estimates on foreign currency debt/GDP but not on controls for total
public debt or debt composition, hence the effect is relatively linear for these countries: a 1
percentage point transitory increase in the hard currency debt/GDP ratio corresponds with
interest rates roughly -65 basis points lower over a 4-quarter period for both bins (-170 basis
points lower from a permanent increase).

        To summarize, under our simple de facto classification in which we bin groups of
countries by their nominal exchange rate volatility, we find evidence of possible fiscal
dominance among both DMEs and EMEs, as monetary policy is constrained by fiscal space (or
lack thereof). Among DMEs, total public debt/GDP is associated with lower policy rates on
average, and the effect size is larger for high exchange-rate volatility countries, the de facto
inflation targeters. Among EMEs, the channel is more nuanced, but the negative effects of debt
on interest rates are significant across all volatility bins. The fiscal dominance effect specifically
transmits through the level of foreign-denominated debt, and the impacts on interest rates are
non-linear as they also depend on the total level of public debt/GDP and the composition of
public debt (which are both functions of the level of foreign currency-denominated debt).

                                                   27
   The de facto analysis bears some similarities with the de jure analysis, while also
highlighting key differences and challenges that come with classifying monetary regimes.
Particularly, among EMEs, the de facto analysis highlights that interest rates under de facto IT
(or high NEER volatility EMEs) may be more sensitive to the fiscal position of the country. This
does not align with the results from the de jure analysis, which shows that under de jure IT,
EMEs don't show significant evidence of fiscal dominance. To reconcile the contrasting results
among EMEs under de jure IT vs. de facto IT, recall that NEER volatility isn't a clean monetary
regime proxy for EMEs, as exchange rate volatility is determined by a variety of factors
including in large part exposure to commodity fluctuations. To account for this, in the following
section, we separate EMEs into commodity-intensive and non-commodity intensive countries
and show that the large fiscal dominance effect among high NEER volatility EMEs is completely
driven by commodity-intensive economies. That is, after controlling for commodity intensity, the
high NEER volatility group does not report significant fiscal dominance effects, which aligns
with the results found among EMEs under de jure IT. Separately, we consider binning by
inflation volatility rather than NEER volatility (Table A27). Upon doing so, we show that
countries with high NEER volatility also exhibit high inflation volatility (correlation of 0.71).
That is, NEER volatility may be proxying for de facto non-IT rather than IT, given that countries
with the highest NEER volatility also exhibit the highest inflation volatility. While this highlights
the challenges of de facto classification, it further reconciles findings of non-IT countries
exhibiting evidence consistent with fiscal dominance.



   4. Fiscal Dominance, IT and Commodity Exposure in Emerging Markets

       Within emerging markets, there is large heterogeneity across economies in terms of their
reliance on key commodities. Moreover, our de facto classification using NEER volatility is
subject to confounding, as many factors other than monetary regime drive exchange rate
volatility. Commodity exposure is one of these key factors. In addition, our NEER volatility
classification differs from the extent of exchange rate misalignment. For commodity-intensive
countries, the unhedged risks of commodity-price volatility for the EME countries in our sample
could imply that the optimal monetary policy may substantially deviate from inflation targeting
in the presence of incomplete financial markets; see Senay and Sutherland (2019) for a

                                                 28
theoretical discussion on models with a single asset and multiple assets. This could explain why
our results for the EME sample are subject to the classification of IT, as seen in Section 2 and 3,
depending on whether we use the de jure or the de facto approaches.

           To pin down drivers of fiscal dominance across EMEs, we further split our EME sample
into two subgroups: commodity-intensive countries and countries which are not commodity-
intensive. A country is defined as commodity-intensive if at least 25% of exports are in
commodities 17. By leveraging the IMF data on commodity-exporting countries along with UN
Comtrade statistics, we compile our list of commodity-intensive EMEs: Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, and South Africa. The first cut of the analysis ignores the
monetary regime and estimates the Taylor Rule regression specification (which includes foreign
currency-denominated debt, the same specification as Table A6) on non-commodity and
commodity EMEs separately. The second set of results incorporate de jure inflation targeting
regimes, thus investigating how monetary policy setting differs between commodity and non-
commodity inflation targeters. Finally, the third set of results apply our de facto classification of
the monetary regime via realized NEER volatility bins. We compare commodity versus non-
commodity EMEs, which have the highest realized exchange rate volatility ­ countries that fall
within the third quantile (bin 3, high volatility) from the previous analysis. Because EME bin 3
coincidentally contains all commodity-intensive countries except for Turkey, the non-commodity
intensive comparison group constituents are Turkey plus non-commodity EMEs from bin 2,
second highest quantile in terms of exchange rate volatility.

           Table A10 reports regression estimates upon splitting the EMEs into commodity-
intensive and non-commodity countries. All three pairs of results suggest that commodity-
intensive countries follow an interest rate rule, which puts much more weight (ranging from a
factor of 1.5 to 3) on inflation rates compared to non-commodity EMES. Given commodity
countries and their exposure to international market volatility, spillovers through terms-of-trade
shocks can be an important source of inflation that these central banks are required to lean
against with aggressive monetary policy.




17
     We apply a definition similar to that found in Aizenman et al. (2011).
                                                       29
       The first two columns of Table A10 are not conditional on the monetary regime; rather,
we look at EMEs based on commodity-intensity and ignore whether the country targets inflation
or the exchange rate. The role of international reserves and exchange rate fluctuations in setting
monetary policy among EMEs is driven specifically by the commodity-intensive countries.
Changes in the REER and international reserves are statistically significant for commodity-
intensive EMEs, and moreover, the effects are significantly different from their non-commodity
counterparts. A negative coefficient (estimate of -0.22) on REER changes and a positive
coefficient (estimate of 0.046) in international reserves suggest that commodity EMEs respond
with higher interest rates in the face of exchange rate depreciation and inflows of international
reserves. Positive global commodity price shocks can lead to capital inflows, overheating and
inducing inflationary pressures in such economies, hence the positive coefficient on international
reserves may reflect the joint response of reserve accumulation to prevent an over-strengthening
of the exchange rate in the presence of capital inflows plus the interest rate response to
inflationary pressures. We do not see a significant effect of international reserves on interest
rates among non-commodity EMEs. Finally, foreign currency debt/GDP is significant and
negatively associated with interest rates for both commodity and non-commodity EMEs
(estimate of -0.34 for commodity EMEs, -0.15 for non-commodity EMEs), and the effect size is
quantitively larger for commodity-intensive EMEs. Controlling for public debt composition, we
see that the proportion of debt that is denominated in hard currency is also statistically significant
across both subgroups of countries (estimate of 0.21 for commodity EMEs, 0.041 for non-
commodity EMEs), but quantitatively larger among commodity-intensive EMEs. Hence, both
fiscal dominance and risk premium effects of hard currency debt accumulation on interest rates
are relatively stronger in commodity-intensive emerging markets.

       The second pair (columns 3 and 4) of Table A10 conditions on de jure inflation targeting
regimes via IMF classifications. Under the de jure classification, both commodity-intensive EME
under IT and non-commodity intensive EMEs under IT have significant responses to lagged
policy rates and inflation, with commodity-intensive EMEs responding more aggressively to
inflation compared to non-commodity intensive EMEs (inflation coefficients of 0.504 vs. 0.369,
respectively). While commodity-intensive inflation targeters respond significantly to output gaps
(estimate of 0.066), this is generally not the case for non-commodity intensive inflation targeters
(based on the de jure classification). Conditioning on de jure inflation targeting regimes renders
                                                 30
the coefficient on the real exchange rate statistically insignificant for both commodity and non-
commodity EMEs. The estimate on international reserves (coefficient of 0.019) however,
remains significant at the 10% level for commodity EMEs but is not significantly different from
zero for non-commodity EMEs. Interestingly, foreign currency public debt/GDP is significant
and negative (estimate of -0.18) among non-commodity EME inflation targeters, but not
significant among commodity-intensive inflation targeters. It is important to note that these
results are under the de jure classification of inflation targeting. Under our simple de facto
classification, a very different picture emerges.

         The final pair (columns 5 and 6) of Table A10 applies our de facto inflation targeting
classification defined by NEER volatility bins with high levels of exchange rate volatility. Here,
we take the commodity EMEs with the high NEER volatility and compare them against non-
commodity EMEs also with high NEER volatility. Again, lagged interest rates and inflation enter
significantly, with the coefficient on inflation twice as large among commodity countries than
non-commodity countries. The GDP gap does not enter significantly for either group.
Commodity EMEs under de facto IT respond to exchange rate depreciation with higher interest
rates (coefficient of -0.25) while non-commodity EMEs under IT is statistically unresponsive.
Finally, a sharp difference under the de facto IT classification is that fiscal variables are
statistically significant for commodity-intensive, high NEER volatility EMEs, while this is
generally not the case for non-commodity, high NEER volatility EMEs. Hence, after
conditioning on commodity intensity, the de facto results match those of the de jure analysis
(which found that EMEs under IT did not show evidence of fiscal dominance, while non-IT
EMEs did). Evidence of possible fiscal dominance can be displayed by the coefficient on
foreign currency-denominated debt/GDP (estimate of -0.45 for commodity-intensive countries),
with higher hard currency debt levels associated with lower interest rates. Risk premium effects
are evident as positive coefficients on controls for total public debt/GDP and debt composition
(0.17 and 0.28, respectively). Comparable estimates are insignificant in the non-commodity
group.

         To summarize, by stratifying EMEs further by commodity intensity, we sharpen our
analysis and identify an additional potential factor that drives possible fiscal dominance effects
in emerging market economies. Inflation plays a much larger role in interest rate policy for

                                                    31
commodity-intensive countries compared to non-commodity EMEs. When we do not condition
on the monetary regime, we find that commodity-intensive EMEs also consider fluctuations in
the real exchange rate and international reserves when determining interest rates while non-
commodities do not. We then condition on monetary regime using both de jure IT classification
and de facto NEER volatilities. Under the de jure classification, the output gap plays a noticeably
larger role in interest rate setting for commodity-intensive inflation targeters, but not for their
non-commodity inflation targeting counterparts. We also see that under the de jure classification,
evidence of fiscal dominance is present among non-commodity inflation targeting EMEs. De
facto classification based on exchange rate volatility tells a different story. Exchange rate
depreciations are associated with higher interest rates in commodity-intensive, high-NEER
volatility EMEs but not the non-commodity intensive group. Finally, fiscal variables are highly
significant among commodity-based, high-NEER volatility EMEs, but not among high-NEER
volatility, non-commodity EMEs (aligning with the de jure analysis). Consistent with the
previous sections, non-linear effects of hard currency debt accumulation are present, as fiscal
dominance effects of lower interest rates offset risk premium effects of higher interest rates. One
note is the association between exchange rate volatility, our de facto measure of the monetary
regime, and commodity intensity. We observe that commodity intensity is positively associated
with exchange rate volatility. This association makes it crucial to stratify the high volatility
group of emerging market countries on commodity intensity as done in this exercise.

       Importantly, we find that among high exchange rate volatility EMEs, it is those who are
commodity-intensive that show the strongest evidence of debt levels influencing policy interest
rates (non-commodity intensive, high-NEER volatility EMEs do not). This result reconciles the
issue of `flipped' estimates for de jure IT (Section 2) and de facto IT EMEs (Section 3) in the
previous sections and suggests that for EMEs, commodity exposure is a key factor separate from
the monetary regime, motivating fiscal dominance driven monetary policy.



   5. Non-Linear Effects of Foreign-Denominated Public Debt on Interest Rates

       Thus far, the non-linear effects of public debt on the policy rate have been mentioned in
several sections. This is particularly the case among EMEs, as many of the results suggest that
while foreign currency-denominated public debt/GDP has a negative effect on interest rates, total
                                                  32
public debt/GDP and the debt composition (percentage of total public debt that is denominated in
foreign currency) tend to have positive effects. Moreover, because these variables are interrelated
(foreign currency debt cannot change without changing total public debt or changing the debt
composition - except in the limiting case where 100% of public debt is foreign currency-
denominated debt), total effects are not obvious. Table A14 and Figure 8 show the distribution
FX Debt/Total public debt by EME, for the beginning and end of the sample, while Figure 9
plots the EME average over time. To sharpen our analysis, we compute now the total (short-run)
effect on the policy rate across a spectrum of foreign currency debt/total public debt levels (or
`debt composition' ratios). The simulation is carried out for three separate iterations covered in
the previous sections: We compare de jure IT Vs. Non-IT EMEs, de facto high-NEER volatility
EMEs Vs. de facto low-NEER volatility EMEs, and high-NEER volatility commodity-intensive
EMEs Vs. high-NEER volatility non-commodity-intensive EMEs. The total effect of a rise in FX
denominated public debt/GDP can be derived from the regression coefficients and fiscal values
taken from final three terms in the EME regression specification (excluding the error term for
simplicity):

                                           
                         =  +     +     +    ,
                                            

where / is FX denominated public debt/GDP, / is total public debt/GDP, and
/ is the debt composition, or FX denominated public debt/total public debt ratio. The
coefficients { ,  ,  } are their associated estimated regression coefficients. To compute the
change in the policy rate for a unit rise in FX denominated public debt/GDP; first, we rewrite the
RHS expression as

                                          
                               +      +    ,
                                          
                                         
and then differentiating with respect to  yields us the effect of a change in the FX debt/GDP

ratio on the interest rate as a function of the proportion of FX debt to total public debt, or

                                    1     
                              =  +     +    .
                                           
                                     
                                      




                                                  33
The expression above allows us to easily see that the estimated total effect of rising FX debt on
the interest rate is non-linear in the proportion of FX-denominated debt held. Additionally, the
total effect can be positive (e.g., dominating `risk premium effects') or negative (e.g., dominating
`fiscal dominance effects) depending on the signs of the coefficients.

       In our simulation study, we constrain the proportion of FX debt to total Public debt to lie
between 10% and 75%, as the maximum observation within the sample is Argentina in Q2 2002
which realized an FX debt to total Public Debt ratio of 71%. This period was around the end of
Argentina's currency board, a period of fixed exchange rate where the policy interest rate was
mostly passive or non-existent until the collapse. Figure 7 reports the interest rate responses to a
1 percentage point rise (that is, an increase in the ratio of 0.01, not to be confused with a 1%
increase which would depend on the initial level of FX debt/GDP) in the FX public debt/GDP
ratio as a function of FX public debt/Total public debt.

   5.1 De Jure IT Vs. Non-IT EMEs

       The left-most chart shows that under IT, the sensitivity of interest rates to fiscal variables
is much lower than under non-IT regimes. In contrast, non-IT regimes can have economically
large positive responses to rising FX debt/GDP (e.g., +25 basis points when 20% of total public
debt is FX-denominated) or negative responses (e.g., -20 basis points when 60% of total public
debt is FX-denominated). The wide range of effects highlights the importance of debt
composition under non-IT regimes in predicting whether rising FX debt leads to higher or lower
policy rates.

   5.2 High NEER Volatility Vs. Low NEER Volatility EMEs

       The center chart examines countries separated by our de facto classification, high versus
low NEER volatility. The high NEER volatility group has a monotonically decreasing interest
rate responses to rising FX debt/GDP; the effect is significantly (statistically and economically)
large. A 20% FX debt proportion would predict a +50 basis point increase in the policy rate for a
1 percentage point rise in the FX debt/GDP ratio. In contrast, 60% FX debt proportion implies a -
-13 basis point cut in the policy rate for the same rise in FX debt/GDP. The low NEER volatility
group shows a relatively stable interest rate response function. A negative (-13 to -20 basis
points) response to a 1 percentage point rise in FX debt/GDP is implied regardless of the FX debt
proportion of total public debt.
                                                 34
   5.3 High NEER Volatility: Commodity-Intensive Vs. Non-Commodity-Intensive EMEs

       The chart displayed on the right compares high NEER volatility EMEs, stratified based
on whether they are commodity-intensive or not. The results confirm what was reported in
previous sections: commodity-intensive EMEs are driving the overall effects found among high
NEER volatility EMEs. The interest rate response function follows a similar pattern as the high
vs. low NEER volatility char, with economically risk premium effects dominating in the form of
higher policy rates when the FX debt composition is small - and negative fiscal dominance
effects dominating as the FX debt composition increases.

   5.4 Discussion

   Our baseline simulations point to the economic significance of monetary-regime choice on
the currency composition of external debts. Ogrokhina and Rodriguez (2019, 2018) find in the
data that financially integrated inflation-targeting countries have lower foreign currency shares in
their external debt compared to non-targeting countries. They find such a reduction of the foreign
currency share in foreign-held total sovereign debt but no effect on domestic-held debt or non-
US dollar share, i.e., the euro share. Note that the currency composition of external debts also
depends on the macroprudential policies in place. Using structural panel vector autoregressions
that identify both monetary and macroprudential policy actions, Kim and Mehrotra (2018) show
that tighter macroprudential policies used to contain credit growth also have a significant
negative impact on macroeconomic aggregates such as real GDP and the price level; as such the
similar effects of monetary and macroprudential policies may suggest a complementary use of
the two policies at normal times. We are currently studying the association between monetary
regimes, macroprudential policies, and both sovereign and private external debts, focusing on
systemically-relevant borrowers.


   6. Robustness checks

Debt/Tax Base in Emerging Market Economies

       Among emerging markets, the tax base is often an alternative measure used to assess
fiscal space as it is more representative of the underlying country [see Aizenman et al. (2019)].
To establish the robustness of our findings, the baseline regressions using de jure and de facto
                                                35
classifications are re-estimated for EMEs, but traditional debt overhang variables that were
normalized by GDP are instead normalized by tax revenue. We take 5-year moving averages of
tax revenues to reduce seasonality and ensure that the variation of debt overhang is dominated by
the fluctuations in debt rather than economic growth.

       Table A11 and A12 report similar baseline regressions on EMEs analogous to A6 and A7
but replacing foreign currency denominated public debt/GDP and total public debt/GDP replaced
with foreign currency denominated public debt/tax base (5-year moving average of the tax base)
and total public debt/tax base, respectively. Using tax base yields results consistent with the
original analysis. Under the de jure classification, emerging markets under non-IT regimes still
respond significantly and negatively to higher levels of foreign currency denominated debt
(columns 11 and 12 of Table A11) and positively to the proportion of foreign currency
denominated debt to total public debt.

       Table A13 shows the results under de facto classification similar to the initial analysis
reported in A9. Again, results remain consistent with the initial analysis: Significant negative
coefficients on the foreign currency public debt variables for the subgroups of EMEs with high
NEER volatility (our de facto inflation targeters), along with significant positive effects (risk
premium effects) of public debt/tax and debt composition on interest rates. In Table A9, possible
fiscal dominance effects were present in the lower volatility subgroups too, with significant
negative coefficients on foreign currency debt/GDP among bins 1 and 2 ­ though to a far lesser
extent than the effect size in bin 3. The significant effects among bins 1 and 2 are not present
when replacing GDP with tax revenue, though overall, our main results remain consistent
regardless of using GDP or tax revenue.

Lagged Debt Variables

       In the main analysis, fiscal variables are contemporaneous, as policy rates are regressed
on debt ratios of the same period. As a robustness check, we run two sets of exercises where
lagged fiscal variables are used instead, with the hope of alleviating some potential endogeneity
issues arising from the contemporaneous specification. The first set of exercises introduce fiscal
variables lagged by 1 quarter, and the second set of exercises lag fiscal variables by 4 quarters.
The standard de jure IT/non-IT regressions are then re-run (Tables A15 and A16), along with the
standard de facto NEER volatility regressions (Tables A17 and A18).
                                                 36
       In Table A15, the benchmark de jure analysis is repeated using lagged debt variables for
DMEs. The significant negative effect of public debt/GDP on interest rates among DMEs
disappears when substituting the contemporaneous variable with either 1-quarter or 4-quarter
lags. However, when repeating the de jure analysis for EMEs, the effect of FX public debt/GDP
remains highly significant and negative under either 1-quarter or 4-quarter lags (Table A16).

       The de facto analysis, where countries are grouped by NEER volatility, is repeated with
lagged debt variables. For DMEs (Table A17), the significant negative effect among bin 3 (the
high NEER volatility group) disappears when lagging Public debt/GDP by 1 or 4 quarters, while
the negative effect within bin 2 (the mid NEER volatility group) remains statistically significant
and negative under lagged debt variables ­ consistent with the bin 2 results found in the initial
analysis. The de facto analysis for EMEs is robust under lagged debt variables. Both 1-quarter
and 4-quarter lagged specifications result in statistically significant, negative coefficients on FX
debt/GDP for bin 2 and bin 3. Bin 3, the high NEER volatility group, has the largest negative
coefficients, consistent with the initial analysis. Bin 1, the low NEER volatility EMEs, reported a
statistically significant and negative effect of FX debt/GDP on the interest rate over the initial
analysis where debt variables entered contemporaneously. Under lagged debt variables, the
significant effect on bin 1 EMEs disappears.

       Overall, the robustness check with lagged variables suggests that the results of EMEs are
most stable. Both in the de jure and de facto analyses, substituting lagged debt variables did not
generally change the sign or significance of the effect of FX debt/GDP on policy rates. The one
exception is in the de facto analysis, the significance of the effect on the low NEER volatility
group disappears. The robustness check presents mixed performance among DMEs, with the de
jure analysis results rendered insignificant when substituting in lagged debt variables while the
de facto analysis maintained some degree of stability among the coefficient estimates of interest.

Instrumental Variables

Identifying the causal effect of debt on interest rate policy is admittedly challenging. However,
as a robustness check we apply a geographical instrument for a country's debt ­ the average debt
of other countries. Specifically, we take the IV strategy of Checherita-Westphal, Cristina &
Rother, Philipp (2012). The basic idea is to instrument country i's debt using the average value
over all countries excluding country i. This in turn proxies for the global trend in debt. The effect
                                                 37
of debt on the policy rate is then identified under the assumption that there are no spillover
effects from the debt of other countries to the policy interest rate of country i. This assumption is
quite strong especially in the presence of global integration and policy coordination. However,
this IV strategy lends well to our research design.

For EMEs, we construct instruments for FC public debt/GDP, Total public debt/GDP, and FC
public debt/total public debt. Results are reported in Table A26. Recall in the analogous non-IV
regression, there are significant debt effects for non-IT EMEs. Under the IV specification, FC
public debt/GDP and total public debt/GDP both are statistically significant, but the estimates
switch signs compared to the non-IV specification. The effect of FC public debt/GDP on policy
rates switches from negative to positive, and the effect of total public debt/GDP on policy rates
switches from positive to negative. This implies the presence of omitted variables which covary
negatively with FC public debt/GDP and positively with total public debt/GDP. Under the IV
specification, higher global public debt is associated with lower policy rates. Despite estimates
changing signs, the results remain consistent with fiscal dominance.

Binning by Inflation Volatility

To sort out de facto inflation targeting countries, thus far we've solely relied on exchange rate
volatility. Although inflation targeting often comes with floating exchange rate, it may be too
restrictive to define de facto inflation targeting based on exchange rate volatility alone.
Alternatively, to classify de facto inflation targeters it may be useful to compare realized
inflation volatility across countries, under the presumption that inflation is less volatile in
inflation targeting countries.

       Results are reported in Table A27 for EMEs binned by inflation volatility, and the results
are similar to those under exchange rate volatility bins. Turkey and Argentina round out the top
countries in terms of inflation volatility. In fact, the cross-country correlation between inflation
volatility and exchange rate volatility is over 0.70. Hence, this suggests that greater exchange
rate volatility may be proxying for non-inflation targeters rather than inflation targeters. At the
same time, this reconciles the finding of non-IT countries exhibiting greater evidence of fiscal
dominance under de jure classification. Under de facto classification, higher exchange rate
volatility is associated with higher inflation volatility, and these countries exhibit stronger


                                                  38
associations between debt and policy rates. De jure non-IT is linked to higher de facto inflation
volatility, both of which are associated with stronger links between debt and monetary policy.

Collapsing Currency Regimes

Among EMEs within the sample, some experienced currency crises resulting in sharp
movements in real exchange rates and other macroeconomic variables. Using the Ilzetzki,
Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017) exchange rate regime classification, we identify periods of `free-
falling' exchange rates. Argentina experienced a collapsing currency from December 2001 to
November 2002, and more recently from December 2015 to September 2016. Turkey
experienced an episode of collapsing currency from February 2001 to March 2003. Arguably,
both regimes had a spell of 'fear of floating' related to both fiscal and inflationary concerns, but
both failed in the management of these fears and paid the price in terms of inflation being out of
line with the pre-set target. In Argentina, before 2001-2002, the effective target was close to that
of United States inflation. With a lag, the collapse of the fixed exchange rate in Argentina and
Turkey had a clear fiscal cost: economic default on the local currency debt (inflating a big share
of it, at rates well above the expected inflation), and a sovereign debt crisis. Arguably, both
countries failed due to the questionable quality of institutions, e.g., de-facto the lack of Central
Bank independence among other things.

       As an additional robustness check, we omit these episodes of currency collapse and re-
estimate the baseline regressions. Results for the de jure analysis are reported in Table A19, with
Table A20 reporting results from the de facto analysis. The de jure analysis shows estimates of
FX debt/GDP as economically large and negative (estimate of -0.21, column 12), but the
coefficient loses significance upon controlling for Public debt/GDP ­ which enters as significant
and positive. Moreover, while the coefficient on REER changes under non-IT remains significant
and negative, the effect size drops drastically (from -0.43 to -0.11) after omitting collapsing
currency episodes. Table A20 reports the de facto analysis, where EMEs are grouped into NEER
volatility bins. Even after removing collapsing currency regimes, Argentina and Turkey both fall
into the high NEER volatility bin (bin 3). Among bin 3, the negative coefficient on REER
changes weakens after removing collapsing regimes (from -0.28 to -0.075) but the statistical
significance rises. For bin 3, The effect of FX debt/GDP remains economically large but loses
significance (coefficient estimate falls from -0.450 to -0.356).

                                                  39
      Despite losing statistical significance, the economic significance of the fiscal dominance
effects related to FX debt/GDP remains large (though smaller) after removing observations
related to collapsing currency regimes. Meanwhile, the effect of REER changes on interest rates
maintains statistical significance, but the effect size diminishes. The fact that including crisis
periods in the sample causes the effect sizes to rise helps emphasize the pervasiveness of `fear of
floating' and fiscal dominance during currency crises. As the historical context suggests, these
climactic episodes also serve as periods of desperation where the trade-off between defending
the exchange rate via higher interest rates (i.e., `fear of floating') and avoiding sovereign default
via lower interest rates (i.e., fiscal dominance) might become particularly pronounced.

Secular Trends in the Risk-Free Rate

           There is a clear trend over the sample period of a dropping nominal and real `risk-free'
rate in the U.S. and more broadly, the world. This secular decline in interest rates accompanies
the upward trend in public debt accumulation to a large degree. Therefore, a potential
endogeneity issue particular to Developed Market Economies arises where our regression
estimates might be capturing the downward adjustment of policy rates in response to a lower
risk-free rate ­ an omitted variable ­ rather than the association between policy rates and public
debt. If this is the case, the support for any fiscal dominance effect among DMEs becomes
diminished. However, even if it is simply the case that lower risk-free rates and higher public
debt/GDP coincide due to secular trends, the net outcome is, arguably, that going forward, there
will be greater resistance to increasing the interest rate. It is key to clarify this issue, and
therefore we run an auxiliary robustness check to test whether the significant negative effects of
rising public debt/GDP found among DMEs are robust to controlling for the risk-free interest
rate. We control the world risk-free rate in four ways. We augment the baseline regression with
The nominal U.S. policy rate, the real U.S. policy rate, or the Holston et al. (2017) 18 estimate of
the U.S. or E.U. natural rate of interest (R-star). The former two specifications exclude the
United States from the data, as we use the U.S. policy rate as an explanatory variable, while the



18
     The authors' approach defines R-star as the real short-term interest rate expected to prevail when an
economy is at full strength and inflation is stable. Estimates of R-star are published by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
                                                       40
latter two specifications include all DMEs. We rely most heavily on results that consider R-star
as the control as we believe this is the most reliable and conservative estimate of the world risk-
free rate 19.

           Tables A21 and A22 report the de jure and de facto analysis for DMEs but include the
various measures to control for the risk-free rate. The de jure analysis (A21) first introduces the
U.S. policy rate as an explanatory variable (column 1 and 5) and subsequently the real U.S. rate
(the U.S. policy rate less the annualized quarterly inflation, columns 2 and 6) and then finally the
U.S. and E.U. R-stars in columns 3 and 7; 4 and 8, respectively. The results using the de jure IT
classification show, that while the negative impact of public debt/GDP on policy rates remains
significant (and the size of the effect is stable) under IT in columns 1 (nominal U.S. rate) and 2
(real U.S. rate), the coefficient on public debt is rendered insignificant when introducing R-star
as a control (columns 3 and 4), while the coefficient on R-star is highly significant. That is, to the
extent which R-star captures the broader common trend of falling risk-free rates across
Developed Markets (non E.U), the negative relationship found between rising public debt/GDP
and policy rates among Developed Market Economies disappears. While the association between
higher public debt loads and suppressed policy rates in Developed Markets disappears upon
controlling for the natural rate of interest, the significant coefficient on R-star suggests that
monetary policy in these countries may be constrained in a different way: when R-star is
exceedingly low (as in the post-2008 era, where R-star dropped about 200 basis points from
2.5% to 0.5%). The coefficient estimate on R-star suggests a non-negligible trend effect among
the policy rates of inflation targeting Developed Markets: On average for these countries, about




19
     One issue to keep in mind which is relevant to our R-star measures, is that the United States is a
federal union - the 50 US states are constrained in terms of debt/GDP and expect to get their share of
federal transfers and fiscal demand. In contrast, the E.U. does not have this feature, which may account
for the more aggressive stance of the ECB in terms of its policies. Hence, the E.U. may be more under
the cloud of Fiscal Dominance. While we do not consider the E.U. in our DME sample since they share
the same policy interest rate, Appendix B provides a case study on select E.U. countries around the 2010
Debt Crisis showing the fiscal impact of E.U. policies on the cost of serving the IIPS (Ireland, Italy,
Portugal, Spain) debt.
                                                       41
40 percent of a 100 bps change in the natural rate passes through to domestic policy rates. We
find that this is generally not the case for non inflation targeting DMEs.

Table A22 reports supplementary results from the de facto binned analysis, where DME
countries are grouped by low, mid, and high NEER volatility, controlling for the secular decline
interest rates with the US R-star. Recall that in the benchmark de facto analysis, statistically
significant negative coefficient estimates on public debt/GDP were found among bin 2 and bin 3
(-0.009 and -0.011, respectively). When we introduce R-star as a regressor to control for any
secular trend in the risk-free rate, the estimated coefficient on public debt under bin 2 remains
statistically significant, but the effect under bin 3 loses statistical significance (bin 2 DMEs are:
Canada, Norway, Sweden, U.K. and bin 3 DMEs are: Australia, New Zealand, Japan).

      Therefore under both specifications, the secular trend in the risk-free rate does seem to
explain away some of the fiscal dominance effects initially found in both the de jure and de facto
analysis, suggesting that for DMEs, controlling for the secular trend in risk-free rates is crucial
for disentangling any signs of Fiscal Dominance. We also test whether R-star weakens the Fiscal
Dominance effects found among Emerging Markets (particularly de jure non-IT) 20. We find no
loss of significance upon adding R-star as a control, confirming our belief that across Emerging
Markets, a declining R-star is a less potent factor in interest rate determination. While this
weakens the evidence of Fiscal Dominance among DMEs conditional on the secular trend in the
risk-free rate, we want to re-emphasize that such conditions are still consistent with greater
resistance to increasing the interest rate going forward.

Alternative Regression Specifications

Our parsimonious regression specification is one of several potential ways to test the association
between public debt and policy interest rates. We acknowledge that a drawback of our simple
approach may be that our empirical model is misspecified. For this reason, we consider both de
jure and de facto classifications, but this still may not be enough. In this subsection, we consider
additional variants to our baseline regression. First, we augment the regression model with
interaction terms which explicitly tests whether public debt levels influence interest rates through
their effect on domestic policy targets. To do this, we test whether a country's Taylor Rule


20
     We do not report these estimates, but they are available upon request.
                                                       42
coefficients on inflation, the output gap, the real exchange rate, or foreign reserves depend on the
country's debt level. A simple yet effective method to test for this is to extend the baseline
regression model by including interaction terms between public debt and the four domestic
objective variables. Aside from the main effects of the regressors, the interaction terms will
capture heterogeneity in domestic policy objectives which depends on a country's fiscal position.
The second approach is similar but may have more structural appeal. Rather than interacting
domestic target variables with public debt, we classify countries as "low debt" (below median)
and "high debt" (above median) and estimate the baseline de jure regressions. After we sort on
debt, we additionally sort on de jure IT/non-IT, yielding 4 separate sets of estimates. At the cost
of fewer observations per regression, this specification essentially allows all coefficients to vary
conditional on low or high debt.

        Regression with Debt Interactions

For EMEs, our regressions contain three different public debt variables; hence we focus on
Foreign Currency Public Debt/GDP as the debt variable we interact with. For DMEs, we only
have one variable ­ public debt/GDP, so naturally, this is the variable we interact with domestic
objectives. If the main effect of a domestic variable on policy rates is positive (e.g., inflation), a
negative coefficient estimate on the interaction of [inflation x public debt/GDP] is consistent
with the presence of Fiscal Dominance. An interpretation of this effect is that: all else fixed, if
two countries face the same level of inflation, the country with higher levels of public debt is
more likely to have a lower policy rate.

        The first two columns of Table A23 reports estimated coefficients on the main effect of
Public Debt/GDP and the interaction terms under the de jure IT classification for DMEs. For
DMEs under IT, only the coefficient on foreign reserves is significant at the 10% level,
suggesting that for a given level of foreign reserves accumulation, DMEs with higher levels of
public debt will tend to exhibit lower policy interest rates. While not statistically significant,
interestingly, the remaining interaction terms also show negative coefficients. For DMEs under
non-IT regimes (column 2), the main effect of public debt on policy rates becomes highly
statistically significant and negative upon including the interactions (coefficient of -0.045, t-
statistic of -6.21). The interaction terms paint a mixed picture. First, the coefficient on [inflation
x public debt/GDP] is negative, suggesting that non-IT countries weaken their stance on

                                                  43
combating inflation as the level of public debt rises ­ consistent with Fiscal Dominance.
However somewhat counter-intuitively, the coefficient on [output gap x public debt/GDP] is
significant and positive, suggesting that the policy response to a positive output gap is even
stronger in non-IT countries with higher public debt levels. Unique to non-IT DMEs mostly
composed of exchange rate targeters, a statistically significant and positive estimate is found on
[REER change x public debt/GDP]. Note that the main effect on a REER change is negative (-
0.06) suggesting `Fear of Floating' behavior where real depreciations occur in tandem with
higher policy rates. The positive interaction term, however, suggests that in the presence of an
equivalent real depreciation, the policy response of higher interest rates significantly weakens as
the public debt burden rises. This phenomenon would be akin to `Fear of Floating' turning into a
`Fear of higher interest rates' driven by Fiscal Dominance.

       Columns 3 and 4 of Table A23 report analogous estimates for Emerging Markets under
the de jure IT classification. For de jure IT EMEs, none of the estimates are statistically
significant. The main effect of FX public debt/GDP is negative, which is consistent with the
baseline results of Table A7, where Foreign Currency public debt/GDP is statistically
insignificant yet negative for EMEs under IT. For EMEs under non-IT, the main effect of FX
public debt/GDP is highly significant and positive upon including interaction terms. This
contrasts with the baseline analysis (Table A7) which finds a highly significant negative estimate
(in the absence of any interactions). Two interactions stand out. First, [GDP gap x FX public
debt/GDP] is highly significant and negative, suggesting that for this subgroup of countries, the
policy response to positive output gap deviations weakens as the debt burden rises ­ consistent
with Fiscal Dominance. Second, [REER change x FX public debt/GDP] is highly significant and
negative. In the baseline analysis (Table A7), note there is a significant and negative association
between REER and policy rates, suggestive of `Fear of Floating.' Under the specification which
includes interaction terms, the main effect on REER change turns insignificant (not reported),
while [REER change x FX public debt/GDP] is highly significant and negative. One possible
interpretation is that under non-IT regimes, `Fear of Floating' occurs in the presence of (and
strengthens with) rising FX denominated public debt positions. This point is often argued
qualitatively, while we present here quantitative evidence of such a phenomenon. Under real
deprecation, policy rate responses will tend to be higher in countries with greater debt burdens,


                                                 44
while amid real appreciations, countries with higher debt positions will tend to keep policy rates
lower. The latter scenario may be suggestive of Fiscal Dominance.

          Regressions Grouped by Low and High Debt

          Table A24 report results for DMEs under the grouped debt specification. For DMEs, we
consider a threshold on public debt/GDP to classify whether country-quarter observations are
high or low debt (above or below median). Inflation Targeters with "High Debt" (column 2), the
main effect of public debt remains significant and is also under Inflation Targeters under "Low
Debt" (column 1), but the coefficients on Inflation and GDP gap actually strengthen under "High
Debt," counter what we'd expect in the presence of Fiscal Dominance. Results for non-IT DMEs
(columns 3 and 4) are broadly similar to the baseline analysis.

          Table A25 reports analogous results for EMEs. The variable we threshold is FX public
debt/GDP, where "Low Debt" and "High Debt" are assigned to country-quarters where FX
public debt/GDP is below or above the median, respectively. Under IT (columns 1 and 2), the
main effect of FX public debt/GDP is significant and negative for Inflation Targeting Emerging
Markets under "High Debt" (column 2) but not "Low Debt" IT (column 1) - consistent with the
presence of Fiscal Dominance. However, under "High Debt" IT, we also see larger coefficients
on domestic targets (Inflation and GDP gap) which is not necessarily in line with the Fiscal
Dominance hypothesis, which implies weaker coefficients on domestic targets in the presence of
limited fiscal space. For Emerging Markets that do not target inflation (non-IT) composed mostly
of exchange rate targeters, High Debt (column 4) has stronger coefficients on Inflation, REER,
and Reserves, compared to Low Debt (column 3) suggesting that Fiscal Dominance may operate
in non-IT EMEs in a way such that high FX public debt loads increase the sensitivity of
monetary policy to phenomena like Fear of Floating 21.




21
     The subgroup corresponding to EMEs under non-IT with High Debt (column 4) shows a particularly
high coefficient on inflation (1.3). This result is driven by Argentina, a member of the sub-group. The
country consistently struggles with inflation, often responding sensitively to inflation with the policy
interest rate (in this case, we estimate about 1-for-1) despite being de jure non-IT. Note that the
persistence parameter is also quite low (estimate of 0.21) for this sub-sample. The coefficient drops from
                                                     45
        To summarize, we present two additional specifications where we allow the level of
public debt to influence the policy rate through domestic variables. This yields a rich set of
supplementary results for both DMEs and EMES under de jure IT and non-IT. The key takeaway
from these robustness tests align with the baseline analysis ­ the most convincing evidence
supportive of Fiscal Dominance, where high public debt positions may potentially push policy
rates away from their ideal targets, is found among Emerging Markets under non-IT regimes,
composed mostly of exchange rate targeters. The evidence is much weaker across Developed
Market Economies.

        Time-Varying Inflation Targets

        It may be a concern that our baseline specification assumes that inflation targets are time
invariant. To test this issue, we relax this assumption following the approach of Aizenman
(2011). We collect explicit inflation targets over time for the EME sample for countries which
adopted IT. Then, inflation enters the Taylor Rule equation as deviations from the target by
subtracting these target values from actual inflation rates. The results for this test are found in
Table A28, which reflects the baseline specification of Table A7 (de jure EME with FC debt).
Comparing estimates from Table A28 to the baseline results under time-invariant targets (A7),
the results change very little.



Conclusion

        Advanced countries and emerging markets have increased substantially their public-
sector borrowing as a share of GDP since the Global Financial Crisis. This trend has been driven
by the low risk-free interest-rate, as well as by other challenges associated with the GFC. In our
study, we find that the negative association between total public debt levels and policy interest
rates in Advanced Economies is largely driven by the secular decline in risk-free interest rates.
A possible interpretation of this finding is that the GFC induced public-sector bailouts,
socializing private sector losses. QE and other policies resulted in the secular decline of interest



over 0.40 to 0.21 after controlling for inflation and GDP growth. If we remove Q1 2002-Q1 2003
(Argentinian currency crisis), inflation and GDP growth, the persistence coefficient rises to above 0.6.
                                                    46
rates and growing fiscal dominance. This may be a modern incarnation of financial repression,
as succinctly pointed out in Reinhart (2012). 22 Accordingly, the US and the Eurozone post GFC
policies reduced drastically the cost of serving sovereign debt, in ways that reflect political
economy constraints. Figure 10 (Appendix B) illustrates these trends for the cost of serving the
sovereign debt of Italy, Ireland, Portugal and Spain [IIPS] before and during the first 5 years of
the Euro crisis.

          Rising foreign currency public debt adds downward pressure to interest rates in Emerging
Market Countries. Using a de jure measure of inflation targeting, we find that EMEs under non-
IT regimes (mostly exchange rate targeters) are less likely to raise interest rates when foreign
currency debt levels are higher. In contrast, the overall effect of debt (local and foreign
denominated) on monetary policy is more nuanced as the risk premium effect of larger total debt
loads encourages higher policy rates to match any increase in risks associated with higher debt.
In addition to inflation and output fluctuations (and debt levels), real exchange rate depreciations
are significantly associated with higher interest rates for these countries. Sorting countries by



22
     "One of the main goals of financial repression is to keep nominal interest rates lower than would
otherwise prevail. This effect, other things being equal, reduces governments' interest expenses for a
given stock of debt and contributes to deficit reduction. However, when financial repression produces
negative real interest rates and reduces or liquidates existing debts, it is a transfer from creditors (savers)
to borrowers and, in some cases, governments. This amounts to a tax that has interesting political-
economy properties. Unlike income, consumption, or sales taxes, the repression tax rate is determined by
factors such as financial regulations and inflation performance, which are opaque--if not invisible--to
the highly politicized realm of fiscal policy. Given that deficit reduction usually involves highly
unpopular spending cuts and/or tax increases, the stealthier financial-repression tax may be a more
politically palatable alternative. ... Critical factors explaining the high incidence of negative real interest
rates after the crisis are the aggressively expansive stance of monetary policy and heavy central bank
intervention in many advanced and emerging economies. This raises the broad question of whether
current interest rates are more likely to reflect market conditions or whether they are determined by the
actions of official large players in financial markets. A large role for nonmarket forces in interest-rate
determination is a central feature of financial repression." Reinhart (2012).


                                                       47
exchange rate and inflation volatility, we find that the high exchange rate volatility and high
inflation volatility groups of EMEs have larger negative debt-interest rate associations, This
significant effect is traced to commodity-intensive EMEs. This highlights the importance of
commodity exposure alongside monetary regime as possible determinants of fiscal dominance in
Emerging Markets. Finally, to assess the non-linear impact of FX public debt on policy rates in
EMEs, simulations of a 0.01 rise in the FX public debt/GDP ratio depicts starkly differing
response paths dependent on monetary regime. The interest rate response is shaped by the
currency composition of public debt, tying into the recent theoretical literature on inflation
targeting, sovereign borrowing debt composition, and macroprudential policy.

    Fiscal dominance and risk premium effects are possible interpretations of the above results.
Thereby, more data and a longer sampling period would be useful to test these interpretations
thoroughly. Debt maturity profile, the extent, and effectiveness of capital controls, more detailed
data on local currency public and private debt would allow sharper identification of the forces at
work. These issues are left for future research.




                                             References

Adler, G., Lama, R., Medina, J.P. (2019), Foreign exchange intervention and inflation targeting:
     The role of credibility, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 106.
Adler, Gustavo, Lisack, Noëmie, Mano, Rui C. (2019). Unveiling the effects of foreign exchange
     intervention: A panel approach, Emerging Markets Review, in Press.
Aizenman, J., Edwards, S., Riera-Crichton, D. (2012). Adjustment patterns to commodity terms
     of trade shocks: the role of exchange rate and international reserves policies. Journal of
     International Money and Finance, 31(8), 1990-2016.
Aizenman, J., Hutchison, M., Noy, I. (2011). Inflation targeting and real exchange rates in
     emerging markets. World Development, 39(5), 712-724.
Aizenman, J., Jinjarak, Y (2020). Hoarding for Stormy Days - Test of International Reserves
     Adjustment providing Financial Buffer Stock Services, NBER WP 25909, forthcoming,
     Review of International Economics.
Aizenman J. & Jinjarak, Y, Nguyen Hien, Park D, (2019), Fiscal space and government-
     spending and tax-rate cyclicality patterns: A cross-country comparison, 1960­2016,
     Journal of Macroeconomics, 60, 229-252,
Berganza, J. C., & Broto, C. (2012). Flexible inflation targets, forex interventions, and exchange
     rate volatility in emerging countries. Journal of International Money and Finance, 31(2),
     428-444.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov. "Measuring Monetary Policy." The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 113, no. 3 (1998): 869-902.
                                                   48
Blanchard, O. (2004). Fiscal dominance and inflation targeting: lessons from Brazil (No.
      w10389). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bocola, L., & Lorenzoni, G. (2018). Financial Crises, Dollarization, and Lending of Last Resort
      in Open Economies.
Boris Hofmann & Hyun Song Shin, (2019). FX intervention and domestic credit: Evidence from
      high-frequency microdata". BIS Working Papers 774, Bank for International Settlements.
Calvo, G. A., Reinhart, C. M. (2002). Fear of floating. The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 117(2), 379-408.
Carney, Mark (2019). The Growing Challenges for Monetary Policy in the current International
      Monetary and Financial System. Jackson Hole Symposium 2019.
Checherita-Westphal, Cristina, and Philipp Rother. "The impact of high government debt on
      economic growth and its channels: An empirical investigation for the euro area." European
      economic review 56.7 (2012): 1392-1405.
Christiano, L. J., and T. J. Fitzgerald (2000). "Understanding the Fiscal Theory of the Price
      Level." Economic Review: Q2.
Cochrane, J. H., (1996) "Maturity Matters: Long-Term Debt in the Fiscal Theory of the Price
      Level," unpublished, University of Chicago, December 1996.
Davis, J.S., Fujiwara, I., Wang, J. (2018). Dealing with Time Inconsistency: Inflation Targeting
      versus Exchange Rate Targeting, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 50 (7), pp. 1369-
      1399.
Edwards, S. (1989). Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation, and Adjustment: Exchange Rate Policy
      in Developing Countries, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Eichengreen, B., Hausmann, R., & Panizza, U. (2007). Currency mismatches, debt intolerance,
      and the original sin: Why they are not the same and why it matters. In Capital controls and
      capital flows in emerging economies: Policies, practices, and consequences (pp. 121-
      170)--University of Chicago Press.
English, W. B., Nelson, W. R., Sack, B. P. (2002). Interpreting the significance of lagged interest
      rate in estimated monetary policy rules, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2002-
      24, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US).
Frankel, J. (2017). Policies for Managing External Shocks in Commodity-Exporting Countries,
      Conference on Current Account Sustainability, InterAmerican Development Bank, Apr.18,
      2017.
Fratzscher, Marcel, Gloede, Oliver, Menkhoff, Lukas, Sarno, Lucio, Stohr, Tobias (2019). When
      Is Foreign Exchange Intervention Effective? Evidence from 33 Countries, American
      Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, American Economic Association, vol. 11(1), 132-
      156, January.
Ghosh, A. R., Ostry, J. D., Chamon, M. (2016). Two targets, two instruments: Monetary and
      exchange rate policies in emerging markets economies. Journal of International Money
      and Finance, 60, 172-196.
Goodfriend, M. (2003). Inflation Targeting in the United States? National Bureau of Economic
      Research, 9981.
Holston, Kathryn, and Laubach, Thomas and Williams, John C. (2017), Measuring the Natural
      Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants, Journal of International
      Economics, 108, S59­S75
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Reinhart, Carmen M., Rogoff, Kenneth S. (2017). Exchange Arrangements
      Entering the

                                                49
    21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold? National Bureau of Economic Research, 23134.
Im, Kyung So, Pesaran, Hashem M., Shin, Y. (2003), Testing for unit roots in heterogeneous
      panels, Journal of Econometrics, 115, issue 1, p. 53-74.
International Monetary Fund (2018), Recent Developments on Local Currency Bond Markets in
      Emerging Economies, Staff Note for the G20 IFAWG, June 15.
Judson, R. A., Owen, A. (1999), Estimating dynamic panel data models: a guide for
      macroeconomists, Economics Letters, 65, issue 1, p. 9-15.
Kim, Soyoung, Mehrotra, Aaron N., (2018). Effects of Monetary and Macroprudential
      Policies--Evidence from Four Inflation Targeting Economies, (2018). Journal of Money,
      Credit and Banking, 50 (5), pp. 967-992.
Levin, A., Lin, C. F., Chu, C. S. (2002). Unit root tests in panel data: Asymptotic and finite-
      sample properties. Journal of Econometrics, 108(1), 1­24.
Leeper, E. (1991). "Equilibria under `Active' and `Passive' Monetary and Fiscal Policies,"
      Journal of Monetary Economics 27: 129-147.
Loyo, E. (1999). Tight money paradox on the loose: a fiscalist hyperinflation. Manuscript,
      Harvard University.
Nickell, S. (1981), Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects, Econometrica, 49, issue 6, p.
      1417-26.
Ogrokhina, O., Rodriguez, C.M. (2019). The effect of inflation targeting and financial openness
      on the currency composition of sovereign international debt. Journal of International
      Money and Finance, 97, pp. 1-18.
Ogrokhina, O., Rodriguez, C.M. (2018). The role of inflation targeting in international debt
      denomination in developing countries, Journal of International Economics, 114, pp. 116-
      129.
Taylor, J. B. (1993), Discretion versus policy rules in practice, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
      Series on Public Policy, Volume 39, p. 195-214.
Reinhart, C. M. (2012). Financial Repression Has Come Back to Stay. Bloomberg.com,
      March 11, 6.
Rose, A. K. (2007). A stable international monetary system emerges: Inflation targeting is
      Bretton Woods, reversed. Journal of International Money and Finance, 26(5), 663-681.
Sargent, T. J., Wallace, N. (1981). Some unpleasant monetarist arithmetic. Federal Reserve Bank
      of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5(3), 1-17.
Senay, O., Sutherland, A. (2018). Optimal monetary policy, exchange rate misalignments, and
      incomplete financial markets. Journal of International Economics, 117, pp. 196-208.
Végh, C. A., Morano, L., Friedheim, D., & Rojas, D. (2017). Between a Rock and a Hard Place:
      The Monetary Policy Dilemma in Latin America and the Caribbean, LAC Semiannual
      Report; October 2017. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Woodford, M. (1998) "Public Debt and the Price Level."
     http://blogs.cuit.columbia.edu/mw2230/files/2017/08/BOE.pdf
Woodford, M. (2003) Interest and Prices. Princeton University Press, Princeton.




                                              50
APPENDIX
                                                                        TABLE A1: DATA DETAILS


Variable                                                 Definition                                                                                  Source
Foreign Reserves Change                                  First-difference of log foreign reserves                                                    IMF IFS
FX Denominated Public Debt/GDP Ratio                     Value of public debt denominated in foreign currency divided by nominal GDP.                BIS, IMF IFS
FX Denominated Public Debt/GDP Growth                    First-difference of log FX Denominated Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                BIS, IMF IFS
FX Denominated Public Debt/Tax Revenue Ratio             Value of public debt denominated in foreign currency divided by Tax Revenue.                BIS, IMF IFS, OECD
FX Denominated Public Debt/Tax Revenue Growth            First-difference of log FX Denominated Public Debt/Tax Revenue Ratio                        BIS, IMF IFS, OECD
GDP Gap                                                  Real GDP relative to trend calculated with a Hodrick-Prescott filter                        IMF IFS
Inflation                                                First-difference of log CPI                                                                 BIS
De Jure Inflation Targeting Classification               Dummy variable indicating quarters in which country prescribed inflation targeting regime   IMF
Interest Rate                                            Nominal short-term interest rate or central bank policy rate                                IMF IFS
Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                    Value of public debt divided by nominal GDP                                                 IMF IFS
Public Debt/GDP Growth                                   First-difference of log Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                               IMF IFS
Public Debt/Tax Revenue Ratio                            Value of public debt divided by tax revenue                                                 IMF IFS, OECD
Public Debt/Tax Revenue Growth                           First-difference of log Public Debt/Tax Revenue Ratio                                       IMF IFS, OECD
Real Exchange Rate Change                                First-difference of log real effective exchange rate                                        BIS
Market value of debt used for countries with available data. In other cases, the face value of debt is used.




                        TABLE A2: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR DEVELOPED MARKET ECONOMIES


                                                          IT Sample (552 obs.)                  Non-IT Sample (284 obs.)
variable                                                  mean              std.dev                 mean                std.dev      t-stat for difference between samples
Interest Rate                                             0.026              0.022                  0.014               0.018                              8.667    ***
Inflation                                                 0.005              0.007                  0.002               0.009                              4.181    ***
Output Gap                                                1.000              0.019                  1.001               0.035                              -0.383
REER Change                                               0.000              0.034                  -0.001              0.028                              0.218
NEER Change                                               0.000              0.035                  0.002               0.027                              -1.048
Foreign Reserves Change                                   0.013              0.091                  0.026                0.07                              -2.317   **
Debt/GDP                                                  0.396              0.225                  0.543               0.284                              -7.482   ***
Debt/GDP Growth                                           0.003              0.057                  0.007                0.06                              -0.977
Debt/Tax                                                  3.053              2.637                  5.652               1.881                          -14.926      ***
Debt/Tax Growth                                           0.004              0.062                  0.001               0.049                              0.731
FX Debt/GDP                                               0.017              0.025                  0.003               0.003                           11.492      ***
FX Debt/GDP Growth                                       -0.019              0.222                  -0.005              0.124                              -0.923
FX Debt/Tax                                               0.144               0.21                  0.004               0.004                           14.156      ***
FX Debt/Tax Growth                                       -0.019              0.222                  -0.017              0.112                              -0.117
Mean and standard deviation for all variables. Differenced variables are quarterly changes
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively
Positive values for REER/NEER change correspond with exchange rate appreciation




                                                                                  51
                 TABLE A3: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES


                                        IT Sample (964 obs.)         Non-IT Sample (404 obs.)
variable                                 mean         std.dev         mean            std.dev   t-stat for difference between samples
Interest Rate                            0.058         0.043          0.101            0.103                   -7.709    ***
Inflation                                0.010         0.011          0.019            0.026                     -6.83   ***
Output Gap                               0.999         0.029          1.001            0.061                   -0.643
REER Change                              0.001         0.049          -0.001           0.066                    0.521
NEER Change                             -0.003         0.051          -0.014           0.073                    2.868    ***
Foreign Reserves Change                  0.021         0.059          0.031            0.086                   -2.052    **
Debt/GDP                                 0.379         0.210          0.465            0.245                   -5.871    ***
Debt/GDP Growth                          0.004         0.068          -0.005           0.096                    1.684    *
Debt/Tax                                 2.074         0.745          3.900            2.684                   -11.71    ***
Debt/Tax Growth                          0.004         0.072          -0.004           0.123                    1.069
FX Debt/GDP                              0.048         0.044          0.071            0.134                   -3.072    ***
FX Debt/GDP Growth                       0.006         0.142          -0.015           0.200                    1.743    *
FX Debt/Tax                              0.261         0.207          0.719            1.524                   -5.317    ***
FX Debt/Tax Growth                       0.005         0.144          -0.014           0.227                    1.401
Mean and standard deviation for all variables. Differenced variables are quarterly changes
*,**,*** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively




                                                                52
                                        TABLE A4: UNIT ROOT TESTS


                                                                                         LLC                 IPS
Foreign Reserves Change                                                             -40.632     ***     -43.716       ***
FX Denominated Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                                 -7.457     ***      -2.813       ***
FX Denominated Public Debt/GDP Growth                                               -28.468     ***     -30.191       ***
FX Denominated Public Debt/Tax Revenue Ratio                                         -2.737     ***      -2.246       **
FX Denominated Public Debt/Tax Revenue Growth                                       -30.233     ***     -29.962       ***
GDP Gap                                                                              -9.234     ***     -14.065       ***
Inflation                                                                           -10.455     ***     -20.918       ***
Interest Rate                                                                           -4.3    ***        -2.44      ***
Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                                                -1.421     *         0.729
Public Debt/GDP Growth                                                                 -40.7    ***     -40.361       ***
Public Debt/Tax Revenue Ratio                                                        -3.158     ***      -2.272       **
Public Debt/Tax Revenue Growth                                                      -32.694     ***     -32.462       ***
Real Exchange Rate Change                                                           -48.166     ***     -48.804       ***
The resulting test statistics are based on Levin et al. (2002) and Im et al. (2003) tests. As is true for all other
panel unit root tests, these tests should be interpreted with caution. The LLC test assumes a common process,
while the IPS test assumption is more general, where the rejection of the null can be interpreted as providing
evidence in favor of rejecting the unit root hypothesis for a non-zero fraction of panel members. Data sets were
balanced before performing unit root tests, thus removing earlier dates, which only contained data for select
countries. *, ***, *** indicate rejection at the 10%, 5%, 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                           53
                                                                                   Table A5
                                           ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: DEVELOPED MARKET ECONOMIES

Variable                                                         IT                                                                    Non-IT
                                 (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)                        (5)            (6)           (7)                 (8)
Interest Rate (t-1)              0.898***        0.906***          0.867***       0.868***                   0.866***       0.864***      0.843***            0.851***
                                 (0.011)         (0.011)           (0.036)        (0.032)                    (0.075)        (0.075)       (0.086)             (0.086)

Inflation                        0.217***   0.181***   0.178***   0.148***                                   -0.007         0.007             0.013           0.028
                                 (0.039)+++ (0.050)+++ (0.047)+++ (0.047)+                                   (0.044)        (0.046)           (0.045)         (0.048)

GDP Gap                          0.084***   0.095***   0.099***   0.096***                                   0.006          0.008             0.006           -0.010
                                 (0.013)+++ (0.012)+++ (0.015)+++ (0.013)+++                                 (0.015)        (0.014)           (0.013)         (0.019)

REER Change                                      0.049***   0.050***   0.015**                                              -0.016            -0.015          -0.022*
                                                 (0.009)+++ (0.009)+++ (0.007)+++                                           (0.013)           (0.013)         (0.013)

Reserves Change                                  -0.005           -0.004          -0.006*                                   -0.008*           -0.008*         -0.010*
                                                 (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.003)                                   (0.004)           (0.005)         (0.005)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                             -0.010*         -0.009**                                                    -0.005          -0.005
                                                                  (0.005)         (0.004)                                                     (0.006)         (0.006)

GDP Growth                                                                        0.039***                                                                    0.022***
                                                                                  (0.004)+++                                                                  (0.004)

Observations                     542             542              535             535                        279            279               277             277
Adj. R-Squared                   0.87            0.88             0.89            0.89                       0.87           0.87              0.87            0.87
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.


                                                                                   Table A6
                                               ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES

Variable                                               IT                                                                                     Non-IT
                                  (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)                                          (5)             (6)              (7)                 (8)
                                  0.859***
                                                   ***         ***       ***
                                                                                                                0.407**
                                                                                                                                      ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                          0.860       0.856     0.857                                                        0.471            0.471***            0.475***
                                  (0.027)+++ (0.027)+++ (0.029)+++ (0.028)+++                                   (0.159)         (0.120)          (0.112)             (0.115)

                                  0.492***
                                                           ***              ***
                                                                                    0.446***                    1.132*
                                                                                                                                       ***
                                                                                                                                                 0.701***
                                                                                                                                                                            **
Inflation                                         0.497             0.476                                                       0.698                                0.597
                                  (0.089)         (0.089)           (0.088)         (0.074)                     (0.595)         (0.244)          (0.231)             (0.233)

                                          **
GDP Gap                           0.038           0.037**           0.031*          0.048***                    -0.062          -0.026           -0.026              0.064
                                  (0.017)         (0.017)           (0.017)         (0.016)                     (0.159)         (0.082)          (0.088)             (0.050)

                                                                                                                                        ***             ***
REER Change                                       -0.014            -0.010     0.008                                            -0.495           -0.496              -0.394***
                                                  (0.01)+++         (0.009)+++ (0.019)+++                                       (0.104)          (0.112)             (0.063)

                                                                                                                                       *                **                  ***
Reserves Change                                   0.005             0.006      0.010                                            0.088            0.089               0.127
                                                  (0.009)+          (0.009)+++ (0.009)+++                                       (0.048)          (0.036)             (0.034)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                               -0.004          -0.005                                                       -0.002              -0.010
                                                                    (0.011)         (0.012)                                                      (0.060)             (0.058)

GDP Growth                                                                          -0.023                                                                           -0.167**
                                                                                    (0.017)++                                                                        (0.069)

Observations                      928             928               921             921                         343             343              342                 341
Adj. R-Squared                    0.82            0.82              0.82            0.82                        0.36            0.53             0.53                0.55
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.

                                                                                           54
                                                                                                       Table A7
                                                                  ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, FOREIGN DENOMINATED PUBLIC DEBT

Variable                                                                             IT                                                                                                Non-IT
                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)                                  (7)           (8)            (9)         (10)          (11)          (12)
                                                           ***        ***        ***
                                                                                       0.859***
                                                                                                       ***
                                                                                                            0.856***                             0.407**
                                                                                                                                                                     ***            ***         ***           ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                                  0.859      0.860      0.859                 0.856                                                         0.471          0.471       0.467         0.449         0.460***
                                                     (0.027)+++ (0.027)+++ (0.029)+++ (0.029)+++ (0.033)+++ (0.033)+++                           (0.159)       (0.120)        (0.122)     (0.097)       (0.086)       (0.091)

                                                            ***
                                                                   0.497***
                                                                                       ***          ***
                                                                                                           0.485***
                                                                                                                                ***
                                                                                                                                                 1.132*
                                                                                                                                                                        ***
Inflation                                            0.492                      0.488        0.487                      0.457                                  0.698          0.764***     0.780***     0.919***      0.771***
                                                     (0.089)       (0.089)      (0.089)      (0.089)       (0.089)+     (0.076)                  (0.595)       (0.244)        (0.259)      (0.197)      (0.223)       (0.200)

                                                            **            **
GDP Gap                                              0.038         0.037        0.033*       0.032*        0.032*       0.047***                 -0.062        -0.026         -0.03        -0.04        -0.036        0.04
                                                     (0.017)       (0.017)      (0.019)      (0.017)       (0.018)      (0.017)                  (0.159)       (0.082)        (0.098)      (0.085)      (0.099)       (0.054)

                                                                                                                                                                        ***          ***          ***           ***
REER Change                                                        -0.014    -0.012     -0.012     -0.012     0.005                                            -0.495         -0.519       -0.531       -0.519        -0.429***
                                                                   (0.01)+++ (0.008)+++ (0.008)+++ (0.008)+++ (0.019)+++                                       (0.104)        (0.107)      (0.098)      (0.089)       (0.047)

                                                                                                                                                                        *
Reserves Change                                                    0.005        0.005        0.005      0.005      0.009                                       0.088          0.098**      0.073***     0.066***      0.103***
                                                                   (0.009)+     (0.009)+     (0.009)+++ (0.009)+++ (0.009)+++                                  (0.048)        (0.049)      (0.016)      (0.013)       (0.014)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                ***
FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                                        -0.016       -0.014        -0.105       -0.113                                                -0.052       -0.171       -0.412        -0.367***
                                                                                (0.044)      (0.047)       (0.096)+     (0.100)                                               (0.039)      (0.108)      (0.126)       (0.136)

                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                                                        -0.002        0.011        0.011                                                              0.082        0.152         0.128
                                                                                             (0.011)       (0.015)      (0.015)                                                            (0.094)      (0.087)       (0.091)

FX Public Debt/Public Debt                                                                                                                                                                                     ***
                                                                                                           0.043        0.045                                                                           0.242         0.213***
Ratio
                                                                                                           (0.031)+++ (0.032)+++                                                                        (0.037)       (0.051)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
GDP Growth                                                                                                              -0.021                                                                                        -0.151
                                                                                                                        (0.016)                                                                                       (0.082)

Observations                                         928           928          905          905           905          905                      343           343            298          298          298           298
Adj. R-Squared                                       0.82          0.82         0.82         0.82          0.82         0.83                     0.365         0.53           0.54         0.55         0.56          0.57
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.




                                                                                                              55
                                                           Table A8

        ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: DMEs, GROUPED BY NEER

Variable                                        DME Groups by NEER Volatility
                                              (1)       (2)       (3)
Interest Rate (t-1)                           0.910***      0.880***       0.880***
                                              (0.047)       (0.043)        (0.022)

Inflation                                     0.090**       0.008          0.200
                                                                                 ***

                                              (0.036)       (0.062)        (0.056)

GDP Gap                                       -0.012        0.092***       0.036
                                              (0.016)       (0.014)        (0.037)

REER Change                                   -0.027**      0.029***       -0.005
                                              (0.012)       (0.005)        (0.003)

Reserves Change                               -0.013        -0.005         -0.003**
                                              (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.001)

                                                                     *
Public Debt/GDP Ratio                         -0.004        -0.009         -0.011**
                                              (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.005)

GDP Growth                                    0.019***      0.041***       0.031
                                                                                 ***

                                              (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.006)

Observations                                  295           295            221
Adj. R-Squared                                0.885         0.92           0.9
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The
associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Groups based on quantiles sorted by historical nominal exchange rate volatility, with (1)
being the lowest volatility group, and (3) being the highest.




                                                                56
Table A9

ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, GROUPED BY NEER VOLATILITY

Variable                                        EME Groups by NEER Volatility
                                              (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                      ***           ***                ***
                                              0.910         0.810              0.580
Interest Rate (t-1)
                                              (0.016)       (0.039)            (0.096)

                                                      *             ***                ***
Inflation                                     0.120         0.360              0.930
                                              (0.066)       (0.069)            (0.210)

                                                      *             ***
GDP Gap                                       0.018         0.100              -0.034
                                              (0.010)       (0.037)            (0.089)

                                                                                       **
REER Change                                   -0.011        0.007              -0.280
                                              (0.014)       (0.027)            (0.120)

Reserves Change                               0.003         0.007              0.037
                                              (0.005)       (0.007)            (0.026)

                                                      *
FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                      -0.190        -0.210**           -0.450***
                                              (0.100)       (0.088)            (0.074)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio                         0.007         0.014              0.190***
                                              (0.009)       (0.017)            (0.045)

FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio              0.066         0.064              0.230***
                                              (0.041)       (0.043)            (0.050)

GDP Growth                                    0.012         -0.021*            -0.024
                                              (0.008)       (0.011)            (0.042)

Observations                                  360           419                423
Adj. R-Squared                                0.90          0.86               0.62
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The
associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Groups based on quantiles sorted by historical nominal exchange rate volatility, with (1)
being the lowest volatility group, and (3) being the highest.




                                                                          57
Table A9a

COUNTRY GROUPINGS BY NEER VOLATILITY

Country           Group     Quantile
Hong.Kong.SAR     DME         1
Singapore         DME         1
Switzerland       DME         1
United.States     DME         1
Canada            DME         2
Norway            DME         2
Sweden            DME         2
United.Kingdom    DME         2
Australia         DME         3
Japan             DME         3
New.Zealand       DME         3
China             EME         1
Czech.Republic    EME         1
India             EME         1
Israel            EME         1
Malaysia          EME         1
Thailand          EME         1
Chile             EME         2
Hungary           EME         2
Indonesia         EME         2
Korea             EME         2
Mexico            EME         2
Poland            EME         2
Argentina         EME         3
Brazil            EME         3
Colombia          EME         3
Russia            EME         3
South.Africa      EME         3
Turkey            EME         3




                                       58
Table A9b

                                                MEDIAN STATISTICS BY NEER VOLATILITY QUANTILE

Quantile                  Group                     FX Debt/GDP Public Debt/GDP                                            Inflation           Interest Rate     GDP Growth
   1                      DME                          0.000          0.613                                                 0.006                  0.008           0.010
   2                      DME                          0.017          0.367                                                 0.004                  0.020           0.013
   3                      DME                          0.004          0.293                                                 0.004                  0.025           0.010
   1                      EME                          0.017          0.367                                                 0.005                  0.030           0.025
   2                      EME                          0.042          0.299                                                 0.009                  0.048           0.018
   3                      EME                          0.056          0.383                                                 0.016                  0.095           0.028
Inflation and (nominal) GDP growth are measured at the quarterly frequency. Interest Rate is annualized.


Table A10
                                                       ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, GROUPED BY COMMODITY INTENSITY

                                                                                                    Commodity:                Non-Commodity:     Commodity:      Non-Commodity IT:
Variable                                     Commodity                  Non-Commodity
                                                                                                    De Jure IT                De Jure IT         High NEER Vol   High NEER Vol

Interest Rate (t-1)                          0.510***                   0.870***                    0.827***                  0.817***           0.478***        0.856***
                                             (0.100)+++                 (0.013)                     (0.038)                   (0.032)            (0.085)+++      (0.021)

Inflation                                    0.910***                   0.320***                    0.504***                  0.369***           1.023***        0.470***
                                             (0.310)+                   (0.099)                     (0.079)                   (0.097)            (0.326)         (0.172)

GDP Gap                                      -0.022                     0.030*                      0.066***                  0.04               -0.048          0.038
                                             (0.097)                    (0.017)                     (0.021)                   (0.031)            (0.113)         (0.037)

REER Change                                  -0.220**                   -0.006                      -0.005                    0.018              -0.252
                                                                                                                                                        **
                                                                                                                                                                 -0.006
                                             (0.110)+                   (0.034)                     (0.010)                   (0.037)            (0.113)++       (0.051)

Reserves Change                              0.046**                    -0.004                      0.019
                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                              -0.002             0.048           -0.009
                                             (0.022)++                  (0.006)                     (0.010)+                  (0.007)            (0.033)+        (0.009)

                                                    ***
                                                                        -0.150***
                                                                                                                                     ***                ***
FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                     -0.340                                                 0.112                     -0.180             -0.450          -0.020
                                             (0.120)                    (0.043)                     (0.082)+++                (0.052)            (0.101)+++      (0.065)

                                                                                                                                                        **
Public Debt/GDP Ratio                        0.13                       0.005                       -0.012                    0.018              0.172           -0.013
                                             (0.079)                    (0.009)                     (0.013)                   (0.016)            (0.081)++       (0.016)

                                                    ***                        *                                                                        ***
FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio             0.210                      0.041                       0.006                     0.021              0.282           -0.014
                                             (0.055)+++                 (0.023)                     (0.028)                   (0.024)            (0.039)+++      (0.055)

GDP Growth                                   -0.052                     -0.005                      -0.018                    -0.012             -0.061          -0.001
                                             (0.041)                    (0.012)                     (0.011)                   (0.017)            (0.057)         (0.023)

Observations                                 556                        647                         423                       481                358             286
Adj. R-Squared                               0.52                       0.94                        0.85                      0.83               0.52            0.95
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below
each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between Commodity and Non-Commodity intensive estimates at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.
De facto IT classification based on nominal exchange rate volatility. De facto IT classified as high-volatility quantile
Commodity-intensive EMEs: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, South Africa




                                                                                                     59
Table A11
                              ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES USING TAX REVENUE

Variable                                                                IT                                                                  Non-IT
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)                    (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
                                                  ***
                                                           0.860***
                                                                                ***              ***                    **            ***            ***            ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                         0.859                         0.859            0.860                  0.407         0.471          0.418          0.434
                                            (0.027)+++ (0.027)+++ (0.027)+++ (0.027)+++                           (0.159)       (0.120)        (0.108)        (0.110)


                                            0.492***       0.497***      0.486***
                                                                                                   ***
                                                                                                                  1.132*        0.698***       1.100***
                                                                                                                                                                      ***
Inflation                                                                                  0.461                                                              0.974
                                            (0.089)        (0.089)       (0.089)+++ (0.075)+++                    (0.595)       (0.244)        (0.191)        (0.149)


                                            0.038**
                                                                   **
                                                                         0.036*            0.050***
                                                                                                                                                        *
GDP Gap                                                    0.037                                                  -0.062        -0.026         -0.118         -0.053*
                                            (0.017)        (0.017)       (0.018)+++ (0.017)+++                    (0.159)       (0.082)        (0.063)        (0.029)

                                                                                                                                         ***            ***            ***
REER Change                                                -0.014        -0.013            0.002                                -0.495         -0.488         -0.427
                                                           (0.01)+++     (0.009)+++ (0.019)+++                                  (0.104)        (0.068)        (0.025)

                                                                                                                                        *
Reserves Change                                            0.005         0.005             0.009                                0.088          0.076**        0.101***
                                                           (0.009)+      (0.009)+          (0.009)+++                           (0.048)        (0.037)        (0.036)

                                                                                                                                                        ***
Public Debt/Tax Ratio                                                    0.002             0.002                                               -0.005         -0.006***
                                                                         (0.001)+++ (0.002)+++                                                 (0.001)        (0.001)


GDP Growth                                                                                 -0.019                                                             -0.104
                                                                                           (0.016)                                                            (0.089)

Observations                                928            928           907               907                    343           343            238            238
Adj. R-Squared                              0.82           0.82          0.82              0.82                   0.36          0.53           0.60           0.61
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.




                                                                                      60
Table A12
                                                   ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, FOREIGN DENOMINATED PUBLIC DEBT USING TAX REVENUE

Variable                                                                             IT                                                                                                     Non-IT
                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)                                    (7)           (8)          (9)              (10)          (11)          (12)
                                                           ***        ***        ***         ***       ***
                                                                                                            0.861***
                                                                                                                                                         **            ***          ***              ***           ***           ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                                  0.859      0.860      0.862       0.860     0.860                                             0.407         0.471        0.434            0.420         0.402         0.417
                                                     (0.027)+++ (0.027)+++ (0.028)+++ (0.027)+++ (0.027)+++ (0.026)+++                             (0.159)       (0.120)      (0.089)          (0.117)       (0.093)       (0.092)

                                                            ***           ***         ***        ***        ***                  ***                       *            ***           ***              ***           ***
Inflation                                            0.492         0.497        0.488      0.487      0.487      0.461                             1.132         0.698        1.025             1.090        1.223         1.108***
                                                     (0.089)       (0.089)      (0.087)+++ (0.087)+++ (0.088)+++ (0.075)+++                        (0.595)       (0.244)      (0.136)           (0.216)      (0.264)       (0.202)

                                                            **            **          *         *          **                    ***                                                  *                *
GDP Gap                                              0.038         0.037        0.035     0.036      0.036     0.050                               -0.062        -0.026       -0.130            -0.119       -0.123        -0.07
                                                     (0.017)       (0.017)      (0.019)++ (0.019)+++ (0.018)++ (0.018)+++                          (0.159)       (0.082)      (0.069)           (0.062)      (0.080)       (0.043)

                                                                                                                                                                        ***
REER Change                                                        -0.014     -0.011     -0.013     -0.013     0.002                                             -0.495       -0.502***         -0.490***    -0.458***     -0.411***
                                                                   (0.010)+++ (0.008)+++ (0.008)+++ (0.008)+++ (0.018)+++                                        (0.104)      (0.078)           (0.063)      (0.055)       (0.024)

                                                                                                                                                                        *             **               *
Reserves Change                                                    0.005        0.005         0.005         0.005         0.009                                  0.088        0.056             0.073        0.041         0.064
                                                                   (0.009)+     (0.009)+      (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)                                (0.048)      (0.025)           (0.042)      (0.042)       (0.048)

                                                                                                                                                                                      ***                            **           *
FX Public Debt/Tax Ratio                                                        0.004         0.003         0.003         0.002                                               -0.008            -0.001       -0.030        -0.028
                                                                                (0.007)+      (0.007)       (0.014)+      (0.014)                                             (0.001)           (0.007)      (0.013)       (0.014)

Public Debt/Tax Ratio                                                                         0.001         0.001         0.001                                                                 -0.005       0.007         0.006
                                                                                              (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)                                                               (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.008)

FX Public Debt/Public Debt                                                                                                                                                                                           ***
                                                                                                            -0.001        0.002                                                                              0.293         0.273***
Ratio
                                                                                                            (0.030)+++ (0.031)+++                                                                            (0.091)       (0.099)

GDP Growth                                                                                                                -0.019                                                                                           -0.085
                                                                                                                          (0.016)                                                                                          (0.084)

Observations                                         928           928          905           905           905           905                      343           343          238               238          238           238
Adj. R-Squared                                       0.82          0.82         0.82          0.82          0.82          0.82                     0.365         0.53         0..60             0.61         0.62          0.62
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.




                                                                                                               61
Table A13

      ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, GROUPED BY NEER
              VOLATILITY USING TAX REVENUE

Variable                                   EME Groups by NEER Volatility
                                       (1)        (2)         (3)
Interest Rate (t-1)                    0.918***   0.874***    0.551
                                                                    ***

                                       (0.027)    (0.019)     (0.128)

Inflation                              0.134           0.412***        1.001***
                                       (0.087)         (0.106)         (0.288)

GDP Gap                                0.021**         0.097***        -0.119
                                       (0.009)         (0.027)         (0.087)

REER Change                            -0.005          -0.007          -0.261**
                                       (0.012)         (0.033)         (0.112)

Reserves Change                        0.002           0.004           0.015
                                       (0.005)         (0.008)         (0.036)

FX Public Debt/Tax Ratio               -0.026          0.014           -0.036***
                                       (0.021)         (0.025)         (0.006)

Public Debt/Tax Ratio                  0.0005          -0.0004         0.014***
                                       (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.004)

                                                                              ***
FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio 0.069                 (0.032)         0.236
                                 (0.061)               (0.041)         (0.087)

GDP Growth                             0.008           (0.003)         0.002
                                       (0.007)         (0.019)         (0.031)


Observations                           319             419             405

Adj. R-Squared                         0.83            0.86            0.62
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The
associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Groups based on quantiles sorted by historical nominal exchange rate volatility, with
(1) being the lowest volatility group, and (3) being the highest.




                                                               62
Table A14

                        DEBT COMPOSITION OF EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES

                                    FX Public Debt/Total                  FX Public Debt/Total Public
Country (EME)       1st Period     Public Debt, 1st Period    Last Period     Debt, Last Period       Difference
Argentina             2000                 0.543                 2017               0.297                 -0.246
Brazil                2000                 0.146                 2018               0.028                 -0.118
Chile                 2000                 0.047                 2018               0.208                  0.161
China                 2000                 0.021                 2018               0.000                 -0.020
Colombia              2000                 0.275                 2018               0.159                 -0.116
Czech.Republic        2000                 0.025                 2018               0.095                  0.071
Hungary               2000                 0.093                 2018               0.179                  0.086
Indonesia             2002                 0.003                 2018               0.240                  0.237
Israel                2000                 0.025                 2018               0.086                  0.061
Korea                 2000                 0.099                 2018               0.011                 -0.088
Malaysia              2000                 0.065                 2017               0.033                 -0.032
Mexico                2000                 0.434                 2018               0.179                 -0.256
Poland                2000                 0.103                 2018               0.232                  0.129
Russia                2000                 0.089                 2018               0.163                  0.074
South.Africa          2000                 0.063                 2018               0.096                  0.033
Thailand              2000                 0.069                 2018               0.001                 -0.068
Turkey                2001                 0.192                 2018               0.331                  0.139
India does not have data on FX denominated debt.




                                                         63
Table A15

                                                    ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: DEVELOPED MARKET ECONOMIES
                                                                USING LAGGED DEBT VARIABLES

Variable                                                                            IT                                     Non-IT
                                                                       (1)               (2)                   (3)              (4)
                                                                              ***               ***                  ***              ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                                                    0.948             0.887                 0.905            0.860
                                                                       (0.013)           (0.023)               (0.063)          (0.082)

                                                                              ***               ***
Inflation                                                              0.111             0.152                 0.015            0.020
                                                                       (0.031)+          -0.051+               (0.046)          (0.048)

                                                                       0.051***
                                                                                                ***
GDP Gap                                                                                  0.094                 -0.010           -0.007
                                                                       (0.007)+++        -0.013+++             (0.023)          (0.024)

                                                                                                                       ***             *
REER Change                                                            0.004             0.010                 -0.027           -0.027
                                                                       (0.006)+++        -0.008++              (0.010)          (0.014)

                                                                                                ***
Reserves Change                                                        -0.001            -0.007                -0.005           -0.008
                                                                       (0.002)           (0.003)               (0.005)          (0.006)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-1)                                            0.001                                   0.005
                                                                       (0.001)                                 (0.005)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-4)                                                              -0.001                                 0.004
                                                                                         (0.006)                                (0.004)

                                                                       0.043***
                                                                                                ***
                                                                                                               0.019***
                                                                                                                                       ***
GDP Growth                                                                               0.045                                  0.021
                                                                       (0.004)+++        -0.006+++             (0.007)          (0.005)

Observations                                                           528               518                   275              270
Adj. R-Squared                                                         0.96              0.88                  0.88             0.85
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.




                                                                                          64
Table A16

                                             ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, FOREIGN DENOMINATED PUBLIC DEBT
                                                             USING LAGGED DEBT VARIABLES

Variable                                                                            IT                                       Non-IT
                                                                       (1)               (2)                    (3)               (4)
                                                                              ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                                                    0.907             0.853***               0.540***          0.482***
                                                                       (0.010)+++        (0.032)+++             (0.100)           (0.142)

                                                                              ***
Inflation                                                              0.344             0.467***               0.595***          0.607
                                                                                                                                         **

                                                                       (0.078)           (0.086)                (0.226)           (0.251)

                                                                              ***
GDP Gap                                                                0.049             0.061***               0.022             0.035
                                                                       (0.012)           (0.016)                (0.057)           (0.037)

                                                                              **                                       ***
REER Change                                                            -0.021            0.006                  -0.401            -0.407***
                                                                       (0.011)+++        (0.017)+++             (0.048)           (0.050)

                                                                                                                       ***
Reserves Change                                                        0.002             0.004                  0.102             0.128***
                                                                       (0.004)+++        (0.009)+++             (0.010)           (0.026)

                                                                                                                       ***
FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-1)                                         0.032                                    -0.433
                                                                       -0.055+++                                (0.115)

                                                                                                                       **
Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-1)                                            -0.003                                   0.138
                                                                       -0.009+++                                (0.056)

                                                                                                                       ***
FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio (t-1)                                 -0.008                                   0.246
                                                                       (0.017)+++                               (0.073)

                                                                                                                                         **
FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-4)                                                           -0.053                                   -0.317
                                                                                         (0.072)                                  (0.160)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-4)                                                              -0.006                                   0.072
                                                                                         -0.008                                   (0.080)

                                                                                                                                         *
FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio (t-4)                                                   0.021                                    0.214
                                                                                         (0.020)                                  (0.109)

                                                                                                                       ***               **
GDP Growth                                                             0.003             -0.019                 -0.156            -0.145
                                                                       (0.008)+++        (0.017)++              (0.051)           (0.056)

Observations                                                           895               875                    295               285
Adj. R-Squared                                                         0.91              0.82                   0.63              0.62
            Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.




                                                                                    65
Table A17

      ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: DMEs, GROUPED BY NEER VOLATILITY                                                    ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: DMEs, GROUPED BY NEER VOLATILITY
                  USING LAGGED DEBT VARIABLES (t-1)                                                                           USING LAGGED DEBT VARIABLES (t-4)

Variable                                               DME Groups by NEER Volatility                       Variable                                                 DME Groups by NEER Volatility
                                               (1)           (2)           (3)                                                                               (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                     ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                            0.960         0.930***      0.980***                        Interest Rate (t-1)                               0.900***
                                                                                                                                                                          0.870***      0.950***
                                               (0.018)       (0.011)       (0.021)                                                                           (0.055)      (0.041)       (0.030)

Inflation                                      0.062***           0.056              0.140
                                                                                            ***
                                                                                                           Inflation                                         0.098***          0.01              0.180
                                                                                                                                                                                                        **

                                               (0.016)            (0.051)            (0.029)                                                                 (0.037)           (0.064)           (0.075)

GDP Gap                                        -0.018             0.067***           0.003                 GDP Gap                                           -0.011            0.097
                                                                                                                                                                                      ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.026
                                               (0.014)            (0.004)            (0.018)                                                                 (0.020)           (0.016)           (0.035)

                                                       ***
REER Change                                    -0.032             0.023***           -0.009
                                                                                            **
                                                                                                           REER Change                                       -0.034***         0.026
                                                                                                                                                                                      ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.012***
                                               (0.006)            (0.007)            (0.004)                                                                 (0.013)           (0.005)           (0.003)

Reserves Change                                -0.008             0.001              -0.00001              Reserves Change                                   -0.013            -0.007            -0.004***
                                               (0.007)            (0.004)            (0.001)                                                                 (0.010)           (0.007)           (0.001)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-1)                    0.003***           -0.002*            0.002                 Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-4)                       -0.001            -0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                      ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.015
                                               (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.006)                                                                 (0.007)           (0.003)           (0.018)

                                                      ***
GDP Growth                                     0.021              0.040***           0.037***              GDP Growth                                        0.019***          0.043***          0.044***
                                               (0.005)            (0.004)            (0.008)                                                                 (0.005)           (0.006)           (0.011)

Observations                                   292                292                219                   Observations                                      286               286               214
Adj. R-Squared                                 0.93               0.97               0.96                  Adj. R-Squared                                    0.86              0.91              0.90
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard        Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard
errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.                                          errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.                               *, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Groups based on quantiles sorted by historical nominal exchange rate volatility, with (1) being the        Groups based on quantiles sorted by historical nominal exchange rate volatility, with (1) being the
lowest volatility group, and (3) being the highest.                                                        lowest volatility group, and (3) being the highest.




                                                                                                      66
Table A18

      ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, GROUPED BY NEER VOLATILITY                                                    ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, GROUPED BY NEER VOLATILITY
                    USING LAGGED VARIABLES (t-1)                                                                                USING LAGGED VARIABLES (t-4)

Variable                                                EME Groups by NEER Volatility                      Variable                                                EME Groups by NEER Volatility
                                               (1)            (2)           (3)                                                                             (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                     ***            ***           ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                            0.930          0.890         0.570                          Interest Rate (t-1)                              0.910***     0.790***      0.540***
                                               (0.005)        (0.016)       (0.110)                                                                         (0.011)      (0.025)       (0.150)

                                               0.150*            0.240***
                                                                                          ***
Inflation                                                                          0.930                   Inflation                                        0.160*            0.360
                                                                                                                                                                                     ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.870***
                                               (0.083)           (0.073)           (0.230)                                                                  (0.088)           (0.061)           (0.300)

                                                                 0.080***                                                                                   0.018**                  ***
GDP Gap                                        0.013                               -0.049                  GDP Gap                                                            0.100             -0.044
                                               (0.010)           (0.023)           (0.082)                                                                  (0.009)           (0.034)           (0.110)

REER Change                                    -0.025*           -0.022            -0.240
                                                                                           **
                                                                                                           REER Change                                      -0.017            0.004             -0.250
                                                                                                                                                                                                       **

                                               (0.015)           (0.021)           (0.110)                                                                  (0.019)           (0.025)           (0.130)

                                               -0.003***
                                                                                                                                                                                                       **
Reserves Change                                                  0.003             0.018                   Reserves Change                                  0.003             0.004             0.071
                                               (0.001)           (0.008)           (0.029)                                                                  (0.004)           (0.010)           (0.033)

                                                                        **                 ***                                                                                       ***               ***
FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-1)                 -0.056            -0.042            -0.590                  FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-4)                   0.011             -0.130            -0.390
                                               (0.034)           (0.020)           (0.110)                                                                  (0.081)           (0.047)           (0.069)

                                                                                          ***
Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-1)                    0.001             0.002             0.230                   Public Debt/GDP Ratio (t-4)                      0.007**           0.001             0.150
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ***

                                               (0.003)           (0.005)           (0.050)                                                                  (0.003)           (0.017)           (0.022)

                                                                                   0.310***
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ***
FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio (t-1)         0.023             0.009                                     FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio (t-4)           (0.006)           0.004             0.190
                                               (0.016)           (0.008)           (0.074)                                                                  (0.031)           (0.012)           (0.048)

GDP Growth                                     0.016***          0.003             (0.040)                 GDP Growth                                       0.012             (0.016)           (0.025)
                                               (0.006)           (0.010)           (0.036)                                                                  (0.008)           (0.011)           (0.031)

Observations                                   358               415               420                     Observations                                     349               407               408
Adj. R-Squared                                 0.93              0.93              0.66                    Adj. R-Squared                                   0.89              0.84              0.60
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard        Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard
errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.                                          errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.                               *, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Groups based on quantiles sorted by historical nominal exchange rate volatility, with (1) being the        Groups based on quantiles sorted by historical nominal exchange rate volatility, with (1) being the
lowest volatility group, and (3) being the highest.                                                        lowest volatility group, and (3) being the highest.




                                                                                                      67
Table A19
                      ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, FOREIGN DENOMINATED PUBLIC DEBT EXCLUDING PERIODS WITH COLLAPSING CURRENCY

Variable                                                                                      IT                                                                                Non-IT
                                                       (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)                (7)          (8)            (9)        (10)           (11)        (12)
                                                              ***          ***          ***           ***          ***          ***                ***          ***            ***          ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                                    0.859        0.860        0.859         0.859        0.856        0.856              0.790        0.800          0.777        0.708        0.708***    0.708***
                                                       (0.027)      (0.027)      (0.029)       (0.029)      (0.033)      (0.033)            (0.112)      (0.120)        (0.126)      (0.112)      (0.111)     (0.111)

                                                              ***
Inflation                                              0.492        0.497***     0.488***      0.487***     0.485***     0.457
                                                                                                                                ***
                                                                                                                                            0.463        0.459          0.498        0.538
                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.545       0.552
                                                       (0.089)      (0.089)      (0.089)       (0.089)      (0.089)      (0.076)            (0.332)      (0.301)        (0.342)      (0.326)      (0.338)     (0.353)

                                                              **           **           *             *
GDP Gap                                                0.038        0.037        0.033         0.032        0.032*       0.047
                                                                                                                                ***
                                                                                                                                            0.038        0.036          0.044        0.038
                                                                                                                                                                                            **
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.038
                                                                                                                                                                                                         **
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.035
                                                       (0.017)      (0.017)      (0.019)       (0.017)      (0.018)      (0.017)            (0.032)      (0.026)        (0.027)      (0.018)      (0.017)     (0.034)

                                                                                                                                                                                            *
REER Change                                                         -0.014       -0.012        -0.012       -0.012       0.005                           -0.092         -0.103       -0.107       -0.107*     -0.110**
                                                                    (0.010)      (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.019)++                       (0.066)        (0.072)      (0.062)      (0.062)     (0.052)

Reserves Change                                                     0.005        0.005         0.005        0.005        0.009                           0.007          0.024        0.012        0.015       0.012
                                                                    (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)                         (0.033)        (0.028)      (0.029)      (0.027)     (0.035)

                                                                                                                                                                               **           **
FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                                         -0.016        -0.014    -0.105          -0.113                                         -0.058       -0.254       -0.208      -0.210
                                                                                 (0.044)       (0.047)++ (0.096)         (0.100)                                        (0.028)      (0.098)      (0.144)     (0.144)

                                                                                                                                                                                            **
Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                                                          -0.002    0.011           0.011                                                       0.107        0.098*      0.099*
                                                                                               (0.011)++ (0.015)         (0.015)                                                     (0.050)      (0.057)     (0.058)

FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio                                                                            0.043        0.045                                                                    -0.052      -0.052
                                                                                                            (0.031)      (0.032)                                                                  (0.103)     (0.103)

GDP Growth                                                                                                               -0.021                                                                               0.006
                                                                                                                         (0.016)                                                                              (0.043)

Observations                                           928          928          905           905          905          905                321          321            276          276          276         276
Adj. R-Squared                                         0.82         0.82         0.82          0.82         0.82         0.83               0.70         0.70           0.71         0.74         0.74        0.74
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.
Excluded Periods: Argentina before Q1 2003 and after Q4 2015. Turkey before Q2 2003.




                                                                                                            68
Table A20

 ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, GROUPED BY NEER VOLATILITY
       EXCLUDING PERIODS WITH COLLAPSING CURRENCY

Variable                                          EME Groups by NEER Volatility
                                                (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                        ***            ***
                                                0.908          0.812          0.755***
Interest Rate (t-1)
                                                (0.016)        (0.039)        (0.110)

                                                        *              ***           ***
Inflation                                       0.121          0.361          0.830
                                                (0.066)        (0.069)        (0.238)

                                                        *              ***
GDP Gap                                         0.018          0.102          0.037
                                                (0.010)        (0.037)        (0.034)

REER Change                                     -0.011         0.007          -0.075***
                                                (0.014)        (0.027)        (0.019)

Reserves Change                                 0.003          0.007          -0.011
                                                (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.018)

FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                        -0.190*        -0.213**       -0.356
                                                (0.100)        (0.088)        (0.224)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio                           0.007          0.014          0.152*
                                                (0.009)        (0.017)        (0.090)

FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio                0.066          0.064          0.097
                                                (0.041)        (0.043)        (0.093)

GDP Growth                                      0.012          -0.021*        0.037
                                                (0.008)        (0.011)        (0.028)

Observations                                    360            419            401
Adj. R-Squared                                  0.90           0.86           0.79
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated
standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Groups based on quantiles sorted by historical nominal exchange rate volatility, with (1)
being the lowest volatility group, and (3) being the highest.
Excluded Periods: Argentina before Q1 2003 and after Q4 2015. Turkey before Q2 2003.




                                                                         69
Table A21


                                           ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: DEVELOPED MARKET ECONOMIES
                                                CONTROLLING FOR TREND IN THE RISK-FREE RATE

Variable                                                                      IT                                                            Non-IT
                                                        (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)                   (5)           (6)        (7)             (8)
                                                         ***            ***            ***           ***                    ***           ***        ***             ***
Interest Rate (t-1)                              0.758          0.869          0.681         0.724                    0.745         0.856      0.813           0.831
                                                 (0.056)        (0.034)        (0.051)       (0.046)                  (0.085)       (0.089) 0.091              0.100

Inflation                                        0.064*         0.146**        0.114**       0.124**                  0.003         0.015        0.017         0.020
                                                 (0.038)        (0.059)+       (0.041)       (0.049)                  (0.045)       (0.043)      (0.049)       (0.052)

GDP Gap                                          0.050***   0.089***   0.113***    0.104***                           -0.021        -0.004       -0.005        -0.007
                                                 (0.006)+++ (0.011)+++ (0.020)+++ (0.017)+++                          (0.017)       (0.016)      (0.021)       (0.021)

                                                           0.016*    0.015*     0.017**                               -0.012*
                                                                                                                                                           *
REER Change                                      0.015                                                                              -0.017       -0.018        -0.0205*
                                                 (0.010)++ (0.009)++ (0.008)++ (0.008)++                              (0.007)       (0.012)      (0.010)       (0.021)

                                                                         *              *             *                                     *                         *
Reserves Change                                  -0.005         -0.005         -0.005        -0.005                   -0.007        -0.010       -0.008        -0.009
                                                 (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.002)                  (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)

                                                          ***
Public Debt/GDP Ratio                            -0.011         -0.010**       -0.003        -0.005                   -0.005        -0.005       -0.003        -0.004
                                                 (0.003)        (0.005)        (0.004)       (0.004)                  (0.005)       (0.006)      (0.004)       (0.005)

                                                         ***                                                                 **
Nominal US Rate                                  0.207                                                                0.124
                                                 (0.040)                                                              (0.062)

                                                                        *
Real US Rate                                                    0.015                                                               -0.012
                                                                (0.008)+++                                                          (0.008)

                                                                                       ***
US R-Star (HLW, 2017)                                                          0.467                                                             0.094
                                                                               (0.086)+++                                                        -0.061

                                                                                                     ***
EU R-Star (HLW, 2017)                                                                        0.416                                                             0.064
                                                                                             (0.101)++                                                         (0.095)

                                                         ***            ***            ***           ***                     ***           ***          ***           ***
GDP Growth                                       0.032          0.042      0.022             0.025                    0.023         0.021        0.019         0.020
                                                 (0.004)        (0.004)+++ (0.005)           (0.005)                  (0.005)       (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.005)

Observations                                     461            461            535           535                      277           277          277           277
Adj. R-Squared                                   0.92           0.89           0.92          0.90                     0.88          0.87         0.87          0.87
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in
parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.




                                                                                       70
Table A22

       ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: DMEs, GROUPED BY NEER VOLATILITY
             CONTROLLING FOR TREND IN THE RISK-FREE RATE

Variable                                       DME Groups by NEER Volatility
                             (1)                   (2)               (3)
Interest Rate (t-1)          0.850***              0.660***          0.850***
                             (0.071)               (0.095)           (0.074)

Inflation                    0.074***                 0.010                     0.160***
                             (0.026)                  (0.041)                   (0.041)

GDP Gap                      -0.001                   0.096***                  0.042
                             (0.020)                  (0.022)                   (0.050)

REER Change                  -0.023*                  0.030***                  -0.006**
                             (0.012)                  (0.006)                   (0.002)

Reserves Change              -0.01                    -0.004                    -0.004***
                             (0.008)                  (0.005)                   (0.001)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio -0.001                          -0.010***                 0.01
                      (0.001)                         (0.002)                   (0.011)

GDP Growth                   0.013*                   0.020***                  0.031***
                             (0.008)                  (0.004)                   (0.007)

R-Star (HLW, 2017)           0.160                    0.470***                  0.250*
                             (0.100)                  (0.140)                   (0.150)

Observations                 295                      295                       221
Adj. R-Squared               0.89                     0.94                      0.91
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard
errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Groups based on quantiles sorted by historical nominal exchange rate volatility, with (1) being the
lowest volatility group, and (3) being the highest.




                                                          71
Table A23


                                 ALTERNATIVE SPECIFICATION WITH PUBLIC DEBT INTERACTED WITH DOMESTIC OBJECTIVES

                    DEVELOPED MARKET ECONOMIES                                                                              EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES

Variable                                                       IT          Non-IT                   Variable                                                            IT        Non-IT
                                                                   (1)        (2)                                                                                           (3)      (4)
                                                                                   ***                                                                                                   ***
Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                          0.005       -0.045                   FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                            -0.267     1.606
                                                               (0.077)     (0.007)                                                                                      (0.394)   (0.381)

Inflation x Public Debt/GDP Ratio                              -0.102      -0.350*                  Inflation x FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                1.59      0.254
                                                               (0.147)     (0.182)                                                                                      (2.210)   (0.943)

                                                                                  ***                                                                                                    ***
GDP Gap x Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                -0.013      0.041                    GDP Gap x FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                                  0.140     -2.136
                                                               (0.077)     (0.009)                                                                                      (0.351)   (0.350)

                                                                                  **                                                                                                     ***
REER Change x Public Debt/GDP Ratio                            -0.008      0.099                    REER Change x FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                              -0.146    -0.645
                                                               (0.011)     (0.044)                                                                                      (0.138)   (0.173)

                                                                      *
Reserves Change x Public Debt/GDP Ratio                        -0.017      0.005                    Reserves Change x FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                          0.113     0.332
                                                               (0.009)     (0.018)                                                                                      (0.085)   (0.291)

Observations                                                   535         277                      Observations                                                        905       298
Adj. R-Squared                                                 0.89        0.87                     Adj. R-Squared                                                      0.83      0.68
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
+,++,+++ Indicate significance of the difference between IT and Non-IT estimate at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Specification includes all main variables as the baseline specification, but we report just Public Debt interactions and main effects for brevity.
De jure IT classification based on IMF.




                                                                                              72
Table A24

                         ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: DMEs, GROUPED BY PUBLIC DEBT/GDP

Variable                                 DME de jure Inflation Targeters                         DME de jure Non-Inflation Targeters
                                         Low Debt             High Debt                         Low Debt         High Debt

Interest Rate (t-1)                      0.850***                0.560***                       0.850***              0.890***
                                         (0.019)                 (0.059)                        (0.110)               (0.035)

Inflation                                0.190***                0.300***                       0.190***              -0.007
                                         (0.065)                 (0.046)                        (0.029)               (0.014)

GDP Gap                                  0.100***                0.370***                       -0.031                0.008***
                                         (0.016)                 (0.065)                        (0.037)               (0.001)

REER Change                              0.00004                 0.014***                       0.031***              -0.008
                                         (0.006)                 (0.004)                        (0.010)               (0.005)

Reserves Change                          -0.004                  0.002                          -0.030***             -0.019*
                                         (0.003)                 (0.007)                        (0.005)               (0.010)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio                    -0.021**                -0.024***                      -0.028***             0.002
                                         (0.009)                 (0.004)                        (0.002)               (0.003)

GDP Growth                               0.045***                0.024***                       0.025                 0.005
                                         (0.002)                 (0.009)                        (0.030)               (0.008)

Observations                             217                     152                            53                    117
Adj. R-Squared                           0.85                    0.83                           0.83                  0.78
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated
coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Low Debt and High Debt groups based on bottom 50% and top 50% in terms of public debt/GDP levels, respectively.




                                                                    73
Table A25



                       ESTIMATED TAYLOR RULES: EMEs, GROUPED BY FX PUBLIC DEBT/GDP

Variable                                      EME de jure Inflation Targeters                    EME de jure Non-Inflation Targeters
                                         Low FX Debt         High FX Debt                       Low FX Debt      High FX Debt

Interest Rate (t-1)                      0.820***                0.710***                       0.930***              0.210***
                                         (0.056)                 (0.085)                        (0.036)               (0.029)

Inflation                                0.300***                0.580***                       0.060**               1.300***
                                         (0.062)                 (0.100)                        (0.027)               (0.100)

GDP Gap                                  0.072***                0.130**                        0.001                 -0.004
                                         (0.020)                 (0.052)                        (0.009)               (0.006)

REER Change                              -0.028                  -0.026                         -0.012                -0.270***
                                         (0.025)                 (0.034)                        (0.014)               (0.009)

Reserves Change                          0.009                   0.004                          0.007***              0.170***
                                         (0.015)                 (0.011)                        (0.001)               (0.015)

FX Public Debt/GDP Ratio                 0.001                   -0.720**                       -0.900***             0.470***
                                         (0.110)                 (0.370)                        (0.087)               (0.002)

Public Debt/GDP Ratio                    -0.003                  0.190*                         0.005**               -0.340***
                                         (0.011)                 (0.110)                        (0.002)               (0.000)

FX Public Debt/Public Debt Ratio         (0.002)                 0.250**                        0.300***              -0.150***
                                         (0.016)                 (0.120)                        (0.042)               (0.006)

GDP Growth                               (0.008)                 (0.014)                        0.005                 -0.330***
                                         (0.012)                 (0.020)                        (0.011)               (0.007)

Observations                             461                     530                            132                   79
Adj. R-Squared                           0.73                    0.86                           0.87                  0.65
Dependent variable: Nominal interest rates. Panel fixed-effects estimation. The associated standard errors are noted below each estimated
coefficient in parenthesis.
*, **, *** Indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Low Debt and High Debt groups based on bottom 50% and top 50% in terms of FX public debt/GDP levels, respectively.




                                                                    74
Table A26




            75
Table A27




            76
Table A28




            77
Figure A1: Inflation-Targeting Adoption (de jure)




                                              78
Figure A2: Developed Market Economies Summary Statistics by IT vs. non-IT (de jure)




                                            79
Figure A3: Emerging Market Economies Summary Statistics by IT vs. non-IT (de jure)




                                            80
Figure A4




            81
Figure A5: Estimates from Table A8 Regressions, DME by Volatility Bin




                                            82
Figure A6: Estimates from Table A9 Regressions, EME by Volatility Bin




                                            83
Figure A7 Policy rate response to a 0.01 increase in the FX Public Debt/GDP ratio (1 percentage
point), as a function of FX Public Debt/Total Public Debt




Figure A8 Distribution of FX Public Debt/Total Public Debt, First Observation (left), Last
Observation (center), and change (right)




                                               84
Figure A9 Historical EME Average of FX Public Debt/Total Public Debt




APPENDIX B: EURO DEBT CRISIS

Figure A10: Euro IIPS [Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain] annual burden of servicing the sovereign
debt/GDP, including risk-free rate (red) and excluding risk-free rate (blue)




                                                85
The blue and red lines in Figure A10 represent the approximate cost of serving the debt/GDP
faced by IIPS governments net and gross of the risk-free rate, respectively. The blue line
represents the annual cost of debt associated with expected default risk, defined by the expected
probability of credit event times the percentage haircut. As an approximation, we take 5-year
sovereign yields as the benchmark debt cost and multiply by the public debt/GDP ratio. 23 A more
rigorous calculation of the cost of debt requires detailed information on the maturity structure of
public debt. For these countries, the average maturity has ranged around 5 years and has been
gradually rising. In Spain and Italy, by 2015, average maturity was equal to 6.45 years and 6.52
years, respectively. Specifically, we first construct normalized spreads,  , for each country 
with respect to the German 5-year yield (the de facto risk-free rate,  ) 24:
                                                       - 
                                                =          .
                                                      1 + 

 The blue line ­ the annual cost of servicing the debt/GDP associated with default premia/GDP is
then given by
                                                     
                                                               .
                                                       


The red line, the annual cost of servicing the debt/GDP gross of the risk-free rate, is computed as
                                                        
                                          ( +  )         .
                                                        

Before the crisis, the gross cost of debt across IIPS countries was dominated by the risk-free
component. Over the euro crisis, the cost of debt became increasingly dominated by the default-
risk component amidst further compression of the German `risk-free' rate alongside the rising
default risk premia among the IIPS. After the crisis, the wedge between net and gross cost of
debt disappears, likely driven by the ultra-low risk-free rate. Moreover, default risk also came


23
     The 5-year sovereign bonds is the most liquid debt market for IIPS. Greece is not included in the charts
due to concerns about the veracity of its sovereign debt size before the euro crisis, and the occurrence of
several significant debt restructuring and haircuts after 2009.
24
     Assuming risk-neutral lenders, competitive and liquid markets,  reflects the expected default rate (the
probability of default times the haircut), and is determined by the spread  -  normalized by
country's i interest rate.
                                                      86
down with the risk-free rate in the post-crisis era, and periphery yields converged back down to
the German yield with a lag (Figure A11). Taking these developments together, the approximate
cost of debt by 2015 is roughly in line with pre-crisis levels, despite the Periphery's large
accumulation in public sector debt since 2008.

Figure A11: Euro Periphery Countries and Germany: 5-year sovereign bond yield




                                                 87
