                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        ARE INTERMEDIARY CONSTRAINTS PRICED?

                                              Wenxin Du
                                          Benjamin M. Hébert
                                           Amy Wang Huber

                                         Working Paper 26009
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w26009


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2019

The authors would like to thank Nina Boyarchenko, John Campbell, David Chapman, Thummim Cho,
Patrick Dennis, Darrell Duffie, Federico Gavazzoni, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Valentin Haddad,
Tarek Hassan, Francis Longstaff, Hanno Lustig, Matteo Maggiori, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Peter Kondor,
Gordon Liao, Stavros Panageas, Hélène Rey, Ken Singleton, Valeri Sokolovski, Andreas Stathopoulos,
Christian Wagner, Jonathan Wallen, Dimitri Vayanos, and Vish Viswanathan for helpful comments.
We would like to particularly thank Svetlana Bryzgalova and Isaiah Andrews for help understanding
issues related to weak identification. We also would like to thank seminar and conference participants
at the American Finance Association Annual Meeting, Arrowstreet Capital, Bank of Canada-SF Fed
Conference on Fixed Income Markets, Canadian Derivatives Institute Annual Conference, JHU Carey
Finance Conference, LSE Paul Woolley Centre Annual Conference, Macro Finance Society, NBER
IFM Fall Meeting, NBER AP Fall Meeting, NBER Summer Institute (IAP), Northern Finance Association
Annual Meeting, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, UVA McIntire, and the Vienna Symposium
on FX Markets. We would like to thank Christian Gonzales Rojas, Sylvia Klosin, Haviland Sheldahl-Thomason,
and Lulu Wang for outstanding research assistance. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Wenxin Du, Benjamin M. Hébert, and Amy Wang Huber. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Intermediary Constraints Priced?
Wenxin Du, Benjamin M. Hébert, and Amy Wang Huber
NBER Working Paper No. 26009
June 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. F31,G12,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

Violations of no-arbitrage conditions measure the shadow cost of intermediary constraints. Intermediary
asset pricing and intertemporal hedging together imply that the risk of these constraints tightening
is priced. We describe a "forward CIP trading strategy" that bets on CIP violations shrinking and show
that its returns help identify the price of this risk. This strategy yields the highest returns for currency
pairs associated with the carry trade. The strategy's risk contributes substantially to the volatility of
the stochastic discount factor, is correlated with both other near-arbitrages and intermediary wealth
measures, and appears to be priced consistently across various asset classes.


Wenxin Du                                            Amy Wang Huber
Booth School of Business                             Stanford University Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago                                PhD Office
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue                              650 Knight Way
Chicago, IL 60637                                    Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                             amyywang@stanford.edu
Wenxin.Du@chicagobooth.edu

Benjamin M. Hébert
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
bhebert@stanford.edu
1    Introduction

Covered interest parity (CIP) violations post the Global Financial Crisis
(GFC) have been interpreted by many authors as a sign that intermediaries
are constrained (e.g. Du et al. (2018b), Avdjiev et al. (2019), Fleckenstein
and Longstaff (2018), Hébert (2018)). Meanwhile, the intermediary asset
pricing literature argues that constraints on intermediaries have important
implications for asset prices (see, e.g., Kondor and Vayanos (2019), and
He and Krishnamurthy (2017) for a survey). In this paper, we combine
these two ideas, and provide direct evidence that the risk of intermediary
constraints becoming larger is priced. Our results offer novel evidence in
support of intermediary-based asset pricing.
    We begin by demonstrating, in a standard intermediary asset pricing
model, that the intermediaries' stochastic discount factor (SDF) is a func-
tion of the return on intermediary wealth and the magnitude of a cross-
currency basis (i.e. a CIP violation). The existence of liquid foreign ex-
change (FX) and interest rate derivatives across very granular maturities
allows us to directly measure innovations to intermediaries' SDF due to
shocks to the cross-currency basis. We argue that the most straightforward
test of this model is a test of whether "forward CIP trading strategies" that
bet on arbitrages becoming smaller earn excess returns.
    We then proceed to the data, and estimate the excess returns of these
forward CIP trading strategies. We define the forward CIP trading strategy
as using FX forwards and forward-starting interest rate swaps to conduct
a forward-starting CIP trade, and then unwinding the trade at its forward
starting date. Consider a trader who, at time t, first enters into a forward-



                                     1
starting CIP trade to go long Japanese yen and short Australian dollars
for three months between t + 1 and t + 4, with the currency risk fully
hedged. We refer to this trade as a one-month forward three-month CIP
trade. Then in a month, at t + 1, the trader unwinds the forward CIP trade
by going long Australian dollars and short Japanese yen for three months,
exactly cancelling all the promised cash flows of the forward CIP trade. The
profits of this two-step forward CIP trading strategy are proportional to
the difference between the market-implied one-month forward three-month
CIP deviation observed at t and the actual three-month CIP deviation
realized one month later at t + 1. The forward CIP trading strategy has
a positive (negative) return if the future CIP deviation is smaller (bigger)
than the market-implied forward CIP deviation today.
   The expected return on the forward CIP trading strategy offers a di-
rect test of intermediary asset pricing theories in which large positive CIP
deviations indicate that intermediaries are very constrained, because the
forward CIP trading strategy pays off poorly in these constrained states.
If the constraints of financial intermediaries are indeed a priced factor, we
should expect the forward CIP trading strategy to earn positive excess re-
turns on average, as a risk premium to compensate investors for bearing the
systematic risk exposure to variations in the shadow cost of intermediary
constraints. If instead intermediaries are not constrained, there will be no
CIP violations, and the forward CIP trading strategy will not be profitable.
   We find that there is a significant risk premium in the forward CIP
trading strategy during the post-GFC period. Specifically, we study our
forward CIP trading strategy for seven of the most liquid currencies: Aus-
tralian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), euro


                                     2
(EUR), British pound (GBP), Japanese yen (JPY), and U.S. dollar (USD).
We consider both the cross-currency basis vis-à-vis the USD and the basis
between two non-USD cross pairs.
       We find that there is a strong relationship between the spot cross-
currency basis, interest rate differentials, and forward CIP trading profits.
For the USD-based pairs post-GFC, the forward CIP trading strategy going
long the USD and shorting the foreign currency in the initial forward CIP
trade generates positive average returns for high interest rate currencies,
such as AUD and CAD, and negative average returns for low-interest-rate
currencies, such as JPY.1 In contrast, the returns on the forward CIP trad-
ing strategy pre-GFC were negligible.
       Our model emphasizes the importance of the currency pairs with the
largest spot cross-currency bases. We show that the average returns of
the forward CIP trading strategies for these pairs are generally sizable and
statistically significant post-GFC. In particular, the forward CIP trading
strategy for the "classic carry" AUD-JPY pair has annualized average profit
equal to 14 basis points and an annualized Sharpe ratio of roughly 1.4.
       We also examine the performance of the forward CIP trading strategies
for portfolios of currency pairs. The returns of the forward CIP trading
strategy (henceforth "forward CIP returns") are significant and positive
post-GFC for portfolios of currency pairs with large interest rate differ-
entials and large spot cross-currency bases. In contrast, we do not find
evidence of risk premia when using a dollar strategy that equally weights
all currencies vis-à-vis the USD. The strong performance of the carry and
   1
    Positive returns for the low-interest-rate currencies can be achieved by switching
the direction of the forward CIP arbitrage to go long the foreign currency and short the
USD in the initial forward CIP trade.



                                           3
the basis portfolios and the lack of significance of the dollar portfolio are
consistent with our model's prediction that the largest CIP violations are
most informative about intermediary constraints.
   Intermediary constraints, if present, should affect many asset markets
beyond the FX market. We show that CIP deviations are correlated with
the first principal component of various other near-arbitrages. We also
show that the returns of the forward CIP trading strategy are correlated
with the proxies for intermediary wealth returns of He et al. (2017).
   However, the correlation between the forward CIP return and the inter-
mediary equity return measure of He et al. (2017) cannot explain the risk
premium we uncover. We demonstrate this in regressions and more for-
mally using the Bayesian factor model comparison method of Barillas and
Shanken (2018) and Chib et al. (2020). These results justify the inclusion
of the forward CIP return as an additional factor (along with the interme-
diary wealth return) in the SDF, consistent with our model. In particular,
the results suggest that intermediaries are risk-tolerant and perceive strate-
gies (such as the forward CIP trading strategy) that perform poorly when
investment opportunities are best to be especially risky.
   We then test whether the excess returns of the tradable factors in this
SDF (intermediary equity and the forward CIP return) are consistent with
the prices of risk implied by the cross-section of assets, in an exercise build-
ing on the work of He et al. (2017) and Pasquariello (2014). We cannot
reject the hypothesis that this risk is priced consistently across the various
asset classes we consider, even when pooling across asset classes.
   Our paper sits at the intersection of literature on arbitrage and on in-
termediary asset pricing. Recent empirical work on covered interest parity


                                       4
violations has documented the existence and time series properties of these
arbitrages, as well as the quarter-end dynamics of these arbitrages arising
from bank regulations (for example, Du et al. (2018b)).2 We broaden the
burgeoning literature on CIP deviations by studying the term structure of
CIP deviations and discussing the general asset pricing implications of these
deviations beyond foreign exchange markets. Distinct from the traditional
limits of arbitrage literature based on the mark-to-market risk of the arbi-
trage trading strategy and slow-moving capital (for example, Shleifer and
Vishny (1997), Liu and Longstaff (2003), Duarte et al. (2007) and Duffie
(2010)), spot CIP arbitrage opportunities exist at very short (overnight or
one week) horizons, making it difficult for convergence risk to explain the
existence of CIP arbitrage. Boyarchenko et al. (2018) attribute the exis-
tence a broad class of arbitrages post-GFC to non-risk-weighted leverage
constraints due to bank regulations. Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2018) link
the cash-derivative basis in the interest rate future market to the cost of
renting financial intermediary balance sheet space. Hébert (2018) inter-
prets these arbitrages through an optimal policy framework.
       Adding the forward CIP return as a factor improves the ability of the
model to price the cross section of assets, reminiscent of a result on financial
market dislocation in Pasquariello (2014). However, the interpretation of
   2
     Besides Du et al. (2018b), there has been a large recent literature on CIP deviations
post-GFC. For example, Borio et al. (2016) argue that hedging demand of different
national banking systems can help explain cross-sectional variations in CIP deviations.
Rime et al. (2019) discuss the role of market segmentation in explaining CIP violations.
Anderson et al. (2019) measure the amount of potential arbitrage capital available to
global banks for CIP arbitrage. Liao (2019) finds that CIP deviations post-GFC affects
the corporate sector's funding currency decision. Avdjiev et al. (2019) examine the
relationship between CIP deviations, the dollar exchange rate, and the cross-border bank
flows in dollars. Du et al. (2018a) and Jiang et al. (2018), and Krishnamurthy and Lustig
(2019) use the CIP deviations for government bond yields to measure convenience yield
differentials between safe-haven government bonds and study implications for exchange
rate dynamics.


                                            5
our results is quite different. Our paper focus on arbitrage opportunities
post-GFC, caused in part by leverage constraints on financial intermediaries
resulting from post-GFC regulations, whereas the market dislocation index
in Pasquariello (2014) ends in 2009 and is interpreted as a result of classical
sources of mispricing, such as liquidity, information, sentiment, and noise.
   The existence of these regulations is one necessary ingredient for the ex-
istence of arbitrages, because the regulations prevent intermediaries from
closing the arbitrage. A second necessary ingredient is some form of limited
or constrained market access for other non-regulated agents in the economy.
These two ingredients are also the key ingredients of intermediary asset
pricing models (e.g. He and Krishnamurthy (2011)). A recent survey of
intermediary asset pricing, He and Krishnamurthy (2017), summarizes this
literature. Models featuring intermediary constraints have been applied to
the exchange rate literature, such as in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) and
Fang (2018). Unlike much of this literature, we emphasize literal arbitrages
as opposed to the intermediaries' ability to access investments with favor-
able risk/return trade-offs. In this respect, our model builds on Garleanu
and Pedersen (2011). We also contribute to this literature by emphasizing
the importance of intertemporal hedging considerations, following Camp-
bell (1993) and Kondor and Vayanos (2019), whereas much of the literature
(e.g. He and Krishnamurthy (2011), Garleanu and Pedersen (2011), and
He et al. (2017)) relies on log utility for intermediaries and neglects these
considerations. In taking the model to the data, we are building on He
et al. (2017), Adrian et al. (2014), and Haddad and Muir (2020). These
papers demonstrate that proxies of intermediaries wealth like the broker-
dealer leverage and capital ratio can price a variety of assets. Our results


                                      6
both support this view and go beyond it by providing evidence (the exis-
tence of arbitrage and its importance to the SDF) that the intermediary
SDF is distinct from the SDF of other agents.
    We begin by outlining the key elements of our model in section 2. We
then describe our forward CIP trading strategy and the relevant data in
section 3. Section 4 presents our main results on excess returns and high
Sharpe ratios for these strategies. Section 5 discusses additional implica-
tions of our model and our results, and in particular argues for the inclusion
of the forward CIP return in models of the SDF. We conclude in section 6.


2    Hypothesis and Model

In the empirical analysis that follows, we will test the hypothesis that
changes in the magnitude of cross-currency bases (i.e. CIP violations) are
a priced risk factor. This hypothesis is motivated by an intermediary asset
pricing model, which we outline below and describe in detail in the Internet
Appendix Section I.D. The purpose of the model is both to motivate the
hypothesis and to provide a framework to interpret our results. The model
is a discrete time version of He and Krishnamurthy (2011) that incorporates
a regulatory constraint (building on He and Krishnamurthy (2017)) and
intertemporal hedging considerations (following Campbell (1993)).
    In particular, we are motivated by log SDFs mt+1 of the form


                                    w
                       mt+1 = µt - rt +1 +  |xt+1,1 |,                     (1)


       w
where rt +1 is the return on the manager of an intermediary's wealth port-

folio and |xt+1,1 | is the absolute value of a one-period cross currency basis.


                                      7
Our hypothesis, in the context of this functional form, is that  is econom-
ically and statistically distinguishable from zero.
       The key idea behind this hypothesis is that the cross-currency basis
|xt,1 | is both a literal arbitrage and a measure of the investment opportu-
nities available to intermediaries at time t. The arbitrage can exist only if
intermediaries are constrained and cannot take advantage of it. In the pres-
ence of such constraints, an intermediary concerned with hedging against
changes in future investment opportunities should perceive assets whose
returns are correlated with |xt+1,1 | as particularly risky or safe, depending
on the sign of the intermediary's intertemporal hedging concerns.
       We begin by discussing intertemporal hedging. Campbell (1993) shows
that SDFs with the functional form of (1) can be derived using CRRA or
Epstein-Zin preferences (and assuming log-normality and homoskedastic-
ity). In this case, |xt+1,1 | must proxy for the revision in expectations about
future investment opportunities. That is,

                                              
                |xt+1,1 | - Et [|xt+1,1 |]           j (Et+1 - Et )[rt
                                                                     w
                                                                       +1+j ].
                                              j =1



The sign of the coefficient  depends on whether the relative risk aversion3
coefficient  is greater or smaller than one ( < 1   > 0).
       Let us suppose the manager of an intermediary has CRRA or Epstein-
Zin preferences and holds an equity claim on the intermediary.4 The inter-
   3
     As discussed in Campbell (1993), this result holds for both CRRA and Epstein-Zin
preferences. That is, it is  and not the elasticity of intertemporal substitution coefficient
that determines the sign of  .
   4
     We follow He and Krishnamurthy (2011) in assuming that the manager must hold
an equity claim of a certain size to avoid moral hazard. For the remainder of this section,
we will assume that this constraint does not bind. We make this assumption both for
simplicity and to emphasize that the regulatory constraint can bind even if the equity
constraint does not. For formulas that extend to the case with a binding constraint, and



                                              8
mediary is subject to a regulatory constraint,


                                          k i |t
                                               i
                                                 |  1.                                (2)
                                     iI


                                                            i
Here, i  I denotes an asset that the intermediary can hold, t is the in-
termediary's holding of asset i at time t as a share of the intermediary's
equity, and k i is an asset-specific weight in the leverage calculation. This
constraint captures some of the key features of leverage ratios and risk-
weighted capital requirements. First, to the extent that the k i differ across
assets, the constraint can capture risk-weights. Second, the constraint is
relaxed by increasing the level of equity financing the intermediary rela-
tive to debt, holding fixed the dollar holdings of each asset. Third, the
constraint can omit entirely certain assets such as derivatives, consistent
with how some leverage constraints and risk-weighted capital constraints
operate. To simplify our exposition, we will assume in what follows that
derivatives are not included in the regulatory constraint.5
                                                                i
    The manager's first-order condition for the portfolio share t is


                                   i       b      RC i    i
                   Et [exp(mt+1 )(Rt +1 - Rt )] = t k sgn(t ),                        (3)


                                  i
where mt+1 is the manager's SDF, Rt +1 is the gross return on asset i  I ,

 b        b
Rt = exp(rt ) is the gross rate on the intermediary's debt between dates t
and t + 1, sgn(·) is the sign function, and RC
                                            t  is the (scaled) multiplier on
a more detailed discussion of this issue, see Internet Appendix Section I.D.
    5
      This particular functional form follows He et al. (2017). Its details are not essen-
tial for our result; in particular, we could easily accommodate a constraint that treats
        i                    i
long (t   > 0) and short (t    < 0) positions asymmetrically. Considering regulatory con-
straints that include derivatives complicates the analysis but does not alter the main
predictions of the model that we will take to the data.




                                            9
the regulatory constraint.6 Let us apply this equation to two portfolios of
assets: the cross-currency basis arbitrage and the wealth portfolio.
      Let St denote the exchange rate at time t (in units of foreign currency
per U.S. dollar), and let Ft,1 denote the one-period ahead forward exchange
rate. We define the spot one-period cross-currency basis as

                                           b
                                          Rt Ft,1
                                 Xt,1 =    c
                                                  -1
                                          Rt St

       c
where Rt is the foreign currency risk-free rate, and let xt,1 = ln (1 + Xt,1 )
be the log version. The first order condition is, taking absolute values,


                                   b
                   Et [exp(mt+1 + rt )]|1 - exp(-xt,1 )| = RC c
                                                           t k ,                  (4)

where k c is the risk-weights of the foreign currency risk-free bond.
      The key takeaway from this equation is that the absolute value of the
cross-currency basis can be used to measure the shadow cost of the reg-
ulatory constraint. Intuitively, if an arbitrage opportunity is available to
the intermediary, the intermediary would take advantage of it if it could;
therefore, the intermediary must be constrained. The size of the arbitrage
opportunity can be used to measure the degree to which the constraint
binds (a point emphasized by Hébert (2018)).
      Let us now consider the first-order condition applied to the entire wealth
portfolio. In this case, the relevant risk-weight is one (by construction):


                                        w             b       RC
                    Et [exp(mt+1 )(exp(rt +1 ) - exp(rt ))] = t .                 (5)
  6                                    i
      In the particular case in which t  = 0, we have the usual inaction inequalities,
-RC
 t k
     i                       i      b
           Et [exp(mt+1 )(Rt+1 - Rt )]  RC    i
                                          t k (see Internet Appendix section I.D).




                                          10
This equation captures the usual intuition that the shadow cost of the
constraint is equal to the marginal value of the forgone investment oppor-
tunities. The constraint can bind only if the intermediary has valuable
investment opportunities that it cannot exploit due to the constraint.
   Combining these two equations to eliminate the shadow cost,

                               w       b
           Et [exp(mt+1 )(exp(rt +1 - rt ) - 1)]   |1 - exp(-xt,1 )|
                                                 =                   .
                     Et [exp(mt+1 )]                      kc

That is, the arbitrage available at time t can measure the investment oppor-
tunities available at time t. Log-linearizing and assuming homoskedasticity,


                          w                        b      -1
            (Et+1 - Et )[rt +1+j ] = (Et+1 - Et )[rt+j + kc |xt+j,1 |].




Thus, revisions in expected future cross-currency bases measure revisions
in future investment opportunities more generally. Moreover, these effects
                           -1
are amplified by leverage kc  . Because innovations to the cross-currency
basis are persistent, we can proxy for revisions in expectations about |xt+j,1 |
with the innovation to |xt+1,1 |. This result, combined with intertemporal
hedging, justifies the SDF of Equation (1).
   This argument (described in more detail in the Internet Appendix) mo-
tivates our empirical exercise, which attempts to measure price of cross-
currency basis risk ( ). The most direct way to estimate this price of risk
is to study a derivative contract whose payoff is linear in |xt+1,1 |. If such a
contract has an excess return that cannot be explained by the covariance
                                                                     w
between |xt+1,1 | and the other parts of the hypothesized SDF (i.e. rt +1 ),

we should conclude that innovations in the cross-currency basis are indeed
a priced risk factor (or at least correlated with an omitted factor). The


                                        11
forward CIP trading strategy that we construct in our empirical analysis is
exactly this derivative contract. The following remarks discuss some basic
insights from the model that guide our empirical analysis.


Omitted Factors. Equation (1) likely omits important elements of the
SDF. Any factor that predicts revisions in expectations (about the future
cross-currency basis, future risk-free rates, or, in a heteroskedastic model
like Campbell et al. (2018), future volatility) should also enter the SDF.


Correlation between Factors. The two factors in our SDF (the inter-
mediary wealth return and the basis) likely move together. Because our
model treats asset prices as exogenous, it makes no predictions about this
co-movement. Most general equilibrium intermediary asset pricing models
(e.g. He and Krishnamurthy (2011)) predict that investment opportunities
are best for intermediaries precisely when intermediaries have lost wealth,
and hence we should expect a negative correlation between the two factors.


Sources of Variation. Our model shows that the shadow cost of regula-
tory constraints can be measured with CIP violations, but is silent on why
CIP violations vary over time. We expect that supply shocks (low inter-
mediary net worth), demand shocks (e.g. changing household preferences),
and changes in the structure of the regulatory constraint will all affect the
shadow cost of the constraints on intermediaries. Our results demonstrate
that, regardless of what is driving changes in these shadow costs, the SDF
in Equation (1) should price the assets available to the intermediary.


The Choice of Currency. Our description of the model has emphasized
a single cross-currency basis, whereas our empirical analysis will consider a

                                     12
variety of currency pairs. In the context of the model, heterogeneity in the
magnitude of the cross-currency basis across currencies can arise only due
to different k i for bonds in different currencies, or if the manager has zero
portfolio weight on all arbitrages except the one with the largest magnitude.
That is, why would an intermediary conduct a USD-EUR arbitrage if a
USD-JPY arbitrage offers larger profits? Our model, and in particular
the regulatory constraint, is too simple to offer much guidance on this
issue.7 The model does push us in our empirical work to focus on the cross-
currency bases with the largest CIP violations, recognizing that differences
in the definitions of risk-free rates across currencies might introduce some
measurement error into the question of which basis is largest.


CIP vs. Other Arbitrages. Our model places no special emphasis on
CIP violations. Any arbitrage that intermediaries engage in could be used
to measure RC
           t . In subsection 5.1, we argue that among various arbitrages

and near-arbitrages documented in the literature, CIP violations are unique
in terms of our ability to accurately measure the spot arbitrage xt and to
construct a trading strategy that directly bets on xt becoming larger or
smaller in the future. We also document that spot CIP violations are
highly correlated with other arbitrages, consistent with our model.


Magnitudes. Shocks to the cross-currency basis are small (basis points).
However, intermediaries are quite levered, meaning that k c might be small,
consumption-wealth ratios for managers are likely small (meaning  is close
   7
    For example, some degree of segmentation in the FX derivatives market across differ-
ent currency pairs combined with hedging demand can help help generate different sizes
of the basis. Alternatively, Wallen (2020) offers an explanation combining regulatory
constraints and markups.




                                          13
to one), and innovations to the basis are persistent. These forces increase
the price of cross-currency basis risk, and might cause a significant fraction
of the volatility of the SDF to be attributable to innovations in the basis.


3        Forward CIP Arbitrage

We describe the forward CIP trading strategy that bets on the size of the
future cross-currency basis in three steps. First, we revisit "spot" cross-
currency bases (as in Du et al. (2018b)), and describe the cross-currency
bases based on overnight index swap (OIS) rates that we use in our em-
pirical analysis.8 Second, we discuss "forward" cross-currency bases, con-
structed from forward-starting OIS swaps and FX forwards. Third, we in-
troduce our forward CIP trading strategy, which initiates a forward-starting
cross-currency basis trade but then unwinds the trade once it becomes a
spot trade. This trading strategy is not itself an arbitrage, but rather a
risky bet on whether available arbitrages will become bigger or smaller.
        We study cross-currency bases in seven major currencies, AUD, CAD,
CHF, EUR, GBP, JPY and USD.9 We examine the bases of both individ-
ual currency pairs and portfolios of currency pairs. All data on spot and
forward FX rates, interest rate swaps, and FRAs are daily data obtained
from Bloomberg using London closing rates. Our dataset begins in January
    8
      For robustness, in Internet Appendix Tables I.A4 and I.A5, we also consider a
forward CIP trading strategy based on interbank offer rates (IBOR) and forward rate
agreements (FRAs) indexed to these IBOR rates.
    9
      We began with the G10 currencies, and excluded the Norwegian Krona (NOK) and
Swedish Krona (SEK) due to limited data availability on OIS rates and IBOR FRAs.
We also exclude the New Zealand dollar (NZD) because the OIS floating leg for the NZD
is not a market rate but rather an administered central bank policy rate, the Official
Cash Rate (OFR). The OFR is not equal to the actual overnight rate in the financial
market, which generally fluctuates 0.25% around the OFR.




                                         14
2003 and ends in August 2018.10 We divide our data into three periods:
Pre-GFC, January 1, 2003 to June 30, 2007, GFC, July 1, 2007 to June 30,
2010, and Post-GFC, July 1, 2010 to August 31, 2018.11


3.1      OIS-Based Spot Cross-Currency Bases

We first define the OIS-based spot cross-currency basis vis-à-vis the USD.
     c
Let Rt, 0, denote the annualized spot gross  -month interest rate in foreign

                                         $
currency c available at time t, and let Rt, 0, denote the corresponding spot

rate in U.S. dollars. The middle subscript "0" denotes a spot rate (as
opposed to a forward rate). We express exchange rates in units of foreign
currency per USD. That is, an increase in the spot exchange rate at time
t, St , is a depreciation of the foreign currency and an appreciation of the
USD. The  -month forward exchange rate at time t is Ft, .
       Following convention (e.g. Du et al. (2018b)), we define the  -month
spot cross-currency basis of foreign currency c vis-à-vis the USD as

                                                   12
                                    $
                          c,$      Rt, 0,    Ft,   
                         Xt, 0,   = c                   - 1,                   (6)
                                   Rt,0,     St


and the log version as xc, $            c,$
                        t,0, = ln (1 + Xt,0, ). This definition is identical to

the one employed in our model, except that we now consider an arbitrary
horizon  and use annualized interest rates.
       The classic CIP condition is that xc, $    c,$
                                          t,0, = Xt,0, = 0. If the cross-

currency basis xc, $
                t,0, is positive (negative), then the direct U.S. dollar in-

              $
terest rate, Rt, 0, , is higher (lower) than the synthetic dollar interest rate

  10
     As a robustness check, in Internet Appendix Table I.A7 we extend our baseline
sample period through March 2020 to cover the financial market turmoil during the
COVID-19 pandemic and obtain similar results.
  11
     The OIS and FRA data for the pre-GFC period appear less reliable (more missing
or erroneous values) than the data for the GFC and post-GFC periods.

                                        15
constructed from the foreign currency bond and exchange rate transactions.
       The CIP condition is a textbook no-arbitrage condition if the U.S. and
foreign interest rates used in the analysis are risk-free interest rates. For
our main analysis, we choose OIS rates as our proxy for risk-free interest
rate. The OIS rate is the fixed rate of a fixed-for-floating interest rate swap
in which the floating rate is an overnight unsecured rate.12
       The OIS is a good proxy for the risk-free rate across maturities for sev-
eral reasons. First, the OIS allows investors to lock in fixed borrowing and
lending rates for a fixed maturity, by borrowing and lending at the nearly
risk-free floating overnight rate each day over the duration of the contract.
Second, the interest rate swaps themselves have very little counter-party
risk, because there are no exchanges of principal, only exchanges of inter-
est. These derivative contracts are also highly collateralized and in recently
years have been centrally cleared in most major jurisdictions. Third, OIS
swaps are generally very liquid and traded at a large range of granular
maturities (unlike e.g. repo contracts).
       Internet Appendix Figure I.A1 shows the three-month OIS-based cross-
currency basis for the six sample currencies vis-à-vis the USD between
January 2003 and August 2018. The three-month OIS basis was close to
zero pre-GFC and deeply negative during the peak of the GFC. After the
GFC, OIS-based CIP deviations persisted. Among our sample currencies,
AUD has the most positive OIS basis, and JPY, CHF, and EUR have
the most negative OIS bases. Internet Appendix Figure I.A2 shows three-
  12
     The list of overnight reference rates for the OIS and their day count conventions
for the seven major currencies currencies we study can be found in Internet Appendix
Table I.A1. For two currencies, the OIS rate is non-standard. For CAD, the overnight
rate is a repo (secured) rate; for CHF the unsecured overnight rate had volumes so low
that the OIS rate was changed to reference a secured rate in 2017.



                                         16
month IBOR cross-currency bases, which follow similar patterns.
       We define the spot cross-currency basis between two non-USD curren-
cies c1 and c2 as the difference in their respective log cross-currency basis
vis-à-vis the USD,
                                 c1 ,c2   c1 ,$   c2 ,$
                                xt, 0, = xt,0, - xt,0, .                              (7)

We use this definition, as opposed to directly constructing the cross-currency
basis between c1 and c2 , both because most trades in currency forwards in-
volve a USD leg and to restrict our sample to US FX trading days.13


3.2      Forward Bases

We next define a forward-starting cross-currency basis. Trading a forward
starting cross-currency basis allows an agent to lock-in the price of a cross-
currency basis trade that will start in the future.
       We define a forward-starting cross-currency basis using forward interest
                            c
rates and FX forwards. Let Rt,h, be the h-month forward-starting annu-
                                                                     $
alized  -month gross interest rate in currency c at time t, and let Rt,h, be
the equivalent rate in the USD. The forward-starting cross-currency basis
of foreign currency c vis-à-vis the USD is

                                                       12
                                    $
                           c,$     Rt,h,      Ft,h+    
                          Xt,h,   = c                       - 1,                      (8)
                                   Rt,h,       Ft,h


and the log version is xc, $            c,$
                        t,h, = ln (1 + Xt,h, ). Appendix Figure A1 illustrates

  13
    According to recent BIS FX derivatives statistics, 90% of global FX swaps have the
USD on one leg. Some cross pairs, such as EURJPY and EURCHF, are actively traded.
There are only negligible differences between the cross-currency basis calculated directly
using the FX swap rates for the cross pairs and the basis calculated using Equation
(7). The triangular arbitrage for the cross-currency basis holds quite well post-GFC
because the arbitrage only involves trading FX derivatives with limited balance sheet
implications.



                                           17
the definitions of the spot and forward cross-currency basis.
   Equivalently, we can define the log h-month forward  -month cross
currency basis at time t in terms of two spot cross-currency bases under
the assumption of no-arbitrage between forward interest rate swaps and
the term structure of spot interest rate swaps:

                                h +  c,$     h $
                      xc, $
                       t,h, =       xt,0,h+ - xc,   .                   (9)
                                              t,0,h

The equivalence between Equations (8) and (9) is shown in Internet Ap-
pendix I.B. Equation (9) also shows that there is a close analogy between
forward cross-currency bases and forward interest rates. As in Equation
(7), we define the forward cross-currency basis between non-USD currencies
c1 and c2 as
                           xc 1 ,c2 c1 ,$   c2 ,$
                            t,h, = xt,h, - xt,h, .                    (10)

   We next consider the typical shape of the term structure of CIP viola-
tions ­ that is, the shape of the cross-currency basis forward curve. It is
possible to construct forward CIP trades of many different horizons h and
tenors  . However, the most liquid and reliable OIS tenors are 1M, 2M,
3M, 4M, 6M, 9M, and 12M. In Figure 1, we present the forward curves of
AUD and JPY vis-à-vis the USD for all reliable horizons: spot, 1M, 2M,
3M, 4M, 6M, and 9M. The tenor  of these forward CIP trades differs, be-
ginning at one month and increasing to three months. Internet Appendix
Figure I.A3 presents an alternative version of the forward curve that uses
only three month tenors.
   We present these forward basis curves as time series averages for two
currencies, AUD and JPY. These two currencies stand out in the data as


                                     18
having very positive/negative spot cross-currency bases vis-à-vis the USD
during our post-GFC sample period, respectively. For each currency, we
divide our sample into three sub-samples based on the tercile of the level of
the spot 3M tenor basis. We then compute the time-series average of the
spot and forward-starting cross-currency basis within each sub-sample.
   From these forward curves, it is immediately apparent that the forward
cross-currency bases tend to be larger (more positive) than the spot cross-
currency basis for AUD, and smaller (more negative) for JPY. This fact is
somewhat analogous to the tendency of the term-structure of interest rates
to be upward sloping. If we think of forward cross-currency bases as being
equal to expectations under a risk-neutral measure (an approach that is
valid in our model despite the presence of arbitrage), then this suggests
that the absolute value of spot cross-currency basis is generally expected
to increase under the risk-neutral measure.
   We also present, in Appendix Figure A2, a version of this figure with
three sub-samples based on whether the next quarter-end is within the
next month, between one and two months in the future, or more than
two months in the future. We find that the large spikes in the 1M-tenor
cross-currency basis at quarter end documented by Du et al. (2018b) are
anticipated (at least to some extent) by the forwards. We also observe that,
controlling for when the next quarter end occurs, there still appears to be
an upward slope in the AUD basis relative to the JPY basis.
   This raises the question of whether the spot cross-currency basis is also
expected to increase in absolute value under the physical measure. That
is, do the slopes of these forward curves reflect expectations, risk premia,
or some combination thereof?


                                     19
3.3      Forward CIP Trading Strategy

The forward CIP trading strategy consists of a forward cross-currency basis
trade and a spot cross-currency basis trade at a later date. At time t, an
agent enters into the h-month forward  -month cross-currency basis trade.
After h months, at time t + h, the agent unwinds the trade by shorting the
then-spot  -month cross-currency basis.
       Although the forward CIP trading strategy involves two potential arbi-
trage opportunities, it is itself risky in that the spot  -month cross currency
basis at time t + h is not guaranteed to be equal to the h-month forward
 -month cross-currency basis at time t. Appendix Figure A3 illustrates the
mechanics this trading strategy.
       The profits from this trading strategy are primarily a function of the
realized cross-currency basis at time t + h compared to  -month forward
cross-currency basis at time t. To first-order, the annualized profit per
dollar notional (which can be thought of as an excess return) is


                           c1 ,c2      c1 ,c2
                           t +h,h,     (x     - xc 1 ,c2
                                                 t+h,0, ).                       (11)
                                      h t,h,

             
The term     h
                 plays the role of a duration, converting the difference between
the forward and realized basis, xc 1 ,c2 c1 ,c2
                                 t,h, - xt+h,0, , into an annualized dollar

profit per unit notional.14
       The key property of the forward CIP trading strategy for our purposes
is that it allows an intermediary to bet on whether the cross-currency basis
will be higher or lower than implied by the forward cross-currency basis.
Our model equates the magnitude of the basis with the degree to which
  14
    We derive this expression, which is a first-order approximation, from a more exact
calculation in Internet Appendix section I.C.


                                         20
regulatory constraints binds. Consequently, this strategy allows intermedi-
aries to bet on whether constraints will be tighter or looser in the future.
       The forward CIP trading strategy is a valid trading strategy even if
the underlying cross-currency basis is not actually tradable or not a pure
arbitrage. For example, individual arbitrageurs may not have direct access
to the OIS floating leg.15 Nevertheless, the forward CIP trading strategy
is a valid trading strategy that bets on whether the basis as measured by
OIS swaps referencing this rate becomes larger or smaller.
       Moreover, the forward CIP trading strategy per se does not materi-
ally contribute to the balance sheet constraints of financial intermediaries,
especially in comparison with the spot CIP arbitrage. This is because in-
terest rate forwards and FX derivatives have zero value at inception. The
required initial and variation margins for the derivative positions are gen-
erally a few percent of the total notional of the trade. In contrast, the spot
CIP arbitrage requires actual cash market borrowing and lending, and is
therefore balance sheet intensive.
       We do not have data on the transactions costs associated with imple-
menting the forward CIP trading strategy. Large intermediaries are likely
to implement the strategy at low costs (either collecting the bid-offer when
trading with clients or trading at close to the mid-price in inter-dealer trans-
actions). Anecdotal evidence suggests that some hedge funds use interest
rate and FX derivatives to arbitrage the term structure of CIP violations,
suggesting that the transaction costs are not prohibitively large. However,
it may well be the case that a typical trader in a small hedge fund paying the
  15
    For example, in the United States, the floating leg of the OIS is the federal funds
rate. Only banks with reserve accounts at the Federal Reserve can trade in the federal
funds market.



                                          21
bid-offer on the various instruments used to implement the trading strategy
would not find it profitable. We study these trading strategies because they
reveal interesting information about currencies and intermediaries, and not
because we advocate them as an investment strategy.


4     Forward CIP Trading Strategy's Excess Returns

In this section, we present evidence that the forward CIP trading strategy is
profitable on average. The excess returns are observed in certain individual
currencies against the USD, in trades between cross-currency pairs, and
in portfolios. We find that the currency pairs with the highest excess
returns are the currency pairs associated with the "FX carry trade". These
currency pairs have high interest rate differentials, large CIP violations, and
unhedged currency returns that are positively correlated with returns on
the S&P 500 index.


4.1    USD-based Currency Pairs

We begin by discussing results for individual currencies. Panel A of Table
1 reports the profits per dollar notional on the one-month-forward three-
month tenor forward CIP trading strategy in each of the six sample curren-
cies vis-a-vis the USD. For each forward CIP trading strategy, we present
the annualized mean profit per dollar notional and the Sharpe ratio, by
period. Standard errors of the statistics are reported in parentheses.16
  16
     Means and Sharpe ratios are calculated using overlapping
                                                              monthly profits per dollar
notional from daily data and then scaled up by 12 and 12, respectively. We use Newey-
West standard errors and the Newey and West (1994) bandwidth selection procedure,
and use the "delta" method to compute standard errors for the Sharpe ratios (Lo,
2002). Internet Appendix Table I.A6 presents for robustness virtually identical results
for portfolios (Table 3 below) using non-overlapping monthly data.



                                          22
       Beginning with the pre-GFC period, we observe that for all sample
currencies vis-à-vis the USD, the pre-GFC profits are virtually zero. Post-
GFC, the profits in most currencies are larger in absolute value. Some cur-
rencies such as JPY have marginally statistically significant Sharpe ratios
in the pre-GFC period, but this reflects small mean profits and even smaller
standard deviations. In contrast, post-GFC, four currencies vis-à-vis USD
have non-trivial mean profits and both statistically and economically sig-
nificant Sharpe ratios.
       Panel B of Table 1 illustrates that the sign of a currency's forward CIP
trading profits (vis-à-vis the USD) is related to a number of other econom-
ically important properties of the currency. AUD, CAD, and GBP have
positive forward CIP arbitrage profits, while EUR, CHF, and JPY have
negative forward CIP arbitrage profits. The former group are high-interest-
rate "investing currencies" and the latter group are low-interest-rate "fund-
ing currencies" for the unhedged FX carry trade. In bad times (proxied
by low S&P returns), the "funding currencies" tend to appreciate against
the USD, while the "investing currencies" depreciate. CIP deviations make
"funding currencies" more appealing in terms of their synthetic dollar inter-
est rates. These currencies have substantial negative cross-currency bases
(higher synthetic dollar interest rates), whereas "investing currencies" have
less negative or even positive cross-currency bases vis-à-vis USD.
       Moreover, the AUD, CAD, and GBP all have an upward-sloping CIP
term structure on average.17 In contrast, EUR, CHF, and JPY have a
downward-sloping CIP term structure on average. Put another way, the
increases in the absolute value of the basis implied by the forward curves
  17
    We define slope as the difference between the 1-month forward 3-month basis and
the spot 3-month basis.


                                        23
do not actually occur, on average. This result is analogous to the existence
of the term premium in the term structure literature. Taking this analogy
one step further, in Internet Appendix I.F we show that the slope of the
forward curve predicts forward CIP trading profits, just as the slope of the
term structure predicts bond returns (Campbell and Shiller, 1991).18


4.2      Choice of Currency Pairs and the Classic Carry Strategy

Our model suggests that the bases that best measure intermediary con-
straints are the largest ones (adjusted for any differences in risk weights
across currencies). However, in practice, the OIS benchmarks across dif-
ferent currencies may not be perfectly comparable due to different con-
ventions. Our model is also silent on other factors that affect financial
intermediaries' choice of currency pairs to engage in the CIP arbitrage,
such as differences in the deposit base and access to wholesale funding
markets across currencies.19 For these reasons, rather than take a stand
on which one is truly the largest, we present in Table 2 the forward CIP
returns associated with the ten currency pairs with the largest average spot
3-month bases post-GFC.20 The mean returns of these currency pairs are
linear combinations of the mean returns for each currency leg vis-à-vis USD
presented earlier; the Sharpe ratios are not.
       The mean average profits are positive for all ten pairs post-GFC, and
  18
      However, there are also instances when the slope might reflect expectations and not
risk premia. At quarter-ends, the 1M-tenor spot cross-currency basis spikes upwards
(Du et al., 2018b). As shown in Appendix Figure A2, the forward curve anticipates
these spikes. In Internet Appendix I.G, we show that there is no detectable extra risk
premium associated with quarter-end crossings. The spikes in the forwards associated
with quarter ends are (on average) roughly equal to the realized spikes in the spot basis.
   19
      See, for example, Rime et al. (2019) on the impact of money market segmentation
on CIP deviations.
   20
      These ten pairs also all have a positive spot 3M basis on virtually every day in our
sample.


                                           24
the annualized Sharpe ratio is above 0.5 for 8 out of 10 currency pairs.
The average interest rate differential for each of these ten pairs is positive,
once again suggesting a relationship between carry and the profits of the
forward CIP trading strategy.
       Consider as a leading example the "classic carry" currency pair of long
AUD, short JPY. This pair has one of the largest spot bases, and is par-
ticularly associated with the carry trade.21 We find that the AUD-JPY
forward CIP trading strategy earns an a post-GFC average profit equal to
14 basis points and its annualized Sharpe ratio is 1.38. Both results are
highly statistically significant, and the magnitude of the Sharpe ratio is
high compared to many documented trading strategy returns in the liter-
ature. For comparison, the traditional un-hedged FX carry trade has an
annualized Sharpe ratio of 0.48 for developed market currencies from 1987
to 2009, and the annualized Sharpe ratio of a value-weighted portfolio of
all U.S. stocks from 1976 to 2010 is 0.42 (Burnside et al. (2010), Burnside
et al. (2011)).
       The connection between interest rate differentials and the spot cross-
currency basis was documented in Du et al. (2018b). Those authors suggest
that the basis is induced by the interaction of customer demand for the un-
hedged carry trade and intermediary constraints. One implication of this
theory, through the lens of our model, is that the risk that the classic
carry basis becomes larger is priced because it correlates with intermediary
constraints more broadly. Consistent with this theory, our results show that
there is a relationship between the spot basis, interest rate differentials, and
  21
    AUD-CHF is also associated with the carry trade and has a slightly larger average
basis. However, this pair is not desirable as a benchmark because of the pegging and
de-pegging of CHF during the sample and the low quality of the CHF OIS data, which
led to changes in the OIS definition after December 2017.


                                         25
forward CIP trading profits.


4.3     Portfolio Forward CIP Trading Strategies

In addition to the "classic carry" AUD-JPY currency pair, we examine four
portfolios of forward CIP trading profits: "three-currency carry", "dynamic
top-five basis", "top-ten basis", and "dollar". The first three of these are
based on interest rate differentials and the size of the spot cross-currency
basis; they generate positive mean returns and high Sharpe ratios post-
GFC. In contrast, the return for the dollar portfolio is insignificant.
      The portfolios are defined as follows. The "three-currency carry" portfo-
lio is a dollar-neutral carry strategy. The portfolio goes long in the forward
CIP trading strategy for the AUD, CAD, and GBP vis-à-vis the USD, and
short in the forward CIP trading strategy for the EUR, CHF, and JPY vis-
à-vis the USD. The "dynamic top-five basis" portfolio equally weights the
forward CIP trading strategies for the largest five spot cross-currency basis
pairs and is rebalanced monthly. The "top-ten basis" equally weights the
forward CIP trading strategies for the ten pairs shown in Table 2, which
were selected based on the average spot 3-month cross-currency basis in
the post-GFC sample. The "dollar" portfolio places equal weights on each
of the individual sample currencies vis-à-vis the USD.
      We report the annualized mean profit and the Sharpe ratio for these four
portfolios, together with the performance for the "classic carry" strategy
in Table 3. The pre-GFC mean profits of these portfolios are all close to
zero. The post-GFC mean profits are significantly positive at about 10
basis points for the first three portfolios sorted on the carry and the spot
basis. These carry and spot basis sorted portfolios also all have a significant


                                       26
Sharpe ratio above 1. In contrast, the post-GFC profits and the Sharpe
ratio for the dollar portfolio remain close to zero.
    We conduct several additional robustness checks. We show similar pat-
terns hold for three-month horizons and for strategies based on IBOR bases
(Internet Appendix Tables I.A3, I.A4, and I.A5). We also show that our
results remain strong even after we extend our sample period to through
March 2020, covering the financial market turmoil amid the COVID-19
pandemic (Internet Appendix Table I.A7). As expected, the strategies
experienced sharply negative returns between February and March 2020,
consistent with our interpretation that they perform poorly when interme-
diaries are distressed but have good investment opportunities.22


5    Implications for the Price of Risk

In the preceding section, we found that there is a substantial risk premium
associated with the risk that AUD-JPY and other bases become larger. We
interpret this, through the lens of our model, as implying that this basis is
a measure of intermediary constraints and that the risk that intermediary
constraints tighten is a priced risk factor.
    This interpretation has several implications that we explore in this sec-
tion. First, it suggests that the AUD-JPY cross-currency basis should be
correlated both with other arbitrages affected by constraints on interme-
diaries. Second, it suggests that the basis should be correlated with mea-
sures of intermediary wealth. Third, it implies (assuming an intertemporal
  22
     It is difficult to say whether the post-GFC period through August 2018 (our original
sample) or the period including the recent pandemic is more representative of the average
returns of the forward CIP trading strategy. We find it reassuring that our results are
not too sensitive to this choice.



                                           27
hedging motive) that the forward CIP risk premium should exist even af-
ter controlling for intermediary wealth, and that the forward CIP return
should be included along with intermediary wealth in the SDF. Fourth,
the forward CIP risk premium should be consistent with the prices of risk
extracted from other assets that intermediaries trade. We explore each of
these implications in turn.


5.1     CIP vs. Other Arbitrages

We interpret the AUD-JPY basis and other CIP deviations as measures of
intermediary constraints. However, our model implies that intermediary
constraints, if present, should affect many no-arbitrage relationships and
not just CIP. To verify that the bases we study are indeed measures of
intermediary constraints, we begin by confirming that they co-move with
other documented near-arbitrages. Specifically, we show that the AUD-
JPY cross-currency basis co-moves with the first principal component of
other near-arbitrages from outside the FX market.
      We consider seven types of near-arbitrages: the bond-CDS basis, the
CDS-CDX basis, the USD Libor tenor basis, 30-year swap spreads, the
Refco-Treasury spread, the KfW-Bund spread, and the asset-swapped TIPS/Treasury
spread. These near-arbitrages have been examined in recent literature, such
as Bai and Collin-Dufresne (2019); Boyarchenko et al. (2018); Fleckenstein
et al. (2014); Jermann (2019); Longstaff (2002); Schwarz (2018). We de-
scribe these near-arbitrages in more detail in Internet Appendix I.H.
      Each of these near-arbitrages is subject to measurement errors and id-
iosyncratic supply and demand shocks. We use a principal component
analysis to extract the common component. Our model implies that varia-


                                      28
tion in the balance sheet capacity of financial intermediaries should affect
all these near-arbitrages, and we therefore view this common component
as an alternative measure of intermediary constraints.
       We show in Figure 2 that our benchmark AUD-JPY cross-currency
basis and the first principal component (PC) of the other near-arbitrages
follow broadly similar trends. We find that the first PC both explains
53% of total variation in the level of the seven near-arbitrages between
January 2005 and August 2018, and has a 50% correlation with the level of
the AUD-JPY cross-currency basis post-GFC. The correlation between the
two variables provides additional support to our interpretation that CIP
deviations reflect intermediary constraints.23
       However, CIP deviations have several advantages over these other near-
arbitrages. First, they are close to true arbitrages, unlike some of these
other measures. For example, the Libor tenor basis and Treasury swap
spread may reflect credit risk rather than intermediary constraints, while
the bond-CDS basis has a cheapest-to-deliver option and other complica-
tions. Second, they are precisely measured, exhibiting less high frequency
volatility than most of these other measures. Third, and most importantly
for our empirical strategy, they have a rich term structure that allows us
to construct our forward CIP trading strategy. For these reasons, we use
CIP violations, and specifically the AUD-JPY cross-currency basis, as our
as our preferred measure of intermediary constraints.
  23
     All seven near-arbitrages are long-term (five years or above), while the cross-
currency basis we use has a three-month tenor, so the correlation between the two
series should not be perfect.




                                        29
5.2     CIP vs. Intermediary Wealth

If the cross-currency basis measures intermediary constraints, then the gen-
eral equilibrium models of He and Krishnamurthy (2011) and Kondor and
Vayanos (2019) imply that it should co-move with intermediary net worth.
However, demand and regulatory shocks should also affect the tightness of
intermediary constraints, so we do not expect a perfect correlation.
      We explore the relationship between intermediary wealth measures and
the AUD-JPY cross-currency basis in Figure 3 and in the next sub-section.
We use as our primary measure of intermediary wealth the intermediary
equity value of He et al. (2017) (henceforth HKM), which is the cumulative
return of value-weighted equity of primary dealers. We also consider, fol-
lowing those authors, the equity capitalization ratio of the dealers (HKM
Capital Ratio), and the value of the entire stock market.
      In Figure 3, we present a time series of the spot 3M AUD-JPY basis and
these three intermediary wealth measures.24 The cross-currency basis and
the proxies for intermediary wealth appear to be (negatively) correlated.
This suggests that variations in the spot basis are in part driven by shocks
to intermediary wealth. However, in recent years, we observe an upward
trend in the basis, likely attributable to changes in regulation (e.g. the
implementation of Basel III). During this period, intermediary wealth also
increases. As discussed earlier, we expect the basis to capture regulatory
and demand shocks in addition to changes to intermediary wealth.
  24
     Internet Appendix Figure I.A4 shows that other cross-currency bases constructed
using the portfolios defined in section 4.3 closely track the AUD-JPY basis.




                                        30
5.3     The Basis and the SDF

Can the correlation between the AUD-JPY basis and intermediary equity
returns explain the risk premia we documented in the previous section? If
the intermediary's SDF consisted only of the intermediary wealth return,
then regressions of excess asset returns on proxies for this factor should gen-
erate intercepts of zero (Cochrane (2009)). Panel A of Table 4 reports these
regressions for four configurations of intermediary wealth return proxies:
Market only, Intermediary Equity only, Market and Intermediary Equity,
and Market and HKM Factor.25 Here, Market and Intermediary Equity
refer to the return on the stock market and the value-weighted equity of
primary dealers, respectively, and HKM Factor refers to innovations to the
AR(1) process of primary dealers' equity capital ratio, as defined in He
et al. (2017). The outcome variable is the profits of the 1M-forward 3M-
tenor AUD-JPY forward CIP trading strategy, scaled by 1/3 to convert
the units from annualized profits per dollar notional to bps per month (see
Equation (11)).
      All four configurations generate statistically significant intercepts (" "),
rejecting the null that the HKM wealth-portfolio factors are sufficient to
explain the risk premia on the forward CIP trading strategy. Moreover, the
point estimates for the intercepts range from 3.8 to 4.2 bps per month when
using overlapping daily data, which is close to the average excess return of
4.8 bps/month (see column (1)). That is, proxies for intermediary wealth
returns explain only a small part of the excess returns associated with the
AUD-JPY forward CIP trading strategy.
  25
     We use daily observations of monthly returns where possible. The HKM Factor is
constructed by those authors and is available only in monthly frequencies.



                                        31
    This result suggests that SDFs which include both intermediary wealth
returns and forward CIP returns (as in Equation (1)) should fit the data
better than SDFs that use only intermediary wealth. The Bayesian ap-
proach of Barillas and Shanken (2018) and Chib et al. (2020) provides a
method of comparing SDFs to formalize this intuition. We consider the
same proxy factors for the intermediary wealth return: Market only, In-
termediary Equity only, Market and Intermediary Equity, and Market and
HKM Factor. In Panel B of Table 4, for each of these four specifications,
we calculate the posterior probabilities for factor models that do and do
not include the forward CIP return (see Appendix I.J for more details).
    Across all specifications, the model that includes the forward CIP return
has a posterior probability close to one. For example, when the intermedi-
ary wealth proxies are Intermediary Equity and Market, the factor models
considered are Intermediary Equity only, Intermediary Equity and Market,
Intermediary Equity and forward CIP return, and all three factors; the
posterior probability of the model with all three factors is 98.7%.
    If the forward CIP return is part of the SDF, its mean return can help
identify the coefficients of the SDF. By construction, the returns of our
forward CIP trading strategy are also the (negative of) innovations to the
magnitude of the cross-currency basis.26 Our forward CIP trading strategy
earns 4.8 bps per month on average in the post-GFC period. Take the
Intermediary Equity return as the tradable proxy for intermediary wealth
returns; the mean excess return of Intermediary Equity from 1970 to 2018
is 60 bps per month. Defining  as the vector containing these mean ex-
cess returns, we can extract estimates of  and  (the coefficients in the
  26
     We focus on the AUD-JPY cross-currency basis in part because its sign essentially
does not change over our sample, allowing us to ignore issues related to absolute values.


                                           32
SDF of Equation (1)) by multiplying these means by the inverse of the
variance-covariance matrix () of the two factors (see Cochrane (2009)).
We estimate the standard deviation of the AUD-JPY forward CIP return
at 12 bps per month, and the standard deviation of the Intermediary Eq-
uity return at 6.7% per month. The correlation between these two factors
is 0.19 in our post-GFC sample, meaning that the basis tends to shrink
when intermediary equity returns are positive. Using these estimates,
                                                          
                                -1  0.66 
                              = =        .
                                    305


      Our results are consistent with  < 1 in two ways. First, our direct
estimate of the  parameter is less than one. Second, the sign of our
estimate of  is greater than zero, which should be expected if  < 1. Note
that these are point estimates and subject to estimation error.27
      Our estimate of  > 0 (implying  < 1) is driven by the fact that the
forward CIP strategy achieves a risk premium that is larger than would
be expected given its beta to the intermediary equity factor. Recall that a
large basis indicates better future investment opportunities. Intermediaries
will view exposure to basis shocks as risky if they prefer to hoard wealth
to take advantage of those better investment opportunities, which occurs
when  < 1. We emphasize that this is not a quirk of our model, but rather
a general fact about investment opportunities and intertemporal hedging.28
      However, we cannot rule out the alternative possibility that the for-
ward CIP return is a better proxy for the true intermediary wealth return.
If the risk premia we document is caused entirely by this effect and not
 27
      See Appendix I.I for a discussion of the estimation and standard errors.
 28
      See, for example, pg. 1157 of Kondor and Vayanos (2019).


                                            33
inter-temporal hedging, the forward CIP return must be a much better
proxy for the true intermediary wealth return than the HKM intermediary
equity measure. Suppose that  = 1, so there is no intertemporal hedg-
ing concern. Our Sharpe ratio estimate for forward CIP trading strategy
implies (by the Hansen-Jagannathan bound) that the true intermediary
wealth return must have an annual volatility of at least 138%, far higher
than the annualized volatility of the Intermediary Equity return. Suppose
instead that  > 1. In this case, the intermediary manager should view
the forward CIP trading strategy as not being very risky at all, because
it offers low returns only when there are future arbitrage opportunities.
To overcome this intertemporal hedging effect, we would have to suppose
that our forward CIP trading returns are strongly correlated with the true
intermediary wealth returns.29
      We believe our results are interesting regardless of which of these in-
terpretations is preferred. Either intertemporal hedging considerations are
large and can be proxied for by the forward CIP return, or the forward CIP
return is a better way of measuring intermediary wealth returns (the main
component of the SDF). Under either of these interpretations, we would be
justified in using the forward CIP return as an asset pricing factor.


5.4     Cross-sectional Asset Pricing

We next present a cross-sectional analysis, which provides an additional
test of our theory. If the SDF in Equation (1) is correctly specified and
the traded factors are good proxies of the true factors, the prices of risk
  29
     Given the persistence of the cross-currency basis, which causes the intertemporal
term to be large, it is not obvious that even perfect correlation with the intermediary
wealth return solves the problem. However, without an exact quantification of the
intertemporal terms, we cannot rule out this possibility.


                                          34
estimated from the cross-section of asset returns should be the same as the
unconditional risk premia of the traded factors.
       Our exercise builds directly on HKM. We study equities (FF6, the
Fama-French 6 size by value portfolios, Fama and French (1993)), curren-
cies (FX, developed and EM currencies sorted on forward premia, Lustig
et al. (2011)), US bonds (US, six maturity-sorted CRSP "Fama Bond Port-
folios" of Treasury bonds and five Bloomberg corporate bond indices),
sovereign bonds (Sov, sorted on credit rating and beta to the market,
Borri and Verdelhan (2015)), equity options (Opt, eighteen portfolios of
S&P 500 calls and puts, Constantinides et al. (2013)), credit default swap
indices (CDS, five traded CDS indices), and commodities (Comm, twenty
three commodity futures return indices). We also study single-currency
forward CIP returns with OIS and IBOR rates (FwdCIP), excluding AUD
and JPY.
       The conjecture we are testing, which follows from our hypothesized form
of the stochastic discount factor30 , is that


                           i       f        i     i
                       E [Rt +1 - Rt ] =  + w w + x x ,                         (12)


      i                                                              i
where w is the beta of asset i to the intermediary wealth return and x
is the beta to the negative of the forward CIP return. These betas can be
estimated in the standard way using a time series regression,


                 i       f        i   w      f     i       |x|    i
                Rt +1 - Rt = µi + w (Rt+1 - Rt ) + x rt+1 +       t+1 ,         (13)
  30
   Our hypothesis is expressed as a linear form for the log SDF, but we test a linear
SDF to stay closer to the procedure of He et al. (2017).




                                         35
           |x|
where rt+1 is the negative of the AUD-JPY forward CIP return.31
       Our preferred specification uses the Intermediary Equity return as our
           w
proxy for Rt +1 . As discussed in Cochrane (2009), with tradable factors,

if we included the factors as test assets and used GLS or two-step GMM
to estimate the risk prices x and w , we would recover the mean excess
returns of those factors. We ask instead whether the price of risk implied by
the cross-section of other asset returns is consistent with the mean excess
returns on our tradable factors. For this reason, we do not include our
factors as test assets. We estimate Equation (12) as an OLS regression,
with GMM standard errors to account for the estimation of the betas in
Equation (13), following chapter 12 of Cochrane (2009).32 Both regressions
use monthly data. For each asset class, and for a combination of six asset
classes, we report the "H1 p-value" from testing whether w and x are
equal to the mean excess return of the corresponding factor (as described
in the previous sub-section). This p-value, as opposed to the usual test of
whether the coefficients are zero, is the focus of our analysis.
       One difference between our main specification and the textbook proce-
dure is that the samples we use to estimate the betas and the mean ex-
cess returns are different. Our model argues that the cross-currency basis
enters the SDF because it measures the degree to which regulatory con-
straints bind, a viewpoint relevant for the post-GFC period. Eight years
of data, however, is generally too short to reliably determine whether one
  31
      Our model implies that the risk-free rate in this time-series regression is misspecified,
and should include an adjustment proportional to xt (see Appendix Equation (I.A2)).
                                                           w        f     |x|
However, because xt has almost no ability to predict Rt     +1 - Rt or rt+1 , omitting it has
almost no effect our results. See Appendix Table I.A14 for a version of Table 5 with a
risk-free rate adjustment.
   32
      More efficient (in an asymptotic sense) procedures estimate equations (12) and (13)
jointly as moment conditions. These procedures have advantages and disadvantages
relative to the cross-sectional approach; see Cochrane (2009).


                                              36
test portfolio has a higher expected return than another test portfolio. To
overcome this difficulty, we estimate the cross-sectional regression using the
longest available sample for each test portfolio, while estimating the betas
using only the post-GFC sample. This approach increases the likelihood
of rejecting our "H1" hypothesis (biasing against our main finding), and
is valid if the long-sample expected excess returns are also the expected
excess returns in the post-crises period. We present qualitatively similar
results using only post-GFC data in the Internet Appendix, Table I.A19.33
       Because we use a short sample to estimate our betas, there is the po-
tential for weak identification in our setting. Weak identification arises
when there is not significant cross-sectional variation in the betas of the
test assets to the factors. Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) develop a "pre-test"
that tests whether the estimated betas of the test assets are different from
each other. We report the p-value associated with this test. Low p-values
suggest rejection of the hypothesis that the betas are equal.34 Note that
the primary focus of our exercise is whether we can reject our "H1" hy-
pothesis. Spurious rejection induced by weak identification therefore makes
it harder for us to find cross-sectional results that are consistent with our
  33
      One difference between our main results and our results using post-GFC means is
the risk price of the basis shock with FX test assets. We find that carry trade returns
are correlated with the basis shock, but in the post-GFC period, carry trade returns are
roughly zero. This example illustrates the costs and benefits of using the full sample for
mean returns. If we believe carry still earns a risk premium, but happens to have done
poorly during the post-GFC period, using the long sample provides a better estimate of
the price of risk for the basis shock. If instead we believe that carry no longer earns a
risk premium, then using only the post-GFC sample is preferable.
   34
      Specifically, we use the multi-factor version of the test described in the appendix
of Kleibergen and Zhan (2020). We report the F test associated with their statistic
to account for the "large N , small T " nature of some of our regressions. We modify
their test slightly to account for the fact that when we pool asset classes, we have
one intercept for each asset class in the asset-pricing equation as opposed to a single
intercept. Unfortunately, the other robust inference methods described by Bryzgalova
(2020) and Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) could not be directly applied to our setting.




                                           37
direct estimates of the risk premia for our tradable factors.
       Lastly, note that our estimates depart in a variety of ways from HKM.
Our results are estimated on monthly data, and our betas are estimated
only in the post-GFC period. Our test portfolios in each asset class are also
different, in some cases only slightly and in some cases more substantially.
We describe these details in the Internet Appendix, Section I.E.
       Our main cross-sectional results are shown in Table 5. These results
use the two-factor specification of Equation (12), with the Intermediary
                                          w
Equity return as the empirical proxy for Rt +1 . The first eight columns

show results for individual asset classes. For most asset classes, we cannot
reject the hypothesis of weak identification, and the problem is particularly
severe for equities and commodities.35 Pooling the first six asset classes (i.e.
everything except equities and commodities) improves identification, and
we report pooled results in column (9).
       Our main outcome of interest is the H1 hypothesis that the prices of risk
are equal to the mean excess returns of Intermediary Equity and negative
of the forward CIP return (roughly 0.6 %/mo. and -0.05 %/mo.). We are
unable to reject this hypothesis with p  0.1 in any asset class or when
we pool across six asset classes to achieve more precise identification. Our
point estimates in the pooled specification (w = 0.728, x = -0.0725) are
in fact quite close to the mean excess returns.
       Appendix Table A1 presents results that add in Market as an additional
  35
    Our results about the disconnect between cross-sectional equity risk premia and
intermediary health measures echo the results of Haddad and Muir (2020), who find that
intermediary health measures only weakly predict equity returns but strongly predict
returns in other asset classes. They are also consistent with certain results in HKM, who
also have difficulty pricing equities in their monthly data, and with the view espoused
by those authors that intermediaries are unlikely to be the marginal agents in equity
markets.



                                           38
factor (as in HKM). Our H1 hypothesis now requires that all three risk
prices be consistent with the mean excess returns of those tradable factors.
We again are unable to reject our hypothesis at the 10% level. Internet
Appendix Tables I.A11 and I.A12 present versions of Tables 5 and A1
that do not include the basis shock (i.e. specifications found in HKM).
When the basis shock is not included, the point estimates for the price of
intermediary equity risk are generally higher, in some cases to the point that
we are able to reject the hypothesis that the prices of risk are consistent
with the returns on the intermediary equity. We interpret this result as
again suggesting that either the basis shock is captures something about
intermediary wealth that the equity return omits or that it captures an
intertemporal hedging consideration that is significant in its own right.
   The Internet Appendix also presents a number of other variants on Ta-
ble 5. There is a variant (Table I.A13) in which we use the HKM capital
ratio innovation (along with the Market and forward CIP return), which is
non-tradable and is the primary specification in HKM. In this case, we can
only test whether the risk prices of the traded factors are consistent with
their excess returns, and our results are noisier both in terms of standard
errors and with respect to the weak identification test. The Internet Ap-
pendix also contains variants that use alternative measures in the place of
the AUD-JPY forward CIP return. Table I.A15 uses USD-JPY, and Tables
I.A16, I.A17, and I.A18 use the portfolios of forward CIP returns described
in Table 3. Table I.A20 replaces the forward CIP return in Table 5 with
the AR(1) innovation (following HKM) of the first principal component of
the near-arbitrages described in Section 5.1, scaled to match the volatility
of the AUD-JPY forward CIP return. These variants generate results that


                                     39
are similar to those of Table 5.


6    Discussion and Conclusion

We provide direct evidence that the AUD-JPY and other cross-currency
bases are correlated with the SDF. These results are consistent with our
motivating hypothesis, derived from an intermediary-based asset pricing
framework and intertemporal hedging considerations. They are also con-
sistent with the correlation between the basis and other near-arbitrages,
the correlation between the basis and measures of intermediary wealth,
and with our cross-sectional asset pricing tests. Taken together, we view
our results as strongly supportive of intermediary asset pricing theory.
    More broadly, we view this paper as beginning an investigation in the
dynamics and pricing of arbitrages induced by regulatory constraints. If
intermediaries play a central role in both asset pricing and the broader
economy, then the question of how to measure the constraints they face
and the properties of those constraints is of first-order importance.


References
Adrian, T., Etula, E., and Muir, T. (2014). Financial intermediaries and
  the cross-section of asset returns. The Journal of Finance, 69(6):2557­
  2596.
Anderson, A., Du, W., and Schlusche, B. (2019). Arbitrage capital of global
  banks. Working paper.
Avdjiev, S., Du, W., Koch, C., and Shin, H. S. (2019). The dollar, bank
  leverage, and deviations from covered interest parity. American Eco-
  nomic Review: Insights, 1(2):193­208.
Bai, J. and Collin-Dufresne, P. (2019). The cds-bond basis. Financial
  Management, 48(2):417­439.
Barillas, F. and Shanken, J. (2018). Comparing asset pricing models. Jour-
  nal of Finance, 73(2).



                                     40
Borio, C. E., McCauley, R. N., McGuire, P., and Sushko, V. (2016). Cov-
  ered interest parity lost: understanding the cross-currency basis. BIS
  Quarterly Review September.
Borri, N. and Verdelhan, A. (2015). Sovereign risk premia. Working paper.
Boyarchenko, N., Eisenbach, T. M., Gupta, P., Shachar, O., and Van Tas-
  sel, P. (2018). Bank-intermediated arbitrage. Working paper.
Bryzgalova, S. (2020). Spurious factors in linear asset pricing models. Work-
  ing paper.
Burnside, C., Eichenbaum, M., Kleshchelski, I., and Rebelo, S. (2010). Do
  peso problems explain the returns to the carry trade? The Review of
  Financial Studies, 24(3):853­891.
Burnside, C., Eichenbaum, M., and Rebelo, S. (2011). Carry trade and
  momentum in currency markets. Annual Review of Financial Economics,
  3(1):511­535.
Campbell, J. (1993). Intertemporal asset pricing without consumption
  data. American Economic Review, 83(3):487­512.
Campbell, J. Y. (2017). Financial decisions and markets: a course in asset
  pricing. Princeton University Press.
Campbell, J. Y., Giglio, S., Polk, C., and Turley, R. (2018). An intertem-
  poral capm with stochastic volatility. Journal of Financial Economics,
  128(2):207­233.
Campbell, J. Y. and Shiller, R. J. (1991). Yield spreads and interest
  rate movements: A bird's eye view. The Review of Economic Studies,
  58(3):495­514.
Chib, S., Zeng, X., and Zhao, L. (2020). On comparing asset pricing models.
  The Journal of Finance, 75(1):551­577.
Cochrane, J. H. (2009). Asset pricing: Revised edition. Princeton university
  press.
Constantinides, G. M., Jackwerth, J. C., and Savov, A. (2013). The puzzle
  of index option returns. Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 3(2):229­257.
Di Tella, S. (2017). Uncertainty shocks and balance sheet recessions. Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 125(6):2038­2081.
Du, W., Im, J., and Schreger, J. (2018a). The us treasury premium. Journal
  of International Economics, 112:167­181.
Du, W., Tepper, A., and Verdelhan, A. (2018b). Deviations from covered
  interest rate parity. The Journal of Finance, 73(3):915­957.
Duarte, J., Longstaff, F. A., and Yu, F. (2007). Risk and return in fixed-
  income arbitrage: Nickels in front of a steamroller? The Review of
  Financial Studies, 20(3):769­811.
Duffie, D. (2010). Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-
  moving capital. The Journal of finance, 65(4):1237­1267.
Epstein, L. and Zin, S. (1989). Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal

                                     41
  behavior of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework.
  Econometrica, 57(4):937­69.
Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns
  on stocks and bonds. Journal of financial economics, 33(1):3­56.
Fang, X. (2018). Intermediary leverage and currency risk premium. Work-
  ing paper.
Fleckenstein, M. and Longstaff, F. A. (2018). Shadow funding costs: Mea-
  suring the cost of balance sheet constraints. Working paper.
Fleckenstein, M., Longstaff, F. A., and Lustig, H. (2014). The tips-treasury
  bond puzzle. the Journal of Finance, 69(5):2151­2197.
Gabaix, X. and Maggiori, M. (2015). International liquidity and exchange
  rate dynamics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3):1369­1420.
Garleanu, N. and Pedersen, L. H. (2011). Margin-based asset pricing and
  deviations from the law of one price. The Review of Financial Studies,
  24(6):1980­2022.
Haddad, V. and Muir, T. (2020). Do intermediaries matter for aggregate
  asset prices. Working paper.
He, Z., Kelly, B., and Manela, A. (2017). Intermediary asset pricing:
  New evidence from many asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics,
  126(1):1­35.
He, Z. and Krishnamurthy, A. (2011). A model of capital and crises. The
  Review of Economic Studies, 79(2):735­777.
He, Z. and Krishnamurthy, A. (2017). Intermediary Asset Pricing and the
  Financial Crisis. Annual Review of Financial Economics, pages 1­37.
Hébert, B. (2018). Externalities as Arbitrage. Working paper.
Jegadeesh, N. (1990). Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns.
  The Journal of finance, 45(3):881­898.
Jegadeesh, N. and Titman, S. (1995). Short-horizon return reversals and
  the bid-ask spread. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 4(2):116­132.
Jermann, U. (2019). Negative swap spreads and limited arbitrage. The
  Review of Financial Studies, pages 0893­9454.
Jiang, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., and Lustig, H. (2018). Foreign safe asset
  demand and the dollar exchange rate. Working paper.
Kleibergen, F. and Zhan, Z. (2020). Robust inference for consumption-
  based asset pricing. The Journal of Finance, 75(1):507­550.
Kondor, P. and Vayanos, D. (2019). Liquidity risk and the dynamics of
  arbitrage capital. The Journal of Finance, 74(3):1139­1173.
Krishnamurthy, A. and Lustig, H. N. (2019). Mind the gap in sovereign
  debt markets: The us treasury basis and the dollar risk factor. In 2019
  Jackson Hole Economic Symposium.
Lettau, M., Maggiori, M., and Weber, M. (2014). Conditional risk pre-
  mia in currency markets and other asset classes. Journal of Financial

                                    42
  Economics, 114(2):197­225.
Liao, G. Y. (2019). Credit migration and covered interest rate parity.
  Working paper.
Liu, J. and Longstaff, F. A. (2003). Losing money on arbitrage: Optimal
  dynamic portfolio choice in markets with arbitrage opportunities. The
  Review of Financial Studies, 17(3):611­641.
Lo, A. W. (2002). The statistics of sharpe ratios. Financial analysts journal,
  58(4):36­52.
Longstaff, F. A. (2002). The flight-to-liquidity premium in us treasury
  bond prices. Working paper.
Lustig, H., Roussanov, N., and Verdelhan, A. (2011). Common risk factors
  in currency markets. The Review of Financial Studies, 24(11):3731­3777.
Menkhoff, L., Sarno, L., Schmeling, M., and Schrimpf, A. (2012). Carry
  trades and global foreign exchange volatility. The Journal of Finance,
  67(2):681­718.
Newey, W. K. and West, K. D. (1987). A simple, positive semi-definite, het-
  eroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econo-
  metrica, 55(3):703­708.
Newey, W. K. and West, K. D. (1994). Automatic lag selection in covariance
  matrix estimation. The Review of Economic Studies, 61(4):631­653.
Pasquariello, P. (2014). Financial Market Dislocations. The Review of
  Financial Studies, 27(6).
Rime, D., Schrimpf, A., and Syrstad, O. (2019). Covered interest parity
  arbitrage. Working paper.
Roll, R. (1984). A simple implicit measure of the effective bid-ask spread
  in an efficient market. The Journal of finance, 39(4):1127­1139.
Schwarz, K. (2018). Mind the gap: Disentangling credit and liquidity in
  risk spreads. Review of Finance, 23(3):557­597.
Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. W. (1997). The limits of arbitrage. The Journal
  of finance, 52(1):35­55.
Stock, J. and Yogo, M. (2005). Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
  Regression, pages 80­108. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Wallen, J. (2020). Markups to financial intermediation in foreign exchange
  markets. Working paper.
Yang, F. (2013). Investment shocks and the commodity basis spread. Jour-
  nal of Financial Economics, 110(1):164­184.




                                     43
Figures and Tables


 Figure 1: Term Structure of the Forward Cross-Currency Basis




Notes : This figure illustrates the time series average spot and forward-starting cross-
currency bases in AUD and JPY, vis-à-vis the USD, respectively, as defined in Equation
(8). For each currency, the sample from July 2010 to August 2018 is split into three sub-
samples based on the tercile of the level of the spot 3M OIS cross-currency basis. Within
each sub-sample, the time series average of the relevant spot/forward OIS cross-currency
basis is shown.




                                           44
    Figure 2: Cross-Currency Basis and Other Near-Arbitrages




Notes : This figure plots the daily spot 3M AUD-JPY cross-currency basis and the first
principal component of seven other near-arbitrages: the bond-CDS basis, the CDS-CDX
basis, the US Libor tenor basis, the 30-year Treasury-swap spread, the Refco-Treasury
spread, the KfW-Bund spread, and the TIPS-Treasury spread. The details of these
other near-arbitrages are given in Internet Appendix I.H.

     Figure 3: Cross-Currency Basis and Intermediary Wealth




Notes : This figure plots the monthly spot 3M AUD-JPY cross-currency basis and mea-
sures of intermediary wealth from 2003 to 2018. The HKM Capital Ratio is the equity
capitalization ratio of the primary dealers, scaled by 1000. The cumulative intermediary
equity return and the cumulative market return are calculated from January 2003, and
are based on the value-weighted return of the equity of primary dealers and the entire
US stock market, respectively.




                                          45
            Table 1: Forward CIP Trading Profits and Additional Properties for USD-Based Currency Pairs


                    Panel A: Summary Statistics of Returns on OIS 1M-fwd 3M Forward CIP Trading Strategy
                                               Mean                                           Sharpe Ratio
                                 Pre-GFC       GFC          Post-GFC            Pre-GFC             GFC      Post-GFC
              AUD_USD               1.06        3.71            4.73              0.28              0.10        0.90
                                  (0.98)      (19.41)         (1.78)             (0.27)            (0.50)      (0.37)
              CAD_USD              -0.93        1.50           5.56               -0.26             0.05        1.10
                                  (1.57)      (15.50)         (1.57)             (0.44)            (0.48)      (0.32)
              GBP_USD              -1.47        9.27           4.26               -0.48             0.27        0.84
                                  (0.77)      (16.13)         (1.67)             (0.27)            (0.42)      (0.31)
              EUR_USD              -1.15       14.29           -1.35              -0.60             0.34        -0.17
                                  (0.60)      (20.07)         (2.54)             (0.30)            (0.40)      (0.33)
              CHF_USD              -1.34        5.97           -3.60              -0.35             0.14        -0.25
                                  (0.86)      (18.14)         (4.72)             (0.26)            (0.40)      (0.36)
              JPY_USD              -1.97        8.18           -9.53              -0.81             0.17        -1.04
                                  (0.97)      (22.78)         (3.11)             (0.39)            (0.44)      (0.33)




46
              Standard errors in parentheses
                                                  Panel B: Post-GFC Properties
                                Mean Fwd CIP                                            Avg. Interest     Corr SPX and
                                  Trad. Ret.     Average Basis       Average Slope      Diff. vs. USD          FX
               AUD_USD                 4.73            9.14               5.81                2.27             0.51
               CAD_USD                 5.56           -8.64               5.63                0.48             0.49
                GBP_USD                4.26          -14.78              4.34                 0.02             0.31
                EUR_USD               -1.35          -33.65              -1.22               -0.33             0.15
                CHF_USD               -3.60          -51.96              -3.69               -0.62            -0.07
                JPY_USD               -9.53          -42.48              -8.98               -0.37            -0.31
     Notes : Panel A of this table reports the annual profits and annualized Sharpe ratios from the OIS 1M-forward 3M forward CIP trading strategy
     vis-à-vis the USD. All statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is 2003-01-01 to 2007-06-30, GFC is 2007-07-01 to 2010-06-30, and Post-GFC
     is 2010-07-01 to 2018-08-31. Newey-West standard errors are reported in parentheses, where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West (1994)
     selection procedure. Panel B of this table reports additional characteristics the USD-based currency pairs post-GFC. "Mean Fwd CIP Trad.
     Ret." is the annualized profit from the forward CIP trading strategy; "Average Basis" is the average spot 3M OIS cross-currency basis; "Average
     Slope" is the average spread between the 1M-forward 3M and spot 3M OIS cross-currency basis; "Avg. Int. Rate Diff." is the average spread
     between the 3M foreign OIS rate and the US OIS rate; and "Corr SPX and FX" is the correlation between weekly currency returns of going long
     the foreign currency and shorting the USD and the weekly returns on the S&P 500 index.
                    Table 2: Forward CIP Trading Profits for Currency Pairs with large CIP Deviations

                                          Mean                                    Sharpe Ratio                      Post-GFC Metrics
                                                        Post-                                        Post-           Avg.   Int. Rate
                       Pre-GFC        GFC                GFC           Pre-GFC          GFC           GFC           Basis     Diff.
      AUD_CHF            2.47         -1.92              9.82             0.50          -0.06         0.64          60.37      2.89
                        (1.06)      (10.49)             (5.15)          (0.26)         (0.34)        (0.40)
      AUD_JPY            2.44         -4.37             14.27             0.61          -0.16         1.38           51.63        2.64
                        (1.37)      (10.40)             (3.40)          (0.35)         (0.36)        (0.35)
      USD_CHF            1.34         -5.97              3.60             0.35          -0.14         0.25           51.96        0.62
                        (0.86)      (18.14)             (4.72)          (0.26)         (0.40)        (0.36)
      CAD_CHF            1.01         -4.37              9.08            0.20           -0.16         0.67           44.34        1.09
                        (1.78)       (8.41)             (4.39)          (0.39)         (0.29)        (0.40)
      AUD_EUR             2.27       -10.27              6.06            0.62           -0.41         0.68           42.79        2.60
                        (0.88)       (9.01)             (2.93)          (0.24)         (0.32)        (0.35)
      USD_JPY            1.97         -8.18              9.53            0.81           -0.17         1.04           42.48        0.37




47
                        (0.97)      (22.78)             (3.11)          (0.39)         (0.44)        (0.33)
      GBP_CHF            0.16         3.17               8.16             0.04           0.14         0.61           38.58        0.64
                        (0.91)       (7.03)             (4.29)          (0.20)         (0.33)        (0.39)
      CAD_JPY            -0.08        -6.66             15.01            -0.02          -0.23         1.69           33.84        0.85
                        (1.41)      (11.11)             (2.89)          (0.37)         (0.36)        (0.35)
      USD_EUR             1.15       -14.29              1.35            0.60           -0.34         0.17           33.65        0.33
                        (0.60)      (20.07)             (2.54)          (0.30)         (0.40)        (0.33)
      GBP_JPY            0.10          1.09             13.70             0.03           0.05         1.70           27.70        0.40
                        (0.89)       (9.61)             (2.65)          (0.27)         (0.41)        (0.30)
      Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes : This table reports the annual profits and annualized Sharpe ratios from the OIS 1M-forward 3M forward CIP trading strategy for the ten
     currency pairs with the largest average Post-GFC spot 3M bases. All statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is 2003-01-01 to 2007-06-30,
     GFC is 2007-07-01 to 2010-06-30, and Post-GFC is 2010-07-01 to 2018-08-31. "Avg. Basis" is the average spot 3M OIS cross-currency basis
     post-GFC, and "Int. Rate Diff." is the average spread between the 3M foreign OIS rate and the US OIS rate post-GFC. Newey-West standard
     errors are reported in parentheses, where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West (1994) selection procedure.
      Table 3: Summary Statistics of Portfolio Returns on OIS 1M-forward 3M Forward CIP Trading Strategy

                                                              Mean                                             Sharpe Ratio
                                           Pre-GFC             GFC           Post-GFC            Pre-GFC           GFC            Post-GFC
      Classic Carry (AUD-JPY)                 2.44             -4.37           14.27                0.61           -0.16              1.38
                                            (1.37)           (10.40)           (3.40)             (0.35)          (0.36)            (0.35)
      3 Currency Carry                        0.32             -4.59             9.77               0.14           -0.24              1.28
                                            (0.88)            (7.09)           (2.59)             (0.39)          (0.33)            (0.41)
      Dynamic Top5 Basis                      1.83             0.18            11.36               0.79            0.01              1.11
                                            (0.76)           (14.21)           (3.33)             (0.34)          (0.44)            (0.41)
      Top 10 Basis                            0.84             -5.32             9.00              0.38            -0.21             1.06
                                            (0.72)           (10.01)           (2.86)             (0.36)          (0.36)            (0.40)




48
      Simple Dollar                          -0.95             7.37             -0.06              -0.51            0.20             -0.01
                                            (1.09)           (18.17)           (1.86)             (0.56)          (0.45)            (0.35)
      Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes : This table reports the annual profits and annualized Sharpe ratios from the OIS 1M-forward 3M forward CIP trading strategy. All
     statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is 2003-01-01 to 2007-06-30, GFC is 2007-07-01 to 2010-06-30, and Post-GFC is 2010-07-01 to 2018-
     08-31. The Classic Carry portfolio is the forward CIP trading strategy for the AUD-JPY pair. The 3 Currency Carry portfolio longs the forward
     CIP trading strategy in AUD, CAD, and GBP and shorts the forward CIP trading strategy in JPY, CHF, and EUR; all individual currency
     trades are vis-à-vis USD and weighted equally. The Dynamic Top5 Basis portfolio has equal weight in the 5 currency pairs that exhibit the
     highest spot 3M basis, rebalanced monthly. The Top 10 Basis portfolio has equal weights in the ten currency pairs with the largest average
     spot 3M basis post-GFC shown in Table 2. The Simple Dollar portfolio puts equal weights on the forward CIP trading strategy for all sample
     currencies vis-à-vis the USD. Newey-West standard errors are reported in parentheses, where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West (1994)
     selection procedure.
     Table 4: Forward CIP Returns and Intermediary Wealth


                   Panel A: Pricing Fwd CIP Returns with Intermediary Wealth
                         Daily Overlapping Returns          Monthly Returns
                     (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)
Market                          0.007                   -0.0003                    -0.001
                               (0.004)                  (0.004)                    (0.005)
Int. Equity                                  0.006       0.006
                                            (0.002)     (0.003)
HKM Factor                                                                           0.004
                                                                                    (0.003)
Constant            0.048       0.038        0.042        0.042        0.053         0.052
                   (0.011)     (0.012)      (0.011)      (0.012)      (0.013)       (0.014)
Observations        2,099       2,030        2,030        2,030          98           98
 Standard errors in parentheses

           Panel B: Bayesian Posterior Likelihood of SDF Models
 Factor Space                  Model                           Probability

 {Market, Fwd. CIP Ret.}      Market + Fwd. CIP Ret.                                   0.979
                              Market Only                                              0.021
 {Int. Equity, Fwd. CIP Ret.} Int. Equity + Fwd. CIP Ret.                              0.996
                              Int. Equity Only                                         0.004
 {Int. Equity, Market, Fwd.   Int. Equity + Market + Fwd.
 CIP Ret.}                    CIP Ret.                                                 0.987
                              Int. Equity + Market                                     0.005
                              Int. Equity + Fwd. CIP Ret.                              0.007
                              Int. Equity Only                                         0.000
 {HKM Factor, Market, Fwd. HKM Factor + Market +
 CIP Ret.}                    Fwd. CIP Ret.                                            0.980
                              HKM Factor + Market                                      0.010
                              HKM Factor + Fwd. CIP Ret.                               0.010
                              HKM Factor Only                                          0.000
Notes : In Panel A, we regress returns on the AUD-JPY 1M-forward 3M CIP trad-
ing strategy return on a constant and the intermediary wealth proxies described in the
text: Market, Intermediary Equity and the HKM Factor. In regressions (1) through (4),
which use overlapping monthly returns from daily data, Newey-West standard errors are
reported in parentheses, where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West (1994) selec-
tion procedure. In regressions (5) and (6), which use monthly data, heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors are reported. In Panel B, we calculate the posterior probabilities
for factor models that do and do not include the forward CIP return based on the
method developed by Barillas and Shanken (2018) and Chib et al. (2020) (see Appendix
I.J for more details).

                                           49
                                         Table 5: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, 2-Factor.

                                       (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)     (7)              (8)         (9)
                                       US          Sov         FX           Opt        CDS        FwdCIP   FF6             Comm          1-6
           Int. Equity                0.182       1.363       1.845        1.485       2.330      -0.0337  0.301            1.031       0.728
                                     (0.746)     (1.565)     (0.639)      (0.996)     (1.016)     (2.206) (4.148)          (0.694)     (0.466)

           Neg. Fwd CIP Ret.          -0.174 -0.0784          -0.0718     -0.126       -0.0274     -0.0621     0.0839      -0.0171     -0.0725
                                     (0.114) (0.0661)        (0.0508)    (0.0492)     (0.0660)    (0.0371)     (0.341)    (0.0277)    (0.0332)

           Intercepts                  Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
           MAPE (%/mo.)               0.030       0.022       0.060        0.034       0.017        0.007       0.106       0.363
           H1 p-value                 0.436       0.716       0.150        0.289       0.144        0.955       0.186       0.373       0.813




50
           KZ p-value                 0.079       0.379       0.107        0.035       0.355        0.226       0.780       0.780       0.041
           N (assets)                   11          6           11           18           5            9           6          23          60
           N (beta, mos.)               98          98          98           98          98           98          98          98
           N (mean, mos.)              360         283         418          272         170           98        1106         331
           Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
     "Neg. Fwd. CIP Ret." is the negative of the return on the AUD-JPY 1M-fwd 3M forward CIP trading strategy and "Int. Equity" is the
     intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset class (one intercept per column, with six
     in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests whether the price
     of the Fwd. CIP Ret. and Int. Equity risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading strategies. KZ p-value is the p-value of the
     Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using GMM with the
     Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
Appendix

A     Additional Figures

 Figure A1: Illustration of spot vs. forward cross-currency basis




Notes : This figure illustrates the spot 3M cross-currency basis and the 1M-forward 3M
cross-currency basis. The spot basis is xt,0,3 as defined in the text, and the forward
basis is xt,1,3 as defined in the text.




                                         51
        Figure A2: Quarter-end-crossing in spot and forward
                        cross-currency bases




Notes : This figure illustrates the time series average of spot, 1M-forward 1M, and 2M-
forward 1M AUD-JPY cross-currency bases. The sample from July 2010 to August
2018 is split into three sub-samples based which of the three bases has its OIS interest
tenor crossing the quarter end. The three lines correspond to the three sub-samples,
and each point shows the time series averages of the OIS cross-currency bases within
the sub-sample. More details on the quarter-end behavior of the forward CIP trade can
be found in Internet Appendix I.G.




                                          52
    Figure A3: Illustration of the forward CIP trading strategy




Notes : This figure illustrates the return on a 1M-forward 3M forward CIP trading
strategy. At time t, the trader enters the forward basis, xt,1,3 , which is the forward
direct interest less the forward synthetic interest. At time t + 1, the trader unwinds the
spot basis, -xt+1,0,3 , which is the spot synthetic interest less the spot direct interest.
The realized monthly profit per dollar notional on this forward CIP trading strategy is
approximately the sum of the two bases: xt,1,3 + (-xt+1,0,3 ), normalized by the duration
3/12.




                                            53
                                        Table A1: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, 3-Factor

                                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)     (7)            (8)         (9)
                                       US          Sov         FX          Opt        CDS        FwdCIP    FF6           Comm          1-6
           Market                     0.901       0.486       0.907       0.511       1.104       -3.556  -0.998          0.634       0.840
                                     (0.819)     (0.695)     (0.357)     (0.715)     (0.498)     (5.825) (4.892)         (0.373)     (0.412)

           Int. Equity                -0.647      1.580       1.264       1.898       1.947        -2.551     -1.701      0.667      -0.0104
                                     (0.572)     (3.680)     (0.958)     (10.47)     (2.005)      (5.286)    (7.964)     (0.812)     (0.763)

           Neg. Fwd CIP Ret.         -0.0651 -0.0715         -0.0602     -0.122       -0.0316     -0.0689     0.228 -0.00433          -0.0781
                                    (0.0767) (0.101)        (0.0501)    (0.0951)     (0.0827)    (0.0480)    (0.538) (0.0387)        (0.0311)

           Intercepts                  Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes




54
           MAPE (%/mo.)               0.008       0.023       0.059       0.035       0.013        0.006      0.107       0.345
           H1 p-value                 0.192       0.883       0.814       0.391       0.685        0.831      0.616       0.298       0.689
           KZ p-value                 0.061       0.757       0.235       0.911       0.210        0.713      0.871       0.778       0.085
           N (assets)                   11          6           11          18           5            9         6           23          60
           N (beta, mos.)               98          98          98          98          98           98        98          98
           N (mean, mos.)              360         283         418         272         170           98       1106         331
           Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
     "Neg. Fwd. CIP Ret." is the negative of the return on the AUD-JPY 1M-fwd 3M forward CIP trading strategy, "Market" is the CRSP market
     return, and "Int. Equity" is the intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset class
     (one intercept per column, with six in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns.
     H1 p-value tests whether the price of the Fwd. CIP Ret., Market, and Int. Equity risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading
     strategies. KZ p-value is the p-value of the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard
     errors are computed using GMM with the Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
Internet Appendix (Not for Publication)

I.A   List of Tables and Figures
Paper and Paper Appendix Tables
  1. USD-based pair returns OIS 1M-fwd-3M: Table 1

  2. Top ten basis currency pair returns OIS 1M-fwd-3M: Table 2

  3. Portfolio returns OIS 1M-fwd-3M: Table 3

  4. Intercept test and Bayesian model probabilities: Table 4

  5. Cross-sectional Test, Int. Equity + Fwd CIP Ret.: Table 5

  6. Cross-sectional Test, Market + Int. Equity + Fwd CIP Ret.: Table
     A1
Internet Appendix Tables
  1. OIS and IBOR interest rate conventions: Table I.A1

  2. Portfolio returns OIS 1M-fwd-1M: Table I.A2

  3. Portfolio returns OIS 3M-fwd-3M: Table I.A3

  4. Portfolio returns IBOR 1M-fwd-3M: Table I.A4

  5. Portfolio returns IBOR 3M-fwd-3M: Table I.A5

  6. Monthly (non-overlapping) portfolio returns OIS 1M-fwd-3M: Table
     I.A6

  7. Extended sample (including COVID-19) portfolio returns OIS 1M-
     fwd-3M: Table I.A7

  8. Return predictability: Table I.A8

  9. Quarter-end return predictability: Table I.A9

 10. Cross-sectional Test, Market + HKM: Table I.A10

 11. Cross-sectional Test, Int. Equity: Table I.A11

 12. Cross-sectional Test, Market + Int. Equity: Table I.A12

 13. Cross-sectional Test, Market + HKM + Fwd CIP Ret.: Table I.A13

 14. Cross-sectional Test, Int. Equity + Fwd CIP Ret. with risk-free rate
     adjustment: Table I.A14

                                  IA.1
 15. Cross-sectional Test, Int. Equity + JPY-USD Fwd CIP Ret.: Table
     I.A15

 16. GMM Cross-sectional Test, Int. Equity + 3 Currency Carry Fwd
     CIP Ret.: Table I.A16

 17. Cross-sectional Test, Int. Equity + Dynamic Top 5 Fwd CIP Ret.:
     Table I.A17

 18. Cross-sectional Test, Int. Equity + Top Ten Basis Fwd CIP Ret.:
     Table I.A18

 19. Cross-sectional Test, Int. Equity + Fwd CIP Ret., Post-GFC sample:
     Table I.A19

 20. Cross-sectional Test, Int. Equity + Near-Arbitrage First PC: Table
     I.A20

 21. Summary stats of CIP and Near-Arbitrages: Table I.A21

 22. Risk Prices and SDF Parameter Estimates: Table I.A22

Paper and Paper Appendix Figures

  1. Forward basis term structure: Figure 1

  2. Correlation of basis and PCA of other near-arbitrages: Figure 2

  3. Correlation between Basis and Intermediary Wealth: Figure 3

  4. Illustration of spot vs. forward basis: Figure A1

  5. Quarter-end crossing basis: Figure A2

  6. Illustration of forward CIP trading strategy: Figure A3

Internet Appendix Figures

  1. OIS 3M cross-currency basis: Figure I.A1

  2. IBOR 3M cross-currency basis: Figure I.A2

  3. Alternative term structure: Figure I.A3

  4. Correlation between Portolfio Bases and Intermediary Equity: Figure
     I.A4




                                  IA.2
I.B    Equivalent definition of the Forward CIP basis
In this section, we show the equivalence between the two definitions for
the forward cross-currency basis given by equations (8) and (9), under the
assumption of no-arbitrage between forward interest swap rates and term
structure of spot interest swap rates.

         $       c            12
xt,h, = rt,h, - rt,h, -           (ft,h+ - ft,h )
                               
             h+ $                 h $           h+ c           h c       12
       =             rt,0,h+ - rt,    0,  -          rt,0,h+ - rt,   -      (ft,h+ - ft,h )
                                                                0,       
           h+           $           c           12
       =             (rt, 0,h+ - rt,0,h+ ) -       (ft,h+ - st )
                                              h+
           h    $             c          12
       -      (rt, 0,h+ - rt,0,h+ ) -       (ft, - st )
                                         
           h+                   h
       =         xt,0,h+ - xt,0,h ,
                                
where the second equality follows no arbitrage between forward interest
swap rates and the term structure of spot interest swap rates. This no-
arbitrage condition likely holds in practice because arbitrage between in-
terest rate derivatives is not strongly affected by most real-world regulatory
constraints. It holds in our model under the assumption that derivatives
are not subject to the regulatory constraint.

I.C    Profit Calculations
In this section we detail the calculation of profits for the forward CIP
trading strategy, and then show how that can be mapped to the cross-
currency basis variables we have defined. We will use yen as our example
currency.
   At time t, the strategy
  1. receives fixed (pays floating) on one dollar notional of a h-month
     forward-starting  -month interest-rate swap in dollars at annualized
                  $
     fixed rate Rt,h, ,
  2. enters into a h-month forward agreement to sell Ft,h yen in exchange
     for one dollar,
  3. pays fixed (receives floating) on Ft,h yen notional of a h-month forward-
                                                                 c
     starting  -month interest-rate swap in dollars at rate Rt,h,   , and
                                                                               
                                                               c
  4. enters into a h +  -month forward agreement to buy Ft,h (Rt,h, ) 12h
     yen in exchange for dollars at the exchange rate Ft,h+ .

                                     IA.3
   At time t + h, the strategy is unwound. The trader
                                                                          R$            
  1. unwinds the receive-fixed dollar swap, earning ( R$ t,h, ) 12h - 1 dollars,
                                                                           t+h,0,

                                                               St+h -Ft,h
  2. cash-settles the h-month forward, earning                    St+h
                                                                                dollars,
                                                          Ft,h                 Rc           
  3. unwinds the pay-fixed swap, earning                  St+h
                                                               (1    - ( Rc t,h, ) 12h ) dollars,
                                                                               t+h,0,
     and
                                                                                                        
                                                                                               c
                                                                                        Ft,h (Rt,h, ) 12h
                                                                 1              1
  4. unwinds the h+ -month forward, earning ( Ft+h, - Ft,h+ )                                $
                                                                                                             .
                                                                                           (Rt +h,0, )
                                                                                                       12h


                                           $
   In this last expression, we have used Rt +h,0, as the discount rate on the
forward profits (converted to dollars). In our model, because derivatives
are unaffected by the regulatory constraint, the dollar risk-free rate is in
indeed the correct discount rate for the forward profits. If net derivative
profits affected the regulatory constraint, the appropriate discount rate
would depend on questions like whether the trader could unwind or net the
derivatives instead of simply taking an offsetting position. However, as a
practical matter, the choice of discount rate has a minuscule effect on the
computed profits.
   Therefore, total profit per dollar notional (i.e. the excess return) is
                $                          c                             c
               Rt,h,               Ft,h Rt,h,              1      1    Rt,h,    
c
t+h,h,   =(    $
                         ) 12h -       ( c      ) 12h +(      -     )( $     ) 12h Ft,h .
              Rt +h,0,
                                   St+h Rt+h,0,          Ft+h, Ft,h+ Rt+h,0,

   Recall the definition of the cross-currency basis,
                                                              
                                                    $
                         c                        (Rt +h,0, )
                                                              12h F
                                                                    t+h,
                       (Rt +h,0, )
                                   12h S
                                        t+h   =                        
                                                   (1 + Xtc+h,0, ) 12h

and                                                        
                                                    $
                            c                     (Rt,h, ) 12h Ft,h+
                          (Rt,h, ) 12h Ft,h   =         c              .
                                                  (1 + Xt,h, ) 12h
   Plugging in these definitions,

                $
               Rt,h,                    Ft,h+ 1 + Xtc+h,0,          Ft,h+            1
c
t+h,h, = (     $
                         ) 12h     1-        (       c
                                                          ) 12h + (       - 1)       c                           .
              Rt +h,0,
                                        Ft+h, 1 + Xt,h,             Ft+h,      (1 + Xt,h, ) 12h

    This exact profit formula is complicated by a variety of discounting
effects that arise in the presence of arbitrage. Note, however, that all of
these effects (deviations of interest rates and forward exchange rates from
their previous forward values) are typically at most a few hundred basis

                                              IA.4
points. In the presence of cross-currency basis values that on the order of
basis points, these discounting effects will be a couple percent of some basis
points, and hence for the most part negligible.
   We therefore employ a first-order approximation. Define

                             F              Ft+h,
                             t+h,h,   = ln (       ),
                                            Ft,h+
                                             $
                             R
                                            Rt +h,
                             t+h,h,   = ln ( $ ).
                                            Rt,h,

   Taking a first-order expansion around xc       c
                                          t,h, = xt+h, =
                                                                      F
                                                                      t+h,h,   =
R
t+h,h, = 0, we have

                                          
                 c       c
                 t+h,h,  t+h,h, =            (xc       c
                                               t,h, - xt+h,0, ).
                                         12h
Annualizing these monthly profits gives the formula employed in the main
text.


I.D     Model Details
In this appendix section we present a more detailed description of the model
outlined in Section 2, and a more formal statement of the key results.
    Our model adopts the approach of He and Krishnamurthy (2011) and
the subsequent intermediary asset pricing literature (surveyed in He et al.
(2017)), and in particular the idea that the manager of the intermediary
is an agent whose SDF should price assets. The model is a discrete time
version of He and Krishnamurthy (2011). We add to He and Krishnamurthy
(2011) a variety of assets, including both "cash" assets and derivatives, and
a regulatory constraint. We study a manager with CRRA or Epstein-Zin
preferences (rather than focus on log preferences), because these preferences
will allow us to discuss the role that intertemporal hedging concerns play
in the model.36
    The model is based on He and Krishnamurthy (2011), but is partial
equilibrium in that it considers only that intermediary manager's prob-
lem and not market clearing conditions. In this sense, the model follows
the spirit of the standard consumption-based asset pricing approach. Our
maintained assumption is that asset prices are consistent with the man-
ager's Euler equations. This assumption has a particularly significant im-
plication in the presence of arbitrage opportunities: it implies that arbitrage
can exist if and only if constraints prevent the intermediary from taking
  36
    In augmenting the He and Krishnamurthy (2011) model with Epstein-Zin prefer-
ences, we are building on Di Tella (2017) among others.


                                       IA.5
advantage of the arbitrage.37
    The manager is endowed with the ability to run an intermediary that
survives for a single period. In the beginning of the period, the manager
will raise funds from households in the form of both debt and equity, sub-
ject to various constraints, and choose how much of her own wealth to
contribute. The manager then invests these funds in a variety of assets. At
the end of the period, returns realize and the intermediary is dissolved. The
manager receives a payout based on her equity share in the intermediary.
This payout, plus any savings the manager holds outside the intermediary,
determine the manager's wealth entering into the next period.
    Let WtM denote the manager's wealth at the beginning of period t, and
let zt be a state variable that determines the conditional (on time t infor-
mation) distribution of asset returns. These two variables are the state
variables of the manager's optimization problem and are the relevant por-
tions of the manager's information set. Expectations should be understood
as conditioning on these two variables,

                                   Et [·] = E [·|WtM , zt ].

    At the beginning of the period, the manager must decide on a con-
tractual structure for the intermediary she runs. The intermediary begins
by raising equity capital Nt  0. Of the initial equity capital, NtM is con-
tributed by the manager, with the remainder coming from households. The
manager receives a share t of the wealth that will be liquidated when the
intermediary is dissolved at the end of the period, with the remainder go-
ing to households. Note that the share t is not necessarily equal to the
proportion of the equity that the manager contributes; define the fee
                                                t Nt
                                        ftm 
                                                NtM
as the ratio of what the manager receives to what she contributes.
    The manager raises equity and debt from households in a competitive
market. Let MtH                                               ^
                  +1 be the household's SDF, and let Nt+1 be the value of
the intermediary's equity after returns are realized and the debt is repaid
(we define this variable in more detail below). Let Bt be the face value of
                                       b         b
the intermediary's debt, and let Rt       = exp(rt ) be its interest rate. For any
                         M               b
capital structure (t , Nt , Nt , Bt , Rt ) proposed by a manager with wealth
WtM in state zt , households will be willing to purchase the equity if


          Nt - NtM  (1 - t )E [MtH  ^            M        M              b
                                 +1 Nt+1 |zt , Wt , (t , Nt , Nt , Bt , Rt )].

  37
       We would like to thank Andreas Stathopoulos very a helpful discussion on this point.



                                            IA.6
The intermediary's debt must also be priced by the household's SDF,

                                  1 = Et [MtH   b
                                            +1 Rt ].

Note that the expectation relevant for the equity purchase decision is con-
ditional on the state variables zt , WtM and the capital structure of the in-
termediary, but not on the intermediary's asset allocation (which we define
below). That is, the household must form a conjecture about how the man-
ager will choose to invest, and price the equity accordingly; the manager
cannot commit. This is a key friction, which is also employed by He and
Krishnamurthy (2011).
    We have assumed that the intermediary is risk-free. We are ignoring
the possibility of default; the model of He and Krishnamurthy (2011) that
we are building on is developed in continuous time with continuous price
processes, and hence also excludes the possibility of default. We develop
a discrete time model to make the intuition behind our hypothesized SDF
clear, and have found that incorporating the possibility of default obfus-
cates that intuition.38
    We next turn to the intermediary's budget constraints. We allow the
manager of the intermediary to divert resources from the intermediary in-
stead of investing them. Let t  0 be the resources diverted. In equi-
librium, households will ensure that diversion does not occur by ensuring
that t , the manager's claim on the assets, is sufficiently high.
    Let I be the set of all assets available to the intermediary. We partition
this set into "cash" and "derivative" assets, I c and I d , assuming that the
former require an upfront cash investment whereas the latter are contracts
entered into with zero initial net-present-value. Cash assets affect the in-
termediary's initial budget constraint, whereas the derivatives do not. Let
  i
t   be the dollar amount (cash) or notional (derivative) invested in asset i,
scaled by the initial non-diverted intermediary equity Nt .
    The intermediary's initial budget constraint is
                                                         i
                            Nt + Bt = t + Nt             t .
                                                  iI c

    The excess return (cash assets) or profit per unit notional (derivative
                                  i       b
assets) of asset i is defined as Rt +1 - Rt . The distribution of these returns
is a function of zt , and the returns are realized at the end of the period.
The intermediary's net worth when it is liquidated at the end of the period
  38
   Note, however, that incorporating the possibility of default is necessary for the
model to speak to issues like whether it is to preferable to examine OIS or IBOR bases.




                                        IA.7
is therefore
          ^t+1 = -Rb Bt + Nt           i i                        i   i       b
          N        t                   t Rt+1 + Nt                t (Rt +1 - Rt ),
                                iI c                       iI d

which can be re-written as
                ^t+1 = Rb (Nt - t ) + Nt                  i   i       b
                N       t                                 t (Rt +1 - Rt ).
                                                  iI

Using this definition, we can rewrite the household's equity participation
constraint as

               Nt - NtM  (1 - t )(Nt - t)
                                                          i
                      +Nt (1 - t )Et [MtH
                                        +1                t   i
                                                            (Rt       b
                                                                +1 - Rt )]),
                                                  iI


where           i
        t and t are the policies that the household conjectures based on
observing the state variables and capital structure.
   Lastly, as described in the text, we assume that the intermediary oper-
ates under a regulatory constraint that affects only cash assets:

                                1             k i |t
                                                   i
                                                     |.
                                       iI c

Note that we have assumed that the regulatory constraint cannot limit the
cashflow diversion of the manager.39
    These constraints describe the operation of the intermediary. We next
turn to the decisions and preferences of the manager. We assume the
manager has Epstein-Zin preferences (Epstein and Zin (1989)), with risk-
aversion parameter  , intertemporal elasticity of substitution parameter  ,
                                                            1-
and a subjective discount factor of  , and define  = 1-       -1
                                                                 . Whatever
wealth she does not consume or invest in the intermediary, plus any re-
sources she diverts from the intermediary, is saved in risk-free assets, but
the manager cannot borrow. When the manager diverts t resources from
the intermediary, she receives only (1 + )-1 t , which she can save in the
risk-free asset. As a result, her wealth entering the next period is
                                                           t       ^t+1 ,
               WtM     b    M   M    M
                 +1 = Rt (Wt - Ct - Nt +                     ) + t N
                                                          1+
where the first term represents the intermediary's outside savings and the
  39
    Our model inherits from He and Krishnamurthy (2017) the somewhat awkward
assumption that the manager cannot commit when choosing an asset allocation, even
though the regulator can limit the manager's asset allocation.



                                        IA.8
second her share of the intermediary's liquidation value.
   We now define the Bellman equation describing the manager's problem.
The manager solves

          V (WtM , zt ) =                           max
                                     M 0,N M 0,N 0, [0,1], 0,{i }
                                    Ct    t     t  t      t   t iI
                                           -1                               -1      1
                              {(CtM )1-         + Et [V (WtM
                                                           +1 , zt+1 )
                                                                      1- 
                                                                        ] } 1--1 ,

subject to

                    ^t+1 = Rt
                    N       b
                              (Nt - t ) + Nt                    i
                                                                t   i
                                                                  (Rt       b
                                                                      +1 - Rt ),
                                                           iI
                                                                   t       ^t+1 ,
                    WtM     b    M   M    M
                      +1 = Rt (Wt - Ct - Nt +                        ) + t N
                                                                  1+
           CtM + NtM  WtM ,
             Nt - NtM  (1 - t )(Nt - t)
                                                                i
                                   + Nt (1 - t )Et [MtH
                                                      +1        t   i
                                                                  (Rt       b
                                                                      +1 - Rt )],
                                                           iI
                        i    i
                    k       |t |    1,
             iI c

                        NtM  Nt .

In defining this problem, we have eliminated the debt level Bt as a choice
variable by substituting out the initial budget constraint, and we have
assumed that the manager will choose to offer a capital structure acceptable
to households. This assumption is without loss of generality, as the manager
can always set NtM = Nt , t = 1, which is equivalent to having her offer
rejected. Note also that this problem is part of an equilibrium of a capital
raising game. That is, the households expectations            i
                                                     t and t are functions
of the proposed capital structure and must be consistent with the manager's
ultimate choices given that capital structure.40
    We next describe a lemma that collects a number of simplifying results,
in particular focusing on an equilibrium in which no cashflow diversion
occurs in equilibrium and the anticipated asset allocation depends only
in the investment opportunities. These results are essentially identical to
statements contained in He and Krishnamurthy (2011).

Lemma 1. In the manager's problem, there exists an equilibrium in which:
  40
     Formally, we do not require that this equilibrium be subgame perfect. This sim-
plification allows us to focus directly on an equilibrium in which the manager puts all
her savings in the intermediary. He and Krishnamurthy (2011) Lemma 2 proves (in
the context of their model; our model is essentially the discrete time version) that this
outcome holds in all equilibria.


                                                   IA.9
                            i
  1. The optimal allocation t is a function only of the state vector zt ,
     and satisfies

                                                       i                       1
                               -1 < Et [MtH
                                          +1           t   i
                                                         (Rt       b
                                                             +1 - Rt )] <        ,
                                                  iI
                                                                               

  2. There is no diversion, t = t = 0, and the manager's share satisfies
                  -1
     t  (1 + ) ,

  3. The household equity participation constraint binds,

  4. The manager invests all savings in the intermediary, CtM + NtM =
     WtM , with NtM > 0,

  5. The manager's share            M
                         t and fee ft are functions only of zt , with

                                                          t (zt )
         ftM (zt ) =                                                        i
                                                                                               .
                               t (zt ) - (1 - t (zt ))Et [MtH +1       iI   t   i
                                                                              (Rt       b
                                                                                  +1 - Rt )]


                                                                            i
  6. ftM (zt )  1, strictly if and only if Et [MtH
                                                 +1                   iI    t   i
                                                                              (Rt       b
                                                                                  +1 - Rt )] > 0,
     and    t = (1 + )
                        -1
                            if ftM > 1.

Proof. See below.
   With these results, the manager's final wealth is

             WtM      ^
               +1 = t Nt+1
                                                  b
                         = (WtM - CtM )ftM (zt )(Rt +               i
                                                                    t   i
                                                                      (Rt       b
                                                                          +1 - Rt )),
                                                             iI

and the manager's problem can be written as

        V (WtM , zt ) =               max
                                   M 0,{i }
                                  Ct    t iI
                                          -1                                  -1     1
                              {(CtM )1-        + Et [V (WtM
                                                          +1 , zt+1 )
                                                                     1- 
                                                                       ] } 1--1 ,

subject to

               WtM       M   M   M        b
                 +1 = (Wt - Ct )ft (zt )(Rt +
                                                                      i
                                                                      t   i
                                                                        (Rt       b
                                                                            +1 - Rt )),
                                                               iI
                   i    i
               k       |t |    1.
        iI c




                                                 IA.10
       It is useful to define the log return on the manager's wealth,
                    w          M         b           i   i       b
                   rt +1 = ln(ft ) + ln(Rt +         t (Rt +1 - Rt ))
                                                iI
                                WM
                       =   ln( M t+1 M     ).
                              Wt - Ct

This definition includes the fee ftM , unlike the usual definition of the return
on wealth. As shown in Lemma 1, this fee will be positive if and only the
intermediary's portfolio earns an abnormal return under the household's
SDF, and in this case the "inside equity" constraint        t  (1 + )
                                                                          -1
                                                                             will
bind. This is natural, but not guaranteed, in the presence of arbitrage
opportunities.
    For example, if the intermediary can only 1) engage in arbitrage or 2)
buy assets that are also priced under the household's SDF, and arbitrage
opportunities exist, then it must the case that ftM > 1. However, if the
intermediary can also buy assets that are "expensive" from the household's
perspective, then even in the presence of arbitrage opportunities it is not
necessarily the case that ftM > 1. This kind of indifference occurs in He
and Krishnamurthy (2011) when the inside equity constraint does not bind
(normal times).
    In the main text, we assume that ftM = 1 to illustrate the point that
the regulatory constraint can bind even if the inside equity constraint does
not. In the remainder of this appendix, we present results that include ftM .
Note also that ftM can vary over time (in particular, when the economy
transitions from "normal" to "crisis" times), and that the increase in ftM in
crisis times generates an additional intertemporal hedging motive.41
    We next derive the Euler equation for consumption and the first-order
conditions for portfolio choice in the usual way, following Epstein and Zin
(1989). The only complications that our model introduces relative to Ep-
stein and Zin (1989) are the fee ftM , which alters the definition of the wealth
return, and the constraint, which introduces a multiplier into the portfo-
lio choice problem but does not change the consumption Euler equation.
We summarize these equations in the lemma below, and for completeness
provide a derivation at the end of this section.
Lemma 2. Define cM                M           M
                        t+1 = ln(Ct+1 ) - ln(Ct ), and mt+1 =  ln( ) +
        w         M
( - 1)rt +1 -  ct+1 . For the manager's problem, the first-order condition
associated with the consumption-savings decision is
                                                 w
                             1 = Et [exp(mt+1 + rt +1 )]

  41
    Exploring the interactions between intertemporal hedging and the non-linearity in
intermediary asset pricing models is an interesting avenue for future research. We thank
David Chapman for pointing out this possibility.

                                        IA.11
                                  i
and the first-order condition for t is
                                i       b      RC i    i
                Et [exp(mt+1 )(Rt +1 - Rt )] = t k sgn(t ),

Proof. See below.
    Consider in particular the first-order conditions associated with a for-
eign currency risk-free bond and with a forward contract on the exchange
                                                     c St
rate. The return on the foreign currency bond is Rt   St+1
                                                           , and the profit of
                                St+1 -Ft,1
the forward (a derivative) is     St+1
                                             per dollar notional. The two first-
order conditions are

                               c    St     b
               Et [exp(mt+1 )(Rt        - Rt )] = RC c    c
                                                  t k sgn(t )
                                   St+1
and
                                        St+1 - Ft,1
                      Et [exp(mt+1 )(               )] = 0.
                                           St+1
Combining these two equations yields

                               c   St      b
               Et [exp(mt+1 )(Rt        - Rt )] = RC c    c
                                                  t k sgn(t ),
                                   Ft,1
or
                            b
            Et [exp(mt+1 )]Rt (exp(-xt,1 ) - 1) = RC c    c
                                                  t k sgn(t ),

where xt,1 is defined as in the main text. Taking absolute values gives
Equation (4).
   Combining this equation with the first-order condition for an arbitrary
asset i, we have

                       i       b          i       ki
       Et [exp(mt+1 )(Rt +1 - Rt (1 + sgn(t )        |1 - exp -xt,1 |)] = 0.
                                                  kc
We conclude that, holding risk premia constant, the absolute value of the
cross-currency basis should predict asset returns, at least for those assets
the intermediary is consistently long or short. However, the "holding risk
premia" constant caveat is potentially quite important. It may very well
be the case that the cross-currency basis co-moves with other variables in
zt that predict changing variances and co-variances, and hence risk premia
and expected returns.
    We should also emphasize that this prediction is difficult to test. Re-
turn predictability regressions often require long time series, but our theory
only applies to the period in which regulatory constraints create CIP vio-
lations (essentially the post-financial-crisis period). It may be possible to
construct stronger tests even in short data samples by imposing structure


                                     IA.12
on the coefficients k i /k c , by taking a stand on the nature of the regulatory
constraint. For example, a pure leverage constraint might set all of these
coefficients to unity for all assets i. Our approach focuses on a different
prediction of the model, which we derive next.
    Let us consider the first-order condition associated with the wealth port-
folio. We have
                               i   i       b       RC             i i     i
        Et [exp(mt+1 )(        t (Rt +1 - Rt ))] = t              t k sgn(t ),
                          iI                                 iI

which is
                                  w          M       b      RC
              Et [exp(mt+1 )(exp(rt +1 - ln(ft )) - Rt )] = t .

This simplifies to Equation (5) in the ftM = 1 case.
    We next apply the log-normality approximation used by Campbell (1993),
and assume that all conditional variances and covariances are constant (i.e.
that the model is homoskedastic). Under these assumptions, and using the
first-order approximation

                     ki       i                             ki     i
            ln(1 +      sgn( t
                                ) | 1 - exp( - xt, 1 ) | )     sgn(t )|xt,1 |,
                     kc                                     kc
we can simplify the Euler equation for asset i to

         i          b   1 i 2     ic            iw   ki      i
    Et [rt +1 ] - r t +   (  ) =     + (1 -  )     +   c
                                                         sgn(t )|xt,1 |,         (I.A1)
                        2                            k
         i          i      i 2
where rt  +1 = ln(Rt+1 ), ( ) is the conditional variance of the log return,
  ic
 is the conditional covariance of the log return and log consumption
growth, and  iw is the conditional covariance of the log return and the
log wealth return. Compared to the textbook formula (Campbell (2017)),
the expected excess return now includes an effect of the cross-currency
basis, scaled by the relative risk-weights between asset i and the foreign-
currency bond. This result is essentially the "margin-based CCAPM" result
of Garleanu and Pedersen (2011), except that we have used a cross-currency
basis to measure that shadow value of the constraint and employed Epstein-
Zin preferences instead of CRRA utility.
     Using the standard approximation for the return of the wealth portfolio
(Campbell (2017)), and accounting for the possibility of extra fee income,
we have
          w          M       b  1 w 2                 i       i         b  1 i 2
     Et [rt +1 - ln(ft )] - rt + ( ) =                t (Et [rt +1 ] - rt + ( ) )
                                2                iI
                                                                           2
                                                  wc         2  1
                                             =     + (1 - ) w + c |xt,1 |.
                                                               k


                                         IA.13
It follows by the homoskedasticity assumption and the law of iterated ex-
pectations that

                        w                        b         M                       1
          (Et+1 - Et )[rt +1+j ] = (Et+1 - Et )[rt+j + ln(ft+j ) +                    |xt,1 |].
                                                                                   kc
   We next combine the log-linear approximation of the intertemporal bud-
get constraint developed by Campbell (1993) and the Euler equation for
the consumption-savings decision derived in Lemma 2. These two equations
together show that
                                                              
cM          M
 t+1 - Et [ct+1 ]        =      w
                               rt           w
                                  +1 - Et [rt+1 ]+(1 -  )
                                                                              w
                                                                    j (Et+1 [rt               w
                                                                                +1+j ] - Et [rt+1+j ]).
                                                             j =1


Note that this formula is identical to a result in Campbell (1993), because
the Euler equation for the consumption-savings is not distorted by the
regulatory constraint (which only affects the asset allocation).
    Plugging our equation for the expected return on the wealth portfo-
lio into this equation, and then the resulting expression for consumption
growth into the equation defining the return of an arbitrary asset i (equa-
tion (I.A1)), leads to our main result.

Theorem 3. The expected arithmetic excess return of an arbitrary asset i
can be written as

         i          b   1 i 2     iw            ih   ki     i
    Et [rt +1 ] - r t +   (  ) =     + (  - 1)     +    sgn(t )|xt,1 |,                           (I.A2)
                        2                            kc
where  iw is the conditional covariance with the wealth portfolio and
                              
     ih              i                                 1
          =   Covt [rt +1 ,          j (Et+1 - Et )(      |xt+j,1 | + ln(ftM       b
                                                                           +j ) + rt+j )].        (I.A3)
                              j =1
                                                       kc

    This theorem arrives at the usual conclusion that, if  > 1, the man-
ager will be concerned about hedging her investment opportunities, and
will demand a risk premium for assets whose returns co-vary with those
investment opportunities. Conversely, if  < 1, the manager prefers assets
whose returns co-vary with her investment opportunities, because those
assets allow the manager to better take advantage of those investment op-
portunities.
    Future arbitrage opportunities are a particularly stark example of an in-
vestment opportunity, and indicative of the expected returns on the wealth
portfolio, and hence returns that negatively co-vary with future arbitrages
should have a high risk premium if  < 1 and a low risk premium if  > 1.
    The last piece of our argument is the conjecture (which is verified in the

                                                 IA.14
data) that arbitrage opportunities are likely to be persistent. As a result,
shocks to the cross-currency basis at time t + 1 are likely to be indicative
of shocks to the arbitrage at later dates. For illustrative purposes only
(and ignoring issues about negative numbers), suppose that |xt,1 | follows
an AR(1) process,

                                        ¯ + |xt,1 | +  |x|
                            |xt+1,1 | = x                      t+1 ,


where   t+1   is an I.I.D. standard normal shock. In this case, we have
         
                                                 1               1     1
                j (Et+1 [·|zt+1 ] - E [·|zt ])      |xt+j,1 |) =          |x|   t+1 .
         j =1
                                                 kc              kc 1 - 

                                                            b             m
Under very strong assumptions (i.e. that borrowing rates rt  +j and fees ft+j
                                           1- 1
are uncorrelated with t+1 ), the constant kc 1-  |x| is equal to the value of
 defined in our hypothesized functional form for the log SDF. More gener-
ally, projecting the revisions in expectations found in Equation (I.A3) onto
the current innovation in the cross-currency basis, under the assumption
that such innovations are persistent, generates our hypothesized functional
form for the log SDF, Equation (1).

I.D.1   Proof of Lemma 1
                                                 i
First, observe that diversion does not change t    in the conjectured equi-
librium. Consequently, the net benefit of stealing is proportional to

               b                     -                            1
              Rt Et [V (WtM                 M
                          +1 , zt+1 ) VW (Wt+1 , zt+1 )](           - t ),
                                                                 1+
                                                         1
and by the usual arguments VW (WtM  +1 , zt+1 ) > 0. If 1+ > t , stealing has a
net benefit, and this benefit does not diminish. Consequently, there cannot
                                                                      1
be a solution with outside equity (NtM > Nt ). Conversely, if 1+        
                                                                          t ,
diversion has a weakly negative net benefit, and it is without loss of gener-
ality to suppose diversion does not occur in equilibrium. By the argument
                                                                  1
in the main text, it is without loss of generality to suppose 1+    
                                                                      t and
there is no equilibrium stealing.
                                                                      i
    Now consider a perturbation which increases Nt but shrinks t        so that
  i
t Nt remains constant for all assets. If the household participation con-
straint does not bind, this generates a strict welfare improvement for the
manager and is always feasible. Therefore, the household participation
constraint binds,

                         (1 - t )                     i
           t Nt (1 -              Et [MtH
                                        +1            t   i
                                                        (Rt       b        M
                                                            +1 - Rt )]) = Nt .
                            t                    iI



                                            IA.15
Note by assumption that

                                               i                    1    t
                         -1 < Et [MtH
                                    +1         t   i
                                                 (Rt       b
                                                     +1 - Rt )] <     
                                          iI
                                                                       1 - t

and hence that positive values of NtM and Nt are feasible. Observe that if
NtM = Nt = 0, the manager is taking no risk, which cannot be optimal by
the principle of participation. Therefore these values are strictly positive.
    Under these assumptions, the manager's fee ftM is a function of zt and
t ,
                                           t
        ftM (t , zt ) =                 H         i   i        b
                                                                       ,
                        t - (1 - t )E [Mt+1 iI t    (Rt +1 - Rt )|zt ]

Moreover, the manager's final wealth is

 WtM     b    M   M    M      M M             b
   +1 = Rt (Wt - Ct - Nt ) + Nt ft (t , zt )(Rt +
                                                                             i
                                                                             t   i
                                                                               (Rt       b
                                                                                   +1 - Rt )).
                                                                        iI

                                                                         i
Note that ftM (t , zt ) is strictly increasing in t if Et [MtH+1
                                                                            i
                                                                    iI t (Rt+1 -
   b                                          H          i   i         b
Rt )] < 0 and strictly decreasing if Et [Mt+1 iI t (Rt+1 - Rt )] > 0. In
the increasing case, we must have                                   M
                                         t = 1 and in this case ft = 1; in the
                                                         i
decreasing case, ftM  1, strictly if Et [MtH  +1
                                                             i        b
                                                     iI t (Rt+1 - Rt )] > 0, and
           M                                          
therefore ft  1 always. It also follows that t is purely a function of zt ,
and hence the fee ftM is also purely a function of zt .
     Now consider a perturbation that increasing NtM while scaling down t        i
          M M              i
so that Nt ft (t , zt )t remains constant for all i  I . This perturbation
has a weak net benefit, as it increases WtM   +1 , and hence it is without loss of
generality to suppose NtM = WtM - CtM .
     We have demonstrated the stated properties conditional in the conjec-
             i
tured that t    is a function only of zt . We now show that this an equi-
                                                               M
                                                              Ct
librium. We scale variables by wealth. Define cm        t = Wt  M . The problem

is


   V (WtM , zt ) =             max
                            cM    i
                             t 0,{t }iI
                                     -1           -1                             -1    1
                         {(WtM )1- (cM
                                     t )
                                        1-
                                                       + Et [V (WtM
                                                                  +1 , zt+1 )
                                                                             1- 
                                                                               ] } 1--1 ,

subject to

          WtM
            +1
            M
                           b
               = ftM (zt )Rt (1 - cM           M   M
                                   t ) + (1 - ct )ft (zt )
                                                                           i
                                                                           t   i
                                                                             (Rt       b
                                                                                 +1 - Rt ),
          Wt                                                          iI
              i    i
          k       |t |    1.
   iI c



                                                  IA.16
We can immediately (following Epstein and Zin (1989)) conjecture and
verify that V (WtM , zt ) is linear in wealth,

                                       V (WtM , zt ) = WtM J (zt )

for some function J (zt ), and that as a result the optimal policies do not
depend on wealth (or any capital structure variables), verifying the conjec-
ture.

I.D.2    Proof of Lemma 2
Define
                        w       M        b                       i   i       b
                       Rt +1 = ft (zt )(Rt +                     t (Rt +1 - Rt )).
                                                            iI

Using homotheticity, V (WtM , zt ) = WtM J (zt ), and writing the problem in
Lagrangean form,

     J (zt ) =        max          min
                 cM    i     ^ RC
                  t 0,{t }iI t 0
                           -1                                                             -1        1
                 1-                           (1- )
           {(cM
              t )       + Et [((1 - cM   w
                                     t )Rt+1 )      J (zt+1 )1- ] } 1--1
           +  ^ RC (1 -   k i |i |).
                  t                           t
                                iI c

   The Euler equation is derived in the usual way. Taking the FOC with
respect to cM
            t ,

               -      -1               -               -1
                                                     (1- )                                 -1
          (cM
            t )            =  (1 - cM
                                    t )
                                               w
                                         Et [(Rt +1 )      J (zt+1 )1- ] ,

and plugging this back into the Bellman equation,

                                                  -1                        -1       1
                                  1-                                M -
                 J (zt ) = {(cM
                              t )                      + (1 - cM
                                                               t )(ct ) } 1--1
                                              -1        1
                                   -
                           = {(cM
                                t )  } 1--1 .

Therefore, the Euler equation is reads

              -   -1                -              -1
                                                  (1- )         -                    -1        -1
         (cM
           t )         =  (1 - cM
                                t )
                                            w
                                      Et [(Rt +1 )      {(cM
                                                           t+1 )  } ] .
We can rearrange this to

                     w      (1- )            -                    -1   cM         1-
                                                                        t+1 - -1 1--1
           1 = Et [(Rt +1 )       { (1 - cM
                                          t )  (                         M
                                                                           )    }     ],
                                                                       ct
                                         M                        M
                                                                 Ct
                                        Ct
and then substitute cM
                     t =                WtM       and cM
                                                       t+1 =     Wt
                                                                    +1
                                                                   M ,
                                                                    +1




                                                       IA.17
                   w     (1- )             -     -1   WtM --1 CtM
                                                                +1 - -1 
         1 = Et [(Rt +1 )      { (1 - cM
                                       t )   (          M
                                                           )    M
                                                                  )    } ].
                                                      Wt+1    Ct
                                    M
                                   Wt
Using the budget constraint        WtM
                                      +1
                                           = (1 - cM   w
                                                   t )Rt+1 , we have


                            w     (1- )     w         -1   CtM
                                                             +1 - -1 
                  1 = Et [(Rt +1 )      { (Rt +1 ) (         M
                                                               )    } ].
                                                           Ct
Noting that
                                                 -1
                             (1 -  )(1 +              ) = ,
                                              1 -  -1
we conclude that the standard consumption Euler equation applies,

                                    w            CtM
                                                   +1 - -1 
                          1 = Et [(Rt +1 ) {       M
                                                     )    } ].
                                                 Ct
   The FOC for asset i is
   1          M 1- -1                  M     w     (1- )            1- -1 1--1 -1
                                                                                 1
        { ( c t )     + E   t [((1 - c t ) R t +1 )      J ( zt +1 )    ]    }        ×
1 -  -1
                                                                                   -1
                      -1 (1 -  )Et [  ((1 - cM           w
                                                    t )Rt+1 )
                                                                (1- )
                                                                      J (zt )1- ] -1 ×
                          (1 - cM  1-         w
                                      Et [  (Rt     -         1-   i       b      ^ RC c  c
                                t )             +1 ) J (zt+1 )   (Rt +1 - Rt )] = t k sgn(t ).

We can substitute
                                                       -         1-
                                         Et [  (Rt
                                                 w
                                                   +1 ) J (zt+1 )
                                                                      i
                                                                    (Rt       b
                                                                        +1 - Rt )] =

                              -   -1                  -   cM
                                                           t+1 - -1 
                         (cM
                           t )          Et [  (Rt
                                                w
                                                  +1 ) (       )     (Rt i        b
                                                                           +1 - Rt )] =
                                                          cMt
                                                      M CM
                      -   - 1                -     W t     t+1 - -1 
                (cM
                  t )         Et [  (Rt w
                                         +1 ) (                )     (Rt i        b
                                                                           +1 - Rt )] =
                                                  Wt+1 CtM
                                                     M

                                                           M
          M  -1  M - -1                   w     -1 - Ct+1 - -1           i        b
    (1 - ct )     (ct )        Et [ (Rt+1 )             ( M)         (Rt   +1 - Rt )] =
                                                         Ct
                                                           M
                 -1  M - -1                         -1 Ct+1 - -1 
       (1 - cM
             t )     ( ct  )      E t [  
                                          ( R w
                                              t+1 )    (      )     (Rti         b
                                                                         +1 - Rt )].
                                                         CtM

   Re-scaling ^ t to t results in the FOC in the lemma,

                        -1     CtM
                                 +1 - -1 
                  w
          Et [  (Rt +1 )   (     M
                                   )        i
                                          (Rt       b      RC c    c
                                              +1 - Rt )] = t k sgn(t ).
                               Ct




                                            IA.18
I.E     Cross-Sectional Asset Pricing Details
In this appendix section, we provide more details about the cross-sectional
asset pricing exercise of Section 5. We begin by describing our test asset
portfolios, then discuss the differences between our exercise and He et al.
(2017) (HKM).
    Appendix Tables I.A10, I.A12, and I.A11 show cross-sectional asset
pricing results for our test asset classes with the HKM factors. These
tables can be compared (noting the differences in asset class definitions
and sample) with Tables 14 and 17 of He et al. (2017).

I.E.1   Factors and Test Assets
As discussed in the main text, our choice of test assets is inspired by HKM,
but for various reasons the exact portfolios we use in each asset class differ
slightly from their counterparts in HKM. Below, we describe the data used
for each asset class. We truncate all of our series at the end of August
2018.

The Market and the Risk-Free Rate
The equity return we use is the Market factor provided on Ken French's
website (originally from CRSP). We also use, for most of our sample, the
1-month t-bill rate provided on Ken French's website (and due to Ibbotson
and Associates, Inc.). These are the same data sources used by HKM.
However, as discussed on Ken French's website, the Market return was
changed in October 2012 and as a result there are some differences between
our series and the one originally used by HKM.
    We also adjust the risk-free rate in the post-crisis period (as defined
in our main text, July 2010 onwards) to use one-month OIS swap rates
instead of 1-month t-bill rates. We make this adjustment to be consistent
with the risk-free rates we used to compute the cross-currency basis and
forward CIP returns. This adjustment has a minimal impact on our results.

The HKM Intermediary Wealth Returns
In our equity-return only specification (Table 5), we use as an equity return
the "intermediary value-weighted investment return" of HKM, obtained
from Asaf Manela's website. When we use the original HKM specification,
perhaps augmented with our basis shock (Internet Appendix Tables I.A10
I.A13), we use our market return described above and the "intermediary
capital risk factor" of HKM, obtained from Asaf Manela's website.




                                    IA.19
Equities (FF6)
Our test equity portfolios are the monthly return series of the "6 Portfo-
lios Formed on Size and Book-to-Market (2x3)" available on Ken French's
website, building on Fama and French (1993). The series begins in July
1926.
    HKM use the 25 portfolio version of these series, with data from 1970
onwards. We use six portfolios instead of twenty five to mitigate the pos-
sibility of spurious results arising from the presence of large bank stocks
on both sides of the regression. This issue causes, in our post-crisis sam-
ple, an unusually strong correlation between the HKM intermediary value-
weighted investment return and one particular Size-by-Value 25 portfolio
(Large Value). Using only six portfolios instead of twenty five allows us
to capture the factor structure of equity returns documented by Fama and
French (1993) while mitigating this issue.
    There also appear to be a variety of small differences between the re-
turns we obtained from Ken French's website in 2018 and the returns HKM
obtained in 2012. Many of these differences are small enough that they can
be attributed to rounding, but some are not. Ken French's website does
mention a variety of changes in CRSP between 2012 and the present, but
none seem directly applicable to the size-and-value portfolios.

US Bonds (US)
Our U.S. bond portfolios include both government and corporate bonds.
The government bonds are the five CRSP "Fama Maturity Portfolios" de-
fined in twelve-month intervals, plus the two longer-maturity portfolios
(60-120 months and >120 months). We drop the shortest maturity port-
folio, because of the similarity between its returns and the risk-free rate,
and end up with six government bond portfolios. The corporate bonds are
five Bloomberg corporate bond indices, which correspond to US corporate
bonds with ratings of AAA, AA, A, B, and high yield.42
    To include the returns for a particular month, we require that the re-
turns for all six government bond maturity buckets and all five corporate
bond indices be available. As a result, our data starts in September 1988.
Four of our government portfolios are groupings of the Fama bond portfo-
lios studied by HKM, who use the six-month interval portfolios and do not
exclude the shortest maturities or include the longer maturity portfolios.
Our corporate bond indices are different from the ones studied by HKM,
and were chosen because they are readily available.
 42
  The tickers are LU3ATRUU Index, LU2ATRUU Index, LU1ATRUU Index, LUBA-
TRUU Index, and LF98TRUU Index.




                                   IA.20
Sovereign Bonds (Sov)
Our sovereign bond portfolio construction follows the procedure of Borri
and Verdelhan (2015). Those authors consider all countries in the JP Mor-
gan EMBI index, and sort bonds into six portfolios. They first divide
countries into two groups, depending on whether their bonds have a low
or high beta to US equity market returns, and then within each of these
groups split bonds into three sub-groups based on their S&P rating. HKM
use exactly the data of Borri and Verdelhan (2015), as those two papers
are roughly contemporaneous.
    We implement this procedure with updated data. However, three coun-
tries have been dropped from the EMBI index, and do not have returns
available for the post-crisis period. These countries are omitted from our
entire analysis, and as a result there is an imperfect (80%) correlation be-
tween our portfolio returns and the original Borri and Verdelhan (2015)
returns.

Foreign Exchange Portfolios (FX)
We use the 11 forward-premium-sorted portfolios of Lustig et al. (2011).
These portfolios consist of up to 34 currencies on each date. Six these port-
folios contain all currencies, sorted by forward premia. Five contain only
developed-country currencies, sorted by forward premia. These returns
series are updated regularly and available from Hanno Lustig's website.
    In contrast, HKM use six portfolios sorted by forward premia from
Menkhoff et al. (2012) and six portfolios sorted by interest rate differential
from Lettau et al. (2014).43 Because covered interest parity holds for most
of the sample, these two groups of portfolios should be essentially identical.
However, the two papers differ on data sources and samples (Menkhoff et al.
(2012) have up to 48 currencies from 1983 to 2009, Lettau et al. (2014) have
up to 53 from 1974 to 2010), and consequently the two sets of portfolios to
do not exactly span each other.

Equity Options Portfolios (Opt)
We construct equity options portfolios using the procedure of Constan-
tinides et al. (2013) to generate portfolios of puts and calls sorted by mon-
eyness and maturity. We form eighteen portfolios (nine of calls and nine
of puts), for three different maturities (30-day, 60-day, and 90-day), and
three different levels of moneyness (in-, at-, and out-of-the-money). The
underlying data source is OptionMetrics via WRDS.
  43
     The published version of Menkhoff et al. (2012) describes only five portfolios, and
two other portfolios that are linear combinations of the five.



                                        IA.21
    The OptionMetrics data needs to be cleaned extensively, as discussed at
length in Constantinides et al. (2013). We follow their procedure as closely
as feasible and are able to construct portfolios whose returns closely track
the portfolios of Constantinides et al. (2013) in their original sample.
    HKM also use 18 portfolios based on the original portfolios of Constan-
tinides et al. (2013). However, they use nine different moneyness levels
for calls and puts, collapsing the three different maturities into a single
portfolio for each moneyness. We have found that collapsing into nine
moneyness-by-maturity buckets reduces the correlation between the return
series.
    We follow Constantinides et al. (2013) in "leverage-adjusting" the op-
tion portfolio returns by mixing the original return with some amount of
the risk-free return to ensure that the Black-Scholes-implied beta to the
market of each portfolio is one. The advantage of this approach is that the
return distribution of the options is closer to normal. The disadvantage of
this approach is that, by construction, all of the option portfolios have a
beta to the Market factor that is close to one. This leads to weak identifi-
cation, as can be seen in the KZ p-value of column (4) in Appendix Table
A1. In the pooled specification (column (9) of that table), other assets help
identify the price of Market risk. In our main specification (Table 5), the
Market is not included as a factor, and this particular weak identification
problem does not arise.

Credit Default Swaps (CDS)
Our CDS returns series consists of returns for five major CDS indices. The
indices are CDX.NA.IG (North American investment grade), CDX.NA.HY
(North American high yield), CDX.NA.XO (North American cross-over,
between investment grade and high-yield), CDX.EM (emerging markets),
and iTraxx Europe. These indices are available from Markit and via
Bloomberg, with all five series having data from July 2004 onwards.
   In contrast, HKM use portfolios of single name CDS returns constructed
from Markit data on single-name CDS. We obtained this data and at-
tempted to construct similar portfolios, but were unable to approximately
match the return series used by HKM. Using the index returns instead of
the single name returns reduces the likelihood of errors in our calculations
and should make it easier for other researchers to replicate our results.

Commodity Futures (Comm)
We follow HKM and build on the work of Yang (2013). Specifically, we
use the same twenty three commodities used by HKM. We obtain the total
return index for that commodity from Bloomberg. These indices aggre-
gate the returns of several short-maturity futures for each commodity. All

                                   IA.22
twenty three commodities are available starting in February 1991.
    HKM use instead data from the Commodities Research Bureau, which
has the advantage of going back further in time. They also use a slightly
different method of aggregating the various short-maturity futures contract
returns into a single index for each commodity. Nevertheless, on the shared
part of the sample, our returns and theirs are virtually identical.

OIS and IBOR Forward CIP Returns (FwdCIP)
We use OIS and IBOR forward CIP returns in four currencies (CAD, GBP,
EUR, CHF) as test assets. Note that this list excludes AUD and JPY,
which we used to construct the Classic Carry forward CIP returns, our
proposed factor in the SDF. Consequently, our SDF factor is not spanned
by the portfolio of test assets. Our OIS returns include both 1-month
forward 1-month and 1-month forward 3-month returns, whereas the IBOR
returns are restricted to 3-month tenors due a lack of available data.
    For all of these assets, we study as an excess return

                             xc       c
                              t,h, - xt+h,0, ,

which is the profit per dollar notional, normalized by the duration.
    We construct the OIS forward CIP returns as described in the text.
IBOR forward CIP returns are constructed in an essentially identical fash-
ion, using 3M spot IBOR rates and FRA agreements with 3M IBOR as the
underlying rate. For all returns, we consider only the post-crisis period.
    We exclude CHF OIS returns due to problems with the OIS data (and
hence use only IBOR for CHF), and exclude CAD IBOR returns due to
missing data (and hence use only OIS returns for CAD). As a result, we
combine three IBOR-based forward CIP returns with three OIS-based one-
month tenor and three OIS-based three-month tenor forward CIP returns,
for a total of nine test assets.

I.E.2   Estimation and Standard Errors
Our analysis is the GMM version of a traditional two-pass regression to
estimate the price of various risk-factors, as described in chapter 12 of
Cochrane (2009). Our point estimate come from an exactly identified
single-step GMM estimation procedure, as described on pages 241-243 of
Cochrane (2009). We use a Newey-West kernel with a twelve-month band-
width (Newey and West (1987)) to construct standard errors that are robust
to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation.
    The one key difference between our procedure and the textbook pro-
cedure is that we allow the samples for the estimation of the betas and



                                  IA.23
the means to differ.44 To implement this, we introduce as parameters in
our GMM equations a mean-return parameter for each asset and an extra
equation for each asset stating that the difference of the mean parameter
and the asset excess return is zero in expectation. We then write our cross-
sectional asset pricing equation (12) entirely as a function of parameters,
with no data. These changes, and allowing our GMM estimator to use dif-
ferent samples for different equations, implement the desired outcome that
the mean and beta samples can differ.


I.F     Forward CIP Trading Strategy's Return Predictabil-
        ity
In this appendix section, we consider whether the returns of our forward
CIP trading strategy are predictable. In the context of the model, as usual,
return predictability implies time variation in either the quantity or price
of cross-currency basis risk.45
    We find suggestive evidence that forward CIP trading strategy returns
are predictable, in a manner that is analogous to findings of return pre-
dictability in the term structure literature (e.g. Campbell and Shiller
(1991)). Our approach is inspired by Figure 1; the unconditional returns of
the forward CIP trading strategy can be viewed as stating that the increase
in the spot bases implied by the forward curves does not end up happening,
on average. This result is similar to the familiar concept of a term premium
in the term structure literature.
    As demonstrated by Campbell and Shiller (1991), the slope of the term
structure predicts the excess returns on longer maturity bonds. That is,
not only is there a term premium, but it varies over time and variation in
the term premium is a significant portion of the variation in the slope of
the term structure. We find that a similar fact holds for the term structure
of cross-currency bases. In other words, the slope of the term structure
predicts forward CIP trading strategy returns.
    The return predictability regressions we run are presented in Table I.A8.
The regressions estimate equations of the form

                xc       c           c       c
                 t,h, - xt+h,0, =  (xt,h, - xt,0, ) + wt +           t+h ,         (I.A4)

where wt are other controls. We use three-month tenors ( = 3) and look
  44
     For this reason, we do not use an automatic bandwidth selection procedure for our
standard errors. We have found that the standard errors are insensitive to the bandwidth
choice, likely because returns exhibit small amounts of auto-correlation.
  45
     In Appendix I.G, we explore a different kind of predictability, and find that quarter-
end or year-end crossings do not systematically predict abnormal returns in forward CIP
trading strategy.


                                          IA.24
at one-month forward differences between the forward basis and the spot
basis that is actually realized (h = 1). We use the "classic carry" AUD-JPY
basis in all regressions, although we find but do not report similar results
for various currencies vis-à-vis USD. We estimate the regressions in daily
data and rely on a Newey-West HAC kernel with the Newey and West
(1994) bandwidth selection procedure to correct the standard errors for
overlap in the sample.46 Note that our outcome variable is not exactly the
profit per dollar notional defined in equation (11), because we do not scale
                                           
the outcome variable by the duration 12      . This is analogous to regressing
yield changes on yields instead of price changes on yields.
    The first column of Table I.A8 simply regresses the outcome variable
on a constant. We estimate an unconditional mean of 5 basis points and
a root mean squared error of 12 basis points. In other words, on average,
the one-month forward implied three-month classic carry basis is 5 basis
points higher than the spot three-month
                                                basis one month in the future.
The ratio of these two, scaled by 12, is essentially our point estimate for
the annual Sharpe ratio of the unconditional forward CIP trading strategy.
The next four columns of Table I.A8 present the estimations of equation
(I.A4) with various permutations of two controls, the current level of the
spot basis (xc t, ) and a constant. Column (4), which uses the spread and
the spot basis as predictors, appears to offer a low RMSE while using
fewer variables than the specification of column (5).47 The specification in
column (4) has the appealing property that, in a world in which both the
spot and forward bases are zero (covered interest parity holds), we should
expect no return on our forward CIP trading strategy.
    Our return predictability results must be interpreted with caution. We
usually expect return predictability regressions to require long time series
to find significant results. Yet this intuition stems in part from the prior
that "good deals" are not available, and that return predictors are very
persistent. We find that spreads are not very persistent, and hence that it
is possible to find predictability even in our comparatively small sample.
    However, this lack of persistence raises another issue. The forward basis
  c
xt,h, enters both sides of equation (I.A4), and is surely measured with some
bid-offer induced noise. This issue is exactly analogous to the role of a price
in a regression of return on lagged return (as in Roll (1984)). A standard
approach to dealing with these issues is to avoid using the current value of
the forward basis as a predictor value, and replace it with a lagged value
instead (see, e.g., Jegadeesh (1990)). We adopt this approach, employing a
lagged value of the spread, xc           c
                               t-k,h, - xt-k, , as an instrument for the current

  46
     The results are similar when using only non-overlapping month-end data.
  47
     Formally, the column (4) specification has the lowest value of the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC), where the AIC is computed with a sample size of 98 months to account
for overlapping data.


                                         IA.25
value of the spread. Columns (6), (7), and (8) of Table I.A8 repeat the
specification of column (4), using a spread lagged 1, 5, and 10 trading days
as an instrument for the current spread value. Our return predictability
results continue to hold with this approach, and our point estimates remain
similar across specifications, although our standard errors increase in the
length of the lag.
   We should emphasize that this lag approach is not a panacea (Jegadeesh
and Titman (1995)). We have no theory on what causes the spread to
vary over time, and hence cannot say decisively that the "real" variation
dominates the micro-structure induced variation over a one or two-week
period.


I.G    Quarter-ends in Returns
Since spot bases widen on quarter-ends and year-ends when regulatory
constraints tighten, we might expect that the returns to the forward CIP
trading strategy also increase on quarter-ends or year-ends. Yet this needs
not be the case if the price of forward contracts reflects the expected in-
crease in the spot basis.
    To actually earn an h-month forward  -month cross-currency basis, cash
needs to be invested for  months after the h-month forward horizon passes.
The shadow cost of having cash on the balance sheet is greater on quarter-
ends. This leads to spikes in the spot basis when the interest tenor crosses
quarter ends, a fact documented in Du et al. (2018b). If forward prices
anticipate these quarter-end spikes, then any forward basis that is based
on a quarter-crossing  -month interest should also be larger in magnitude.
    In Figure A2, we plot the time series average of the Classic Carry spot,
1M-forward 1M, and 2M-forward 1M cross-currency bases in the Post-Crisis
period. We split all observation-days into three sub-samples based on which
of the three bases has its OIS interest tenor crossing the quarter end. The
three lines correspond to these three sub-samples, and their levels show the
time series averages of the cross-currency bases within the sub-sample. For
example, the line labeled 1M-forward 1M is calculate based on all the days
where the 1M interest starting in 1M crosses a quarter end.
    We observe two patterns. First, the general direction of all three lines
is sloping up slightly. This echoes Figure 1, where the slope of the forward
basis term structure is the source of the excess return in the forward CIP
trading strategy. In addition to the slight upward trend, all three lines
exhibit a spike, precisely when the interest tenor in the basis crosses the
quarter end. This is consistent with forward prices that incorporate expec-
tations of quarter-end spikes. On quarter-ends, intermediary's constraint
tightens, leading to bigger bases.
    Given that forward prices anticipate quarter-end dynamics, returns to

                                   IA.26
the forward CIP trading strategy need not be different around quarter
ends. This is what we find in Table I.A9. In this table, we regress the
Post-Crisis returns of the classic-carry (AUD-JPY) 1M-forward 1M CIP
trading strategy on indicators of quarter-ends (QE) and year-ends (YE).
We examining the QE and YE crossing of both the interest tenor and
the forward horizon. Column (1) reports the unconditional mean return
in the Post-Crisis period; the large, positive, and significant coefficient
is consistent with the risk premium observed in the 1M-forward 3M CIP
trading strategy returns. Columns (2) through (4) examine if quarter-
crossing in either the interest tenor or the forward horizon is associated
with significantly different returns. Columns (5) through (7) report the
results when examining year-crossings, and column (8) checks if crossing
of any quarter or year end is associated with significantly different returns.
Neither any of the individual coefficient nor the joint F-statistics on the
dummies is significant.
    One caveat in interpreting the results in Table I.A9 is the limited power
in the regression. The Post-Crisis period of July 2010 to August 2018
provides just 32 quarter ends and 8 year ends. As such, the statistical
insignificance of our coefficients may be due to imprecise estimation.

I.H    Definitions of Other Near-Arbitrages
We define the seven near-arbitrages as follows.
   · Bond-CDS basis: the spread between the yield on the 5-year North
     America investment grade bonds over their corresponding credit de-
     fault swaps (CDS). The series is from the J.P. Morgan Markets Data-
     Query.

   · CDS-CDX basis: the spread between the composite of 125 single-
     name CDS spreads in the North America investment grade credit de-
     fault swap index (CDX.NA.IG) and the quoted spread on the CDX.NA.IG.
     The series is from the J.P. Morgan Markets DataQuery.

   · US Libor tenor basis: the spread in fixed rates between a 5-year
     interest rate swap indexed to one-month US Libor and a 5-year in-
     terest rate swap indexed to three-month US dollar Libor. The series
     is from the J.P. Morgan Markets DataQuery.

   · Swap-Treasury spread: the spread between the 30-year US Libor
     interest swap rate and the 30-year US Treasury yield. The series is
     from Bloomberg.

   · Refco-Treasury spread: the spread between the yield on the 5-
     year resolution funding corporation strip (fully backed by the U.S.

                                    IA.27
         government) and the 5-year US Treasury bond. The series is from
         Bloomberg.

       · KfW-Bund spread: the spread between the yield on the 5-year
         euro-denominated bonds issued by Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
         (fully backed by the German government) and the 5-year German
         bund yield. The series is from Bloomberg.

       · TIPS-Treasury spread: the spread between the yield on the asset
         swap package combining a 5-year Treasury bond and an inflation
         swap and the yield on the 5-year Treasury inflation protected security
         (TIPS). The series is from Bloomberg.

    In Appendix Table I.A21, we summarize the mean and standard de-
viation of these near-arbitrages, together with the AUD-JPY spot cross-
currency basis, by the pre-GFC, GFC and post-GFC period.


I.I      Estimating the SDF from Prices of Risk
                                                                      w
Our hypothesized SDF (Equation (1)) postulates that mt+1 = µt - rt     +1 +
 |xt+1,1 |. Let  = [rw , |x| ] be the price of risk on the two factors, the
wealth portfolio return and the magnitude of the cross-currency basis, re-
spectively, and  be the variance-covariance matrix between these two
factors. We can estimate the SDF parameters as48

                                                  rw
                                       = -1               .
                                                  |x|

    The parameter  is proportional to the single regression coefficient of the
true SDF on the two factors. It therefore can be estimated from the realized
market risk premium on the two factor's factor-mimicking portfolios. If we
use the He et al. (2017) value-weighted intermediary return on equity as
the factor-mimicking portfolio for intermediary wealth returns, and use the
returns on the forward CIP trading strategy as a direct measure of the
risk premium on the cross-currency basis, then we can estimate  and, by
extension, the SDF parameters  and  .
    We estimate the price of risk on intermediary equity return from monthly
excess returns from January 1970 to August 2018, the longest panel of re-
turns that we have. The average monthly excess return is about 0.61%,
which implies an annual excess return of about 7.3%. We estimate the
  48
    The signs in this equation are slightly non-standard. The factor in the SDF is
-|xt+1 |, and the forward CIP return is positive when this factor increases (i.e. the basis
shrinks).




                                          IA.28
price of risk on the forward CIP trading strategy from the Post-GFC sam-
ple. Given the short sample, we use daily observations of the monthly
returns on the 1M-forward 3M AUD-JPY forward CIP trading strategy.
The average monthly return is 4.76 basis points, which corresponds to an
annual profit of 14.3 basis points on the notional.
    To calculate the SDF parameters, we also need the variance-covariance
between the two factors. We estimate  using monthly returns on the in-
termediary equity and the 1M-forward 3M AUD-JPY forward CIP trading
strategy in the Post-GFC period (July 2010 to August 2018). Together
with estimates of , we find an estimate of  of 0.66 and an estimate of
 of 305. While the estimate of a positive  is statistically significant at
conventional significance levels, the estimate of  is imprecise, and we can-
not reject that the true  is greater than 1. We summarize these results in
Internet Appendix Table I.A22.


I.J    Bayesian Test of Asset Pricing Models
In this appendix section we describe the Bayesian asset pricing methodol-
ogy of Barillas and Shanken (2018) and Chib et al. (2020).
    Let Mj be a candidate factor model and MLj be the marginal likelihood
of Mj . The posterior probability of observing a model is

                                                                    -1

        P (Mj |Data) = {MLj × P (Mj )} ×            MLi × P (Mi )        ,
                                                i

where the denominator sums across all models under consideration.
    Which models are compared? Consider a set of n factors. One of the
n factors (the only one that does not need to be tradable) is the "baseline
factor" f0 , and is assumed to be present in all specifications. The remaining
n - 1 tradable factors could be included in the factor model (f ) or excluded
(f  ), in which case they are treated as test assets. For example, in the first
specification in Panel B of Table 4, f0 is the Market and the only other
factor is the Fwd CIP return. In this case, the exercise compares the model
using only the Market to the model containing both factors.
    For each model Mj , the marginal likelihood is

      MLj = P (R|f ) =        P (R|f, , , )P (|, )P (, )ddd,

where R is the excess returns of the test assets (f  ), f are the factors




                                    IA.29
included in model Mj , and ,  , and  are from

                            Rt =  + ft +  t .

Here, the regression residuals t are assumed to be IID across time and
normally distributed.
     Barillas and Shanken (2018) suggest the prior that all models are equally
likely ex-ante (P (Mj ) = P (Mj )), and construct a prior P (|, ) based
on bounds for Sharpe ratios. Using these priors and an appropriately con-
structed improper prior for the nuisance parameters P (, ) (Chib et al.
(2020)), we can compute the relative likelihood of each candidate model
Mj , P (Mj |Data). We implement this procedure using the software of Chib
et al. (2020).
     These probabilities depend primarily on the Sharpe ratios of the ex-
cluded factors f  given the factor model (f0 , f ). If model Mj with only f is
sufficient, then  from ft =  +   f +  should be 0. In other words, the
marginal likelihood of a model is high when the model is correctly specified
relative to all available potential factors.




                                    IA.30
I.K     Additional Figures and Tables

    Figure I.A1: Three-month OIS-based Cross-Currency Bases




Notes : This figure plots the 10-day moving average of daily spot 3M OIS cross-currency
basis vis-à-vis the USD, measured in basis points, for the six sample currencies. The
spot OIS basis is xct,0,3 , as defined in Equation (6).




                                        IA.31
  Figure I.A2: Three-month IBOR-based Cross-Currency Bases




Notes : This figure plots the 10-day moving average of daily spot 3M IBOR cross-
currency basis vis-à-vis the USD, measured in bps, for the six sample currencies. The
spot IBOR basis is xct,0,3 , as defined in Equation (6).




                                       IA.32
   Figure I.A3: Term Structure of the Forward Cross-Currency
                Basis (Alternative Forward Tenors)




Notes : This figure illustrates the time series average spot and forward-starting cross-
currency bases in AUD and JPY, vis-à-vis the USD, as defined in Equation (8). For
each currency, the sample from July 2010 to August 2018 is split into three sub-samples
based on the tercile of the level of the spot 3M OIS cross-currency basis. Within each
sub-sample, the time series average of the relevant spot/forward OIS cross-currency
basis is shown. Compared to Figure 1, this Figure plots a different set of forward tenors
and use only OIS contracts of 3M tenor.




                                         IA.33
    Figure I.A4: Cross-Currency Bases vs. Intermediary Equity




Notes : This figure plots the monthly spot 3M OIS-based cross-currency bases and a
measure of intermediary wealth from 2003 to 2018. The cumulative intermediary equity
return is calculated from January 2003, and is based on the value-weighted return of the
equity of primary dealers. Four versions of the cross-currency bases are plotted. "Classic
Carry" is the spot cross-currency basis for the AUD-JPY pair; "3 Currency Carry" is the
average spot cross-currency basis on the portfolio going long in AUD, CAD and GBP
and shorting EUR, CHF and JPY. "Dynamic Top 5" has equal weight in the 5 currency
pairs that exhibit the highest spot 3M basis, rebalanced monthly. "Top 10 Basis" has
equal weight in the ten currency pairs with the largest CIP deviations post-GFC basis
shown in Table 2.




                                         IA.34
  Table I.A1: OIS and IBOR Conventions for Sample Currencies

                                           Panel A: OIS
 Currency Indexed Rate                                                                  Day Count
 AUD      Reserve Bank of Australia Interbank Overnight Cash Rate                       ACT / 365
 CAD      Canadian Overnight Repo Rate Average (CORRA)                                  ACT / 365
 CHF      Tomorrow/Next Overnight Indexed Swaps                                         ACT / 360
 EUR      EMMI Euro Overnight Index Average (EONIA)                                     ACT / 360
 GBP      Sterling Overnight Index Average (SONIA)                                      ACT / 365
 JPY      Bank of Japan Estimate Unsecured Overnight Call Rate                          ACT / 365
 USD      US Federal Funds Effective Rate                                               ACT / 360
                                Panel B: IBOR
 Currency Interbank Rate                                                                Day Count
 AUD      Australia Bank Bill Swap Rate (BBSW)                                          ACT / 365
 CAD      Canada Bankers' Acceptances Rate                                              ACT / 365
 CHF      ICE LIBOR CHF                                                                 ACT / 360
 EUR      Euribor                                                                       ACT / 360
 GBP      ICE LIBOR GBP                                                                 ACT / 365
 JPY      ICE LIBOR JPY                                                                 ACT / 360
 USD      ICE LIBOR USD                                                                 ACT / 360
Notes : This table reports the Overnight Index Swap and IBOR conventions for sam-
ple currencies. The Overnight Rate refers to the reference rate used to calculate the
interest on the floating leg, against the expectation of which, the rate on the fixed leg
is determined. The Day Count specifies how interests are calculated from the quoted
annualized rate. For example, with a quoted annualized rate of 2%, a 32-day contract
with a day count of ACT/360 would earn an interest of (1 + 0.02 × 32/360) - 1.




                                         IA.35
        Table I.A2: Summary Statistics of Portfolio Returns on OIS 1M-forward 1M Forward CIP Trading Strategy

                                                            Mean                                               Sharpe Ratio
                                   Pre-GFC                   GFC           Post-GFC             Pre-GFC            GFC            Post-GFC
         Classic Carry                 1.94                  -0.52            6.43                 1.09            -0.04             1.32
                                     (0.71)                 (3.41)           (1.44)              (0.43)           (0.26)            (0.32)
         3 Currency Carry              2.91                  -4.05            4.56                 1.39            -0.44             1.24
                                     (1.18)                 (2.93)           (1.10)              (0.37)           (0.22)            (0.37)
         Dynamic Top5 Basis           3.15                   -0.01            5.39                1.48              0.00             1.04
                                     (1.09)                 (6.82)           (1.54)              (0.36)           (0.44)            (0.37)
         Top 10 Basis                 3.55                   -2.80            4.12                1.45             -0.25             0.99
                                     (1.44)                 (4.28)           (1.25)              (0.36)           (0.31)            (0.36)




IA.36
         Simple Dollar                -1.62                   1.38            0.09                -1.28             0.08             0.03
                                     (0.83)                 (8.48)           (0.91)              (0.48)           (0.48)            (0.32)
         Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports the annual profits and annualized Sharpe ratios from the OIS 1M-forward 1M forward CIP trading strategy. All
        statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is 2003-01-01 to 2007-06-30, GFC is 2007-07-01 to 2010-06-30, and Post-GFC is 2010-07-01 to 2018-
        08-31. The Classic Carry portfolio is the forward CIP trading strategy for the AUD-JPY pair. The 3 Currency Carry portfolio longs the forward
        CIP trading strategy in AUD, CAD, and GBP and shorts the forward CIP trading strategy in JPY, CHF, and EUR; all individual currency
        trades are vis-à-vis USD and weighted equally. The Dynamic Top5 Basis portfolio has equal weight in the 5 currency pairs that exhibit the
        highest spot 3M basis, rebalanced monthly. The Top 10 Basis portfolio has equal weights in the ten currency pairs with the largest CIP deviations
        post-GFC basis shown in Table 2. The Simple Dollar portfolio puts equal weights on the forward CIP trading strategy for all sample currencies
        vis-à-vis the USD. Newey-West standard errors are reported in parentheses, where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West (1994) selection
        procedure.
        Table I.A3: Summary Statistics of Portfolio Returns on OIS 3M-forward 3M Forward CIP Trading Strategy

                                                            Mean                                               Sharpe Ratio
                                   Pre-GFC                   GFC           Post-GFC             Pre-GFC            GFC            Post-GFC
         Classic Carry                 0.62                  0.74              9.99                0.15            0.05               1.04
                                     (1.02)                 (3.84)           (2.36)              (0.26)           (0.25)            (0.27)
         3 Currency Carry             -0.71                  2.46              6.89               -0.23            0.26               0.94
                                     (1.03)                 (2.62)           (1.84)              (0.28)           (0.31)            (0.30)
         Dynamic Top5 Basis           -0.27                  0.94              7.42               -0.08            0.05               0.78
                                     (1.17)                 (6.57)           (2.31)              (0.32)           (0.36)            (0.29)
         Top 10 Basis                 -0.94                  0.11              6.32               -0.26            0.01               0.78
                                     (1.34)                 (4.30)           (2.01)              (0.30)           (0.32)            (0.28)




IA.37
         Simple Dollar                 1.25                  6.84             -0.08               0.33             0.28              -0.01
                                     (1.58)                 (9.07)           (1.36)              (0.32)           (0.34)            (0.25)
         Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports the annual profits and annualized Sharpe ratios from the OIS 3M-forward 3M forward CIP trading strategy. All
        statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is 2003-01-01 to 2007-06-30, GFC is 2007-07-01 to 2010-06-30, and Post-GFC is 2010-07-01 to 2018-
        08-31. The Classic Carry portfolio is the forward CIP trading strategy for the AUD-JPY pair. The 3 Currency Carry portfolio longs the forward
        CIP trading strategy in AUD, CAD, and GBP and shorts the forward CIP trading strategy in JPY, CHF, and EUR; all individual currency
        trades are vis-à-vis USD and weighted equally. The Dynamic Top5 Basis portfolio has equal weight in the 5 currency pairs that exhibit the
        highest spot 3M basis, rebalanced monthly. The Top 10 Basis portfolio has equal weights in the ten currency pairs with the largest CIP deviations
        post-GFC basis shown in Table 2. The Simple Dollar portfolio puts equal weights on the forward CIP trading strategy for all sample currencies
        vis-à-vis the USD. Newey-West standard errors are reported in parentheses, where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West (1994) selection
        procedure.
        Table I.A4: Summary Statistics of Portfolio Returns on IBOR 1M-forward 3M Forward CIP Trading Strategy

                                                            Mean                                               Sharpe Ratio
                                   Pre-GFC                   GFC           Post-GFC             Pre-GFC            GFC            Post-GFC
         Classic Carry                4.60                  -12.56           14.70                1.09             -0.47             1.58
                                     (1.48)                 (9.80)           (2.80)              (0.33)           (0.35)            (0.30)
         3 Currency Carry             4.00                  -10.27            8.95                1.60             -0.67             1.05
                                     (0.91)                 (5.15)           (3.37)              (0.40)           (0.29)            (0.50)
         Dynamic Top5 Basis           2.69                  -20.51            6.50                0.86             -0.96             0.73
                                     (1.17)                 (8.38)           (2.87)              (0.36)           (0.24)            (0.37)
         Top 10 Basis                 1.77                  -13.47            3.04                0.76             -0.91             0.46
                                     (0.85)                 (5.61)           (2.12)              (0.33)           (0.24)            (0.34)




IA.38
         Simple Dollar                0.11                   1.09             2.22                0.06             0.06              0.40
                                     (0.62)                 (8.63)           (2.16)              (0.33)           (0.45)            (0.36)
         Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports the annual profits and annualized Sharpe ratios from the IBOR 1M-forward 3M forward CIP trading strategy. All
        statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is 2003-01-01 to 2007-06-30, GFC is 2007-07-01 to 2010-06-30, and Post-GFC is 2010-07-01 to 2018-
        08-31. The Classic Carry portfolio is the forward CIP trading strategy for the AUD-JPY pair. The 3 Currency Carry portfolio longs the forward
        CIP trading strategy in AUD, CAD, and GBP and shorts the forward CIP trading strategy in JPY, CHF, and EUR; all individual currency
        trades are vis-à-vis USD and weighted equally. The Dynamic Top5 Basis portfolio has equal weight in the 5 currency pairs that exhibit the
        highest spot 3M basis, rebalanced monthly. The Top 10 Basis portfolio has equal weights in the ten currency pairs with the largest CIP deviations
        post-GFC basis shown in Table 2. The Simple Dollar portfolio puts equal weights on the forward CIP trading strategy for all sample currencies
        vis-à-vis the USD. Newey-West standard errors are reported in parentheses, where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West (1994) selection
        procedure.
        Table I.A5: Summary Statistics of Portfolio Returns on IBOR 3M-forward 3M Forward CIP Trading Strategy

                                                            Mean                                               Sharpe Ratio
                                   Pre-GFC                   GFC           Post-GFC             Pre-GFC            GFC            Post-GFC
         Classic Carry                1.61                   -1.02           10.40                0.53             -0.07             1.43
                                     (0.67)                 (3.22)           (1.69)              (0.28)           (0.22)            (0.31)
         3 Currency Carry             1.05                    0.79            7.24                0.56              0.10             1.04
                                     (0.44)                 (2.12)           (1.72)              (0.33)           (0.27)            (0.34)
         Dynamic Top5 Basis           1.27                   -7.05            4.46                0.62             -0.56             0.61
                                     (0.42)                 (4.03)           (1.78)              (0.27)           (0.25)            (0.29)
         Top 10 Basis                 0.75                   -6.25            1.78                0.49             -0.68             0.32
                                     (0.34)                 (2.80)           (1.33)              (0.27)           (0.23)            (0.27)




IA.39
         Simple Dollar                0.33                    4.92            1.16                0.29             0.43              0.25
                                     (0.22)                 (3.70)           (1.12)              (0.17)           (0.33)            (0.23)
         Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports the annual profits and annualized Sharpe ratios from the IBOR 3M-forward 3M forward CIP trading strategy. All
        statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is 2003-01-01 to 2007-06-30, GFC is 2007-07-01 to 2010-06-30, and Post-GFC is 2010-07-01 to 2018-
        08-31. The Classic Carry portfolio is the forward CIP trading strategy for the AUD-JPY pair. The 3 Currency Carry portfolio longs the forward
        CIP trading strategy in AUD, CAD, and GBP and shorts the forward CIP trading strategy in JPY, CHF, and EUR; all individual currency
        trades are vis-à-vis USD and weighted equally. The Dynamic Top5 Basis portfolio has equal weight in the 5 currency pairs that exhibit the
        highest spot 3M basis, rebalanced monthly. The Top 10 Basis portfolio has equal weights in the ten currency pairs with the largest CIP deviations
        post-GFC basis shown in Table 2. The Simple Dollar portfolio puts equal weights on the forward CIP trading strategy for all sample currencies
        vis-à-vis the USD. Newey-West standard errors are reported in parentheses, where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West (1994) selection
        procedure.
        Table I.A6: Summary Statistics of Month-end Portfolio Returns on OIS 1M-forward 3M Forward CIP Trading
        Strategy

                                                           Mean                                             Sharpe Ratio
                                   Pre-GFC                  GFC           Post-GFC            Pre-GFC           GFC            Post-GFC
         Classic Carry                 0.84                  2.54           15.26                0.22            0.09             1.44
                                     (1.85)               (15.27)           (3.70)             (0.49)          (0.58)            (0.34)
         3 Currency Carry              2.08                 -9.82            9.57                0.88           -0.39             1.23
                                     (1.23)               (14.31)           (2.73)             (0.62)          (0.47)            (0.38)
         Dynamic Top5 Basis           2.00                  -8.99            9.24               0.87            -0.22             0.90
                                     (1.20)               (23.00)           (3.61)             (0.49)          (0.50)            (0.41)
         Top 10 Basis                 2.31                 -10.85            7.82               1.15            -0.32             0.90




IA.40
                                     (1.04)               (19.02)           (3.03)             (0.60)          (0.49)            (0.37)
         Simple Dollar                -0.94                11.73             2.00               -0.46            0.27             0.37
                                     (1.06)               (25.08)           (1.91)             (0.51)          (0.50)            (0.34)
         Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports the annual profits and annualized Sharpe ratios from the OIS 1M-forward 3M forward CIP trading strategy based on
        non-overlapping month-end daily observations. All statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is 2003-01-01 to 2007-06-30, GFC is 2007-07-01 to
        2010-06-30, and Post-GFC is 2010-07-01 to 2018-08-31. The Classic Carry portfolio is the forward CIP trading strategy for the AUD-JPY pair.
        The 3 Currency Carry portfolio longs the forward CIP trading strategy in AUD, CAD, and GBP and shorts the forward CIP trading strategy
        in JPY, CHF, and EUR; all individual currency trades are vis-à-vis USD and weighted equally. The Dynamic Top5 Basis portfolio has equal
        weight in the 5 currency pairs that exhibit the highest spot 3M basis, rebalanced monthly. The Top 10 Basis portfolio has equal weights in the
        ten currency pairs with the largest CIP deviations post-GFC basis shown in Table 2. The Simple Dollar portfolio puts equal weights on the
        forward CIP trading strategy for all sample currencies vis-à-vis the USD. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
        Table I.A7: Summary Statistics of Portfolio Returns on OIS 1M-forward 3M Forward CIP Trading Strategy
        for Longer Sample Covering the COVID-19 Pandemic

                                                            Mean                                              Sharpe Ratio
                                   Pre-GFC                   GFC          Post-GFC             Pre-GFC            GFC            Post-GFC
         Classic Carry                 2.44                  -4.37          13.17                 0.61            -0.16             1.00
                                     (1.37)                (10.40)          (3.72)              (0.35)           (0.36)            (0.42)
         3 Currency Carry              0.32                  -4.59           9.12                 0.14            -0.24             1.01
                                     (0.88)                 (7.09)          (2.60)              (0.39)           (0.33)            (0.41)
         Dynamic Top5 Basis           1.83                    0.18          10.06                0.79              0.01             0.83
                                     (0.76)                (14.21)          (3.40)              (0.34)           (0.44)            (0.39)
         Top 10 Basis                 0.84                   -5.32           7.81                0.38             -0.21             0.73
                                     (0.72)                (10.01)          (3.05)              (0.36)           (0.36)            (0.40)




IA.41
         Simple Dollar                -0.95                   7.37           1.54                -0.51             0.20             0.22
                                     (1.09)                (18.17)          (2.06)              (0.56)           (0.45)            (0.26)
         Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports the annual profits and annualized Sharpe ratios from the OIS 1M-forward 3M forward CIP trading strategy for an
        extended sample period covering the COVID-19 pandemic. All statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is 2003-01-01 to 2007-06-30, GFC
        is 2007-07-01 to 2010-06-30, and Post-GFC is 2010-07-01 to 2019-03-31. The Classic Carry portfolio is the forward CIP trading strategy for
        the AUD-JPY pair. The 3 Currency Carry portfolio longs the forward CIP trading strategy in AUD, CAD, and GBP and shorts the forward
        CIP trading strategy in JPY, CHF, and EUR; all individual currency trades are vis-à-vis USD and weighted equally. The Dynamic Top5 Basis
        portfolio has equal weight in the 5 currency pairs that exhibit the highest spot 3M basis, rebalanced monthly. The Top 10 Basis portfolio has
        equal weights in the ten currency pairs with the largest CIP deviations post-GFC basis shown in Table 2. The Simple Dollar portfolio puts equal
        weights on the forward CIP trading strategy for all sample currencies vis-à-vis the USD. Newey-West standard errors are reported in parentheses,
        where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West (1994) selection procedure.
                                    Table I.A8: Forward CIP Trading Strategy Return Predictability

                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)
               1mFwd3m-3m Spread                               0.710      0.554        0.509       0.584       0.507       0.588        0.772
                                                              (0.127)    (0.122)      (0.106)     (0.113)     (0.127)     (0.194)      (0.303)

               Spot Basis 3m                                                          0.0534      0.0945      0.0533       0.0469      0.0339
                                                                                     (0.0208)    (0.0396)    (0.0225)     (0.0272)    (0.0355)

               Constant                            0.0476                 0.0202                  -0.0300
                                                  (0.0113)               (0.0111)                (0.0207)
               RMSE                                 0.119      0.115      0.114        0.112       0.112      0.112        0.112        0.114
               R2                                   0.137      0.196       0.211       0.237       0.246      0.237        0.237        0.218




IA.42
               NW BW (bus. days)                      40         40          40         40           40         40           40           40
               1st Stage F                                                                                    1005.0       153.0        61.48
               Instrument Lag (bus. days)                                                                        1            5           10
               Observations                         2099       2099        2099        2099        2099        2092        2092         2092
               Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports return predictability regressions for the classic carry (AUD-JPY) forward CIP trading strategy. The outcome variable
        in all columns is the one-month return of the three-month OIS forward CIP trading strategy. All data is daily and post-GFC (2010-07-01 to
        2018-08-30). 1mFwd3m-3m Spread is the spread between the 1-month forward three-month AUD-JPY basis and the spot three-month AUD-JPY
        basis. Spot Basis 3m is the spot three month AUD-JPY basis. RMSE is the root-mean-squared error, R2 is the un-centered R2 , NW BW is the
        bandwidth chosen by the Newey-West bandwidth selection procedure, 1st Stage F is the F-statistic from the first stage for the IV regressions
        (see Stock and Yogo (2005)), and Instrument Lag is the number of business days the spread variable is lagged in the IV regression. Units are in
        percentage points.
               Table I.A9: Returns on Quarter- and Year-end Crossing Forward CIP Trading Strategy Returns


                                                                                 OIS 1M-Forward 1M Returns
                                                       (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
          QE Cross: Interest Tenor                              -0.024                  -0.033                                         -0.036
                                                                (0.027)                 (0.030)                                        (0.029)

          QE Cross: Forward Horizon                                         -0.001      -0.017                                         -0.032
                                                                            (0.023)     (0.024)                                        (0.026)

          YE Cross: Interest Tenor                                                                  -0.007                 -0.003       0.013
                                                                                                    (0.069)                (0.069)     (0.072)

          YE Cross: Forward Horizon                                                                              0.050      0.049       0.062
                                                                                                                (0.046)    (0.044)     (0.047)




IA.43
          Constant                                   0.064       0.072       0.065       0.080       0.065       0.060      0.060       0.080
                                                    (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.017)     (0.019)     (0.013)     (0.014)    (0.013)     (0.020)

          F-stat                                                                         0.626                              0.621       0.753
          Observations                               2,106       2,106       2,106       2,106       2,106       2,106      2,106       2,106
          R2                                         0.000       0.005      0.00000      0.006      0.0001       0.007      0.007       0.015
          Residual Std. Error                        0.169       0.169       0.169       0.169       0.169       0.169      0.169       0.168
          Standard errors are in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports regressions of the classic-carry (AUD-JPY) forward CIP trading strategy return on indicators of quarter-ends and
        year-ends. The outcome variable in all columns is the one-month return of the one-month forward CIP trading strtegy. All data are daily and
        post-GFC (2010-07-01 to 2018-08-31). Quarter-end (QE) and year-end (YE) dummies indicate whether the 1M OIS interest-tenor or the 1M
        forward horizon crosses QE or YE. Newey-West standard errors are reported in parentheses, where the bandwidth is chosen by the Newey-West
        (1994) selection procedure.
                           Table I.A10: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, HKM 2-Factor Non-Tradable

                                            (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)             (8)        (9)
                                            US         Sov        FX          Opt       CDS       FwdCIP   FF6            Comm         1-6
                    Market                 1.087     0.0839      2.231       1.907      1.062      4.518   0.877           0.982      1.128
                                          (0.803)    (0.671)    (0.781)     (1.211)    (0.646)    (2.154) (0.703)         (0.787)    (0.515)

                    HKM Factor             -1.480     2.400      3.292       4.071      3.341       3.275      2.582       0.336      0.881
                                          (1.513)    (3.101)    (2.174)     (14.29)    (3.163)     (2.340)    (1.707)     (1.114)    (0.898)

                    Intercepts              Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
                    MAPE (%/mo.)           0.031      0.051      0.062       0.088      0.048       0.009      0.155       0.369
                    H1 p-value             0.585      0.370      0.045       0.308      0.529       0.075      0.746       0.680      0.349




IA.44
                    KZ p-value             0.000      0.053      0.521       0.003      0.080       0.393      0.000       0.023      0.003
                    N (assets)               11         6          11         18          5           9          6           23        60
                    N (beta, mos.)          360        283        418         272        170          98        584         331
                    N (mean, mos.)          360        283        418         272        170         98        1106         331
                    Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
        "Market" is the CRSP market return, and "HKM factor" is the intermediary capital ratio innovation of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an
        intercept is used for each asset class (one intercept per column, with six in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute
        pricing error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests whether the price of the Market risk is equal to its mean excess return. KZ p-value is the
        p-value of the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using GMM
        with the Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                                     Table I.A11: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, HKM 1-Factor

                                            (1)     (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)             (8)        (9)
                                            US      Sov           FX          Opt       CDS       FwdCIP   FF6            Comm         1-6
                    Int. Equity            0.639   1.027         3.646       3.962      2.337      2.150   0.949           1.326      1.701
                                          (0.742) (0.935)       (1.180)     (1.706)    (0.927)    (1.297) (1.589)         (1.016)    (0.701)

                    Intercepts              Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
                    MAPE (%/mo.)           0.065      0.071      0.061       0.088      0.049       0.009      0.166       0.396
                    H1 p-value             0.967      0.639      0.007       0.037      0.036       0.231      0.832       0.454      0.064
                    KZ p-value             0.000      0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000       0.001      0.000       0.000      0.000




IA.45
                    N (assets)               11         6          11         18          5           9          6           23        60
                    N (beta, mos.)          360        283        418         272        170          98        584         331
                    N (mean, mos.)          360        283        418         272        170         98        1106         331
                    Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
        "Int. Equity" is the intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset class (one intercept
        per column, with six in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests
        whether the price of the Int. Equity risk is equal to its mean excess return. KZ p-value is the p-value of the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test
        rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using GMM with the Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month
        bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                               Table I.A12: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, HKM 2-Factor Tradable

                                            (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)             (8)         (9)
                                            US          Sov        FX         Opt       CDS       FwdCIP   FF6            Comm          1-6
                    Market                 1.365       0.171      1.219      1.931      0.620      0.267   0.857           0.939       0.924
                                          (1.038)     (0.756)    (0.983)    (0.965)    (1.042)    (7.363) (0.663)         (0.848)     (0.525)

                    Int. Equity            -1.602      1.701      5.198      7.161      4.779       1.679       2.201      0.949       1.611
                                          (1.640)     (2.773)    (2.761)    (16.22)    (2.902)     (4.954)     (1.409)    (1.261)     (0.818)

                    Intercepts              Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
                    MAPE (%/mo.)           0.034       0.059      0.053      0.079      0.039       0.009       0.152      0.382
                    H1 p-value             0.397       0.789      0.080      0.338      0.140       0.300       0.116      0.915       0.372




IA.46
                    KZ p-value             0.000       0.157      0.569      0.076      0.091       0.411       0.000      0.220       0.000
                    N (assets)               11          6          11        18          5           9           6          23         60
                    N (beta, mos.)          360         283        418        272        170          98         584        331
                    N (mean, mos.)          360         283        418        272        170         98         1106        331
                    Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
        "Market" is the CRSP market return, and "Int. Equity" is the intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is
        used for each asset class (one intercept per column, with six in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error
        of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests whether the price of the Market and Int. Equity risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading
        strategies. KZ p-value is the p-value of the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard
        errors are computed using GMM with the Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                                Table I.A13: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, 3 Factor Non-Tradable

                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)     (7)            (8)          (9)
                                           US          Sov         FX          Opt         CDS        FwdCIP    FF6           Comm           1-6
              Market                      1.014       0.459       0.887       0.435        1.114       -3.608  -1.012          0.627        0.819
                                         (0.828)     (0.660)     (0.301)     (1.188)      (0.507)     (7.600) (4.931)         (0.369)      (0.365)

              HKM Factor                  -1.222      1.712       0.399       2.447        1.956        -2.205     -1.267      0.766        -0.339
                                         (0.810)     (3.392)     (1.442)     (13.81)      (3.345)      (5.347)    (6.847)     (0.891)      (0.942)

              Neg. Fwd CIP Ret.          -0.0483 -0.0605         -0.0588      -0.119      -0.0306      -0.0818     0.228 -0.00635          -0.0705
                                        (0.0868) (0.107)        (0.0409)     (0.0874)    (0.0913)     (0.0638)    (0.544) (0.0339)        (0.0351)

              Intercepts                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
              MAPE (%/mo.)                0.010       0.021       0.062       0.035        0.013        0.006       0.109       0.349




IA.47
              H1 p-value                  0.902       0.952       0.793       0.257        0.660        0.848       0.746       0.340       0.777
              KZ p-value                  0.058       0.636       0.174       0.986        0.246        0.723       0.868       0.780       0.127
              N (assets)                    11          6           11          18            5            9          6           23          60
              N (beta, mos.)                98          98          98          98           98           98         98          98
              N (mean, mos.)               360         283         418         272          170           98        1106         331
              Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
        "Neg. Fwd. CIP Ret." is the negative of the return on the AUD-JPY 1M-fwd 3M forward CIP trading strategy, "Market" is the CRSP market
        return, and "HKM Factor" is the intermediary capital ratio innovation of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset
        class (one intercept per column, with six in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns.
        H1 p-value tests whether the price of the Fwd. CIP Ret. and Market risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading strategies.
        KZ p-value is the p-value of the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are
        computed using GMM with the Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                         Table I.A14: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, with Risk-Free Rate Adjustment

                                          (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)      (7)            (8)          (9)
                                          US          Sov          FX          Opt         CDS        FwdCIP    FF6           Comm           1-6
              Int. Equity                0.176       1.429        1.855       1.328        2.325       0.195   -0.211          1.056        0.738
                                        (0.742)     (1.546)      (0.635)     (0.975)      (0.994)     (2.254) (4.290)         (0.703)      (0.470)

              Neg. Fwd CIP Ret.          -0.170 -0.0694          -0.0658      -0.132      -0.0228      -0.0576     0.124       -0.0208     -0.0696
                                        (0.108) (0.0574)        (0.0503)     (0.0541)    (0.0559)     (0.0381)    (0.335)     (0.0302)    (0.0332)

              Intercepts                  Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
              MAPE (%/mo.)               0.032       0.026        0.063       0.035        0.019        0.007       0.094      0.360
              H1 p-value                 0.423       0.731        0.147       0.319        0.151        0.982       0.338      0.473        0.844
              KZ p-value                 0.079       0.379        0.107       0.035        0.355        0.226       0.780      0.780        0.041




IA.48
              N (assets)                   11          6            11          18            5            9           6         23           60
              N (beta, mos.)               98          98           98          98           98           98          98         98
              N (mean, mos.)              360         283          418         272          170           98        1106        331
              Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
                                                                   i       f          i  w       f     i |x|   i        i
        Betas are estimated from a modified version of (13), Rt      +1 - Rt = µi + w (Rt+1 - Rt ) + x rt+1 + s |xt | + t+1 . "Neg. Fwd. CIP Ret." is the
        negative of the return on the AUD-JPY 1M-fwd 3M forward CIP trading strategy and "Int. Equity" is the intermediary equity return of He
        et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset class (one intercept per column, with six in (9), which pools the first six
        asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests whether the price of the Fwd. CIP Ret. and Int.
        Equity risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading strategies. KZ p-value is the p-value of the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test
        rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using GMM with the Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month
        bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                                          Table I.A15: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, USD-JPY

                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)      (7)             (8)         (9)
                                                   US          Sov          FX          Opt        CDS       FwdCIP    FF6            Comm          1-6
         Int. Equity                              0.893       1.715        1.997       0.947       2.319      0.635   -0.734           1.047       0.900
                                                 (1.053)     (1.542)      (0.609)     (1.036)     (1.012)    (1.749) (1.786)          (0.672)     (0.470)

         Neg. Fwd CIP Ret. (JPYUSD)               -0.227     -0.0844      -0.0541     -0.123      -0.0348     -0.0516      0.126     0.00411      -0.0676
                                                 (0.154)    (0.0750)     (0.0465)    (0.0568)     (0.120)    (0.0226)     (0.148)    (0.0328)    (0.0260)

         Intercepts                                Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
         MAPE (%/mo.)                             0.034       0.016        0.067       0.036       0.018       0.007       0.088       0.368
         H1 p-value                               0.384       0.429        0.076       0.274       0.088       0.446       0.565       0.442       0.195




IA.49
         KZ p-value                               0.226       0.446        0.064       0.024       0.770       0.024       0.635       0.977       0.002
         N (assets)                                 11          6            11          18          5           9           6           23          60
         N (beta, mos.)                             98          98           98          98          98          98          98          98
         N (mean, mos.)                            360         283          418         272         170          98        1106         331
         Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section
        I.E. "Neg. Fwd. CIP Ret." is the negative of the return on the USD-JPY 1M-fwd 3M forward CIP trading strategy and "Int. Equity" is the
        intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset class (one intercept per column, with six
        in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests whether the price
        of the Fwd. CIP Ret. and Int. Equity risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading strategies. KZ p-value is the p-value of the
        Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using GMM with the
        Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                                Table I.A16: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, Three Currency Carry

                                          (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
                                          US         Sov          FX          Opt         CDS       FwdCIP         FF6        Comm           1-6
             Int. Equity                -0.407      1.399        2.171       1.585        2.345      -0.378        0.625       1.008        0.767
                                       (1.188)     (1.707)      (0.769)     (0.949)      (1.270)    (1.731)       (0.933)     (0.707)      (0.450)

             Neg. Fwd CIP Ret.          -0.200     -0.0608      -0.0311 -0.0715          -0.0223      -0.0225     0.0237       0.0216      -0.0263
                                       (0.143)    (0.0473)     (0.0404) (0.0259)        (0.0643)     (0.0110)    (0.0451)     (0.0466)    (0.0132)

             Intercepts                  Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
             MAPE (%/mo.)               0.054       0.033        0.067       0.031        0.017       0.008        0.091       0.351
             H1 p-value                 0.534       0.665        0.023       0.285        0.180       0.255        0.075       0.246        0.640




IA.50
             KZ p-value                 0.165       0.464        0.052       0.002        0.499       0.221        0.518       0.943        0.000
             N (assets)                   11          6            11          18            5           9            6          23           60
             N (beta, mos.)               98          98           98          98           98          98           98         98
             N (mean, mos.)              360         283          418         272          170          98         1106         331
             Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
        "Neg. Fwd. CIP Ret." is the negative of the return on the 3 Currency Carry 1M-fwd 3M forward CIP trading strategy and "Int. Equity" is
        the intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset class (one intercept per column, with
        six in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests whether the price
        of the Fwd. CIP Ret. and Int. Equity risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading strategies. KZ p-value is the p-value of the
        Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using GMM with the
        Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                              Table I.A17: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, Dynamic Top Five Basis

                                           (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)      (7)            (8)         (9)
                                           US        Sov          FX          Opt        CDS        FwdCIP    FF6           Comm          1-6
              Int. Equity                -0.822     1.464        2.162       1.508       2.136       0.668   -0.241          1.023       0.762
                                        (0.724)    (1.580)      (0.731)     (0.971)     (1.374)     (1.301) (1.844)         (0.705)     (0.445)

              Neg. Fwd CIP Ret.          -0.228 -0.0746         -0.0347     -0.105       -0.0393     -0.0262    0.0887      0.0211       -0.0320
                                        (0.140) (0.0530)       (0.0406)    (0.0404)     (0.0678)    (0.0139)    (0.141)    (0.0495)     (0.0165)

              Intercepts                  Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
              MAPE (%/mo.)               0.047      0.028        0.068       0.032       0.018        0.009      0.074       0.363
              H1 p-value                 0.098      0.513        0.024       0.176       0.171        0.618      0.451       0.286       0.921




IA.51
              KZ p-value                 0.157      0.324        0.028       0.024       0.207        0.051      0.617       0.839       0.000
              N (assets)                   11         6            11          18           5            9          6          23          60
              N (beta, mos.)               98         98           98          98          98           98         98          98
              N (mean, mos.)              360        283          418         272         170           98       1106         331
              Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
        "Neg. Fwd. CIP Ret." is the negative of the return on the Dynamic Top Five Basis 1M-fwd 3M forward CIP trading strategy and "Int. Equity"
        is the intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset class (one intercept per column,
        with six in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests whether the
        price of the Fwd. CIP Ret. and Int. Equity risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading strategies. KZ p-value is the p-value of
        the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using GMM with the
        Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                                       Table I.A18: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, Top 10 Basis

                                          (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)
                                          US         Sov          FX          Opt         CDS       FwdCIP         FF6        Comm           1-6
             Int. Equity                -0.313      1.325        2.147       1.385        2.197      0.209         0.390       1.001        0.768
                                       (1.186)     (1.753)      (0.741)     (0.935)      (1.223)    (1.412)       (1.226)     (0.712)      (0.446)

             Neg. Fwd CIP Ret.          -0.237     -0.0688      -0.0323 -0.0824          -0.0359      -0.0252     0.0384       0.0246      -0.0306
                                       (0.162)    (0.0522)     (0.0412) (0.0325)        (0.0645)     (0.0130)    (0.0683)     (0.0526)    (0.0162)

             Intercepts                  Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
             MAPE (%/mo.)               0.044       0.030        0.068       0.029        0.018       0.008        0.082       0.355
             H1 p-value                 0.436       0.563        0.036       0.249        0.150       0.907        0.205       0.330        0.905




IA.52
             KZ p-value                 0.171       0.491        0.033       0.006        0.376       0.096        0.632       0.944        0.000
             N (assets)                   11          6            11          18            5           9            6          23           60
             N (beta, mos.)               98          98           98          98           98          98           98         98
             N (mean, mos.)              360         283          418         272          170          98         1106         331
             Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
        "Neg. Fwd. CIP Ret." is the negative of the return on the Top 10 Basis 1M-fwd 3M forward CIP trading strategy and "Int. Equity" is the
        intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset class (one intercept per column, with six
        in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests whether the price
        of the Fwd. CIP Ret. and Int. Equity risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading strategies. KZ p-value is the p-value of the
        Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using GMM with the
        Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                                    Table I.A19: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, Common Sample

                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)     (6)              (7)        (8)         (9)
                                           US          Sov         FX          Opt        CDS FwdCIP               FF6       Comm          1-6
               Int. Equity                0.618       0.508       0.457       3.042       3.474  -0.0337          -0.523      0.806       0.913
                                         (1.142)     (1.267)     (0.799)     (1.190)     (1.884) (2.206)         (3.971)     (0.806)     (0.655)

               Neg. Fwd CIP Ret.          -0.276 -0.0850         0.0193       -0.0956    0.0838       -0.0621    0.0109     0.00918       -0.0714
                                         (0.173) (0.0680)       (0.0375)     (0.0652)    (0.135)     (0.0371)    (0.315)    (0.0399)     (0.0335)

               Intercepts                  Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
               MAPE (%/mo.)               0.062       0.010       0.087        0.033      0.037       0.007       0.077       0.460
               H1 p-value                 0.414       0.887       0.049        0.073      0.234       0.886       0.616       0.223       0.861




IA.53
               KZ p-value                 0.079       0.379       0.107        0.035      0.355       0.226       0.780       0.780       0.041
               N (assets)                   11          6           11           18          5          9           6           23          60
               N (beta, mos.)               98          98          98           98         98          98          98         98
               N (mean, mos.)               98          98          98           98         98          98         98          98
               Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E,
        using only Post-GFC data. "Neg. Fwd. CIP Ret." is the negative of the return on the AUD-JPY 1M-fwd 3M forward CIP trading strategy and
        "Int. Equity" is the intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept is used for each asset class (one intercept
        per column, with six in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests
        whether the price of the Fwd. CIP Ret. and Int. Equity risks are equal to the mean excess returns of those trading strategies. KZ p-value is
        the p-value of the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using
        GMM with the Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
                                    Table I.A20: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests, 2-Factor. 1st PC

                                          (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
                                          US         Sov          FX          Opt        CDS        FwdCIP        FF6        Comm          1-6
                Int. Equity             -0.252      1.145        1.653       3.020       2.431       -0.544       1.249       1.176       0.880
                                       (0.441)     (1.402)      (0.658)     (1.156)     (0.939)     (2.623)      (1.270)     (0.760)     (0.509)

                PC1 Residual           -0.0694      -0.0813     0.0410       -0.132    -0.00903      -0.0970    -0.0231      -0.0238     -0.0558
                                      (0.0334)     (0.0488)    (0.0376)     (0.100)    (0.0651)     (0.0576)    (0.149)     (0.0336)    (0.0257)

                Intercepts               Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
                MAPE (%/mo.)            0.054       0.046        0.070       0.088       0.018        0.005       0.121       0.352
                H1 p-value              0.036       0.690        0.113       0.026       0.029        0.653       0.612       0.463       0.538




IA.54
                KZ p-value              0.021       0.079        0.652       0.013       0.105        0.654       0.178       0.232       0.005
                N (assets)                11          6            11          18           5            9           6          23          60
                N (beta, mos.)           98           98           98          98          98           98          98         98
                N (mean, mos.)           360         283          418         272         170           98        1106         331
                Standard errors in parentheses
        Notes : This table reports estimates for the price of risk ( in Equation (12)) from the various asset classes described in Appendix Section I.E.
        PC1 Residual is the AR(1) residual of the first principal components of the arbitrages described in Section 5.1, scaled to have the same volatility
        as the AUD-JPY forward CIP return, and "Int. Equity" is the intermediary equity return of He et al. (2017). Intercepts indicates an intercept
        is used for each asset class (one intercept per column, with six in (9), which pools the first six asset classes). MAPE is mean absolute pricing
        error of monthly returns. H1 p-value tests whether the price of the Int. Equity risk is equal to its mean excess return. KZ p-value is the p-value
        of the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test rejecting reduced rank for the betas of the test assets. Standard errors are computed using GMM with
        the Newey-West kernel and a twelve-month bandwidth. Units are in percentage points.
               Table I.A21: Summary Statistics of AUD-JPY Cross-Currency Basis and Other Near-Arbitrages

                        AUD-JPY                                                              Tsy-swap        Refco-Tsy       KfW-Bund          TIPS-Tsy
         Period           Basis          Bond-CDS         CDS-CDX         Tenor basis         spread          spread           spread           spread
         Pre-GFC           3.1               -2.3            -1.0             0.1              -52.7            4.7             11.1             27.9
                          (8.2)             (5.6)           (1.8)            (0.4)             (6.5)           (8.1)            (2.8)            (7.0)
         GFC              17.9              75.5             6.7              6.3              -11.4           60.9             51.3             50.1
                         (25.8)            (80.2)          (12.6)            (3.4)            (35.9)          (35.2)           (20.5)           (35.9)
         Post-GFC         51.6              20.2              3.7            10.0               24.0           41.6             29.8             29.8
                         (25.8)            (13.2)           (3.8)            (3.3)            (15.5)          (12.0)           (19.4)            (6.9)




IA.55
        Notes : This table reports the mean and standard deviation of the AUD-JPY cross-currency basis and seven near-arbitrages, in basis points.
        "AUD-JPY Basis" denotes the OIS-based 3M tenor classic carry (AUD-JPY) cross-currency basis. "Bond-CDS" denotes the 5-year spread between
        North American investment grade corporate bonds and CDS spreads. "CDS-CDX" denotes the 5-year spread between the composite sperad of
        125 constituents of the NA.IG.CDX index and the quoted spread on the CDX index. "Tenor Basis" denotes the 5-year 1-month versus 3-month
        Libor tenor basis swap spread. "Tsy-swap spread" denotes the 30-year spread between the U.S. Treasury over the interest rate swap. "Refco-Tsy"
        denotes the 5-year spread between the yield on Resolution Financing Corporation and the US Treasury. "KfW-Bund" denotes the 5-year spread
        between the yield on euro-denominated KfW bonds and German bunds. "TIPS-Tsy" refers the 5-year spread between the yield on the TIPS
        and the yield on the asset swap package consisting of nominal Treasurys and inflation swaps. All statistics are reported by period: Pre-GFC is
        2005-01-01 to 2007-06-30, GFC is 2007-07-01 to 2010-06-30, and Post-GFC is 2010-07-01 to 2018-08-31. More details on these near-arbitrages
        can be found in Internet Appendix I.H.
           Table I.A22: Prices of Risk and SDF Parameters


                           Intermediary Equity         Forward CIP Trading
                                 Return                  Strategy Return

     Price of risk                  0.610                        0.048
                                   (0.288)                      (0.011)
     SDF parameters                 0.658                         305
                                   (1.768)                      (91.7)
      Standard errors in parentheses

Notes : This table reports the estimated price of risk and SDF parameters on the two
proposed factors. Price of risk is reported in percentage points. The price of risk on
intermediary equity return is estimated using monthly return from January 1970 through
August 2018. The price of risk on the forward CIP trading strategy return is estimated
using daily observations of monthly return from 2010-07-01 to 2018-08-31. Newey-West
standard errors are reported in parentheses, where the overlapping bandwidth is chosen
by the Newey-West (1994) selection procedure. More details on the estimation can be
found in Internet Appendix I.I.




                                       IA.56
