                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DO INCREASING MARKUPS MATTER? LESSONS FROM EMPIRICAL INDUSTRIAL
                          ORGANIZATION

                                         Steven T. Berry
                                         Martin Gaynor
                                       Fiona Scott Morton

                                       Working Paper 26007
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26007


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We wish to thank Al Klevorick and editors at the Journal of Economics Perspectives--Enrico
Moretti, Gordon Hanson, and managing editor Tim Taylor--for helpful comments and
suggestions that substantially improved the paper. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26007.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Steven T. Berry, Martin Gaynor, and Fiona Scott Morton. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Increasing Markups Matter? Lessons from Empirical Industrial Organization
Steven T. Berry, Martin Gaynor, and Fiona Scott Morton
NBER Working Paper No. 26007
June 2019
JEL No. L0,L1,L4

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper considers the recent literature on firm markups in light of both new and classic work
in the field of Industrial Organization. We detail the shortcomings of papers that rely on
discredited approaches from the "structure-conduct-performance" literature. In contrast, papers
based on production function estimation have made useful progress in measuring broad trends in
markups. However, industries are so heterogeneous that careful industry specific studies are also
required, and sorely needed. Examples of such studies illustrate differing explanations for rising
markups, including endogenous increases in fixed cost associated with lower marginal costs. In
some industries there is evidence of price increases driven by mergers. To fully understand
markups, we must eventually recover the key economic primitives of demand, marginal cost, and
fixed and sunk costs. We end by discussing the various aspects of antitrust enforcement that may
be of increasing importance regardless of the cause of increased markups.

Steven T. Berry                                 Fiona Scott Morton
Department of Economics                         Yale School of Management
Yale University                                 Box 208200
Box 208264                                      New Haven, CT 06520-8200
37 Hillhouse Avenue                             and NBER
New Haven, CT 06520-8264                        fiona.scottmorton@yale.edu
and NBER
steven.berry@yale.edu

Martin Gaynor
Heinz College
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER
mgaynor@cmu.edu
Many economists and policymakers are expressing concern over the possibility of increasing
monopoly power in the US and the world economy. There have been decades of research in
industrial organization devoted to understanding how one can (and cannot) reliably learn about
the causes and consequences of market power and markups--that is, a positive difference
between price and marginal cost.

Starting about 30 years ago (Bresnahan 1989), the field of industrial organization adopted
methods for understanding firm conduct and markets based on the relevant economic
primitives: demand, cost, and pricing conduct. Thus, under the assumptions that firms
maximize profits and have to cover their total costs, the equilibrium price (and other outcomes
such as product choice, location, quality, innovation) will be determined by demand, marginal
costs and fixed (possibly sunk) costs, along with the conditions of competition that shape
pricing behavior. These conditions are modeled using modern game theory to incorporate
imperfect competition, product differentiation, multiproduct firms and firm entry, as well as a
host of industry-specific institutions.

However, a number of recent studies of markups instead employ an analytical approach that
was broadly rejected by the field of industrial organization more than 30 years ago: the
structure-conduct-performance paradigm. We begin by discussing the shortcomings of this
approach, which involves regressions with an outcome like markups or profits on the left-hand
side, and a measure of market concentration on the right-hand side, along with various control
variables. This approach faces severe measurement problems, and worse conceptual problems.
As we will explain, there are a number of quite different economic scenarios, with different
welfare implications, which can result in a positive correlation between industry concentration
and markups.

We then turn to some research that avoids the problems of the structure-conduct-performance
approach. Although we mention several approaches, our main focus will be on recent studies
taking an industrial organization approach. As we will see, studies built on economic primitives
sometimes describe a situation in which large firms are changing products and production
methods, including the mix of marginal and fixed costs, over time. In some cases, the welfare
effects for consumers are ambiguous; in others, larger firms seem to raise markups without a
corresponding consumer benefit. In some of these cases, mergers may be playing a role in
increasing markups. The strength of these industry-level studies is that they offer detailed
insights into causes of higher markups; the corresponding downside is that without a surge of
additional studies, it can be difficult to draw inferences about overall levels and trends in
markups across the economy.

Building on these industrial organization studies, we summarize some of the main possible
causes of expanding markups rooted in the underlying economic primitives. Possibilities include
a rise in fixed or sunk costs, network effects, monopsony effects in labor markets, an increase in
rent-seeking behavior, and global effects. As an example, higher fixed (and/or sunk) costs can


                                                2
lead to fewer firms in a market, which can result in softer competition, higher prices and
reduced consumer welfare. On the other hand, in some cases higher fixed/sunk costs can be
the endogenous outcome of improved products or of improved production technology that
lowers marginal cost (Sutton 1991). In this case, observed higher markups may or may not be
associated with higher prices and reduced consumer welfare.

In the final section of the paper, we turn to antitrust enforcement and competition policy, both
because weakened antitrust policy offers a potential explanation for rising markups, but also
because even if the main explanations lie elsewhere, antitrust policy offers some policy levers
to address the rise in markups. Given the uncertainties about the size of the rise and rise in
markups, and that these seem likely to vary across industries, we argue that policy makers
should consider policies that are beneficial under a wide range of conditions, for example,
assuring that market entry is not blocked, that dominant incumbent firms don't engage in
conduct to disadvantage rivals and harm competition, and that anticompetitive conduct in
labor markets is not permitted. We also offer the important caveat that regulatory, trade, and
tax policies may also prove important in addressing any harms associated with increased
markups.


Problems with Some Recent Studies of Market Power

Early empirical research in industrial organization from the 1950s into the 1970s employed the
"structure-conduct-performance" paradigm to study how the extent of competition affected on
market outcomes. This empirical implementation of the paradigm typically involved regression
analysis. The dependent variable was a market outcome like profits, markups or prices. The key
explanatory variable seeks to capture the structure of the market with a measure of a measure
of concentration--usually the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), which is the sum of squared
market shares. The regression also included a range of control variables intended to capture
other exogenous reasons for variation. Structure is thus related to performance, with
(unobservable) conduct captured as the estimated relationship between structure and
performance. In this regression, the coefficient on the concentration measure is intended to
capture how the toughness of competition changes as market concentration changes.

Within the field of industrial organization, the structure-conduct-performance approach has
been discredited for a long time (Bresnahan 1989; Schmalensee 1989). But outside of industrial
organization, the paradigm seems to have been readopted in recent years. Much of the recent
attention to increasing markups or other market outcomes focuses on exactly this kind of
evidence (for example, Furman 2015; Azar, Marinescu, and Steinbaum 2017; Barkai 2017;
Bessen 2017; Gutiérrez and Philippon 2017a, b; Smith 2017; Azar et al. 2018; Benmelech,
Bergman, and Kim 2018; Furman and Orszag 2018; Grullon, Larkin, and Michaely forthcoming).
Such work sometimes proceeds without addressing the problems that led the field of industrial
organization to reject the structure-conduct-performance approach.




                                               3
Given the intuitive relationship between market concentration and firm performance, why did
industrial organization reject the structure-conduct-performance paradigm? Researchers using
the structure-conduct-performance approach were well aware of the limits of their approach at
the time, as emphasized by Schmalensee (1989). We start with a discussion of measurement
problems. The most important point, though, is that there are multiple causal paths that can
explain a given correlation between concentration and other market outcomes. This implies
that the very question--"what is the effect of concentration on prices or markups?"--is not
well-posed.

Measuring concentration is inherently difficult, because economic markets are not observed
directly in the data. For example, industrial classifications in the Census often fail to reflect well-
defined economic markets. It is fairly clear that that "software" is not a single industry, but
much less clear how to divide it into separate industries. Other problems arise from geography.
If Census data in an industry shows a large number of small firms, this may represent a situation
where they are in direct competition with each other or else they may actually operate in quite
separate geographic or product markets. The Census does not measure degrees of product
differentiation or homogeneity, or any measures of product-level prices.

Measuring economic outcomes was another problem for research in the structure-conduct-
performance tradition. Most measures of profits use accounting measures, which are not
economic profits. Markups are rarely directly observed in firm-level data at all, in part because
firms' accounting structures are not set up to measure the economic concept of product-level
marginal cost (Fisher and McGowan 1983). Attempts to estimate marginal cost involved
additional difficult measurement problems with regard to the size fixed costs, sunk costs, and
depreciation. In a best-case scenario, measured markups involve the markup of price over
average variable cost.

Some researchers in the structure-conduct-performance tradition came to regressions using
price as the dependent variable, rather than accounting profits or markups. But then,
comparing prices across industries then led to a call for industry-level structure-conduct-
performance studies (Weiss 1990). Researchers understood that the nature of competition
differs substantially from one industry to the next. For example, prices are determined in the
food distribution industry via second price auction, in health care via bilateral bargaining, and in
retail as posted prices. As a consequence of the deep differences between industries, it's
unclear what sorts of inferences are possible from estimates that aggregate across industries
with such fundamental differences.

But even if the structure and output variables were measured with precision, and the analysis
was within a single industry, structure-conduct-performance researchers beginning with
Demsetz (1973) often grappled with the problem of interpreting their regressions. For
example, Ravenscraft (1983) regressed firm-level markups on firm market share and industry
concentration, finding a coefficient on market share that was positive and significantly different
from zero, but a near zero (or even negative) coefficient on industry concentration. Still, it was
hard to give any definitive interpretation to such regressions. Imagine that large firms have high


                                                  4
fixed costs and low marginal costs, and low marginal costs are associated with higher markups
(in part because the price needs to recover the high fixed costs). This can create a correlation
between firm size or the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index for an industry and markups.

One way of approaching the Demsetz (1973) empirical critique is that concentration is
econometrically endogenous, suggesting a search for possible instruments. However, in many
cases it is not at all clear what variables are excluded from the "concentration-markup"
regression, which naturally depends on all elements of demand and marginal cost.

However, the critique runs deeper than concerns over endogeneity. Different changes in
primitives, with very different positive and normative implications, can produce the same
observed correlations between concentration and markups. Demsetz (1973) emphasized the
path from improved marginal cost to the joint outcome of concentration and measured
accounting markups. This path can exist even in a model of perfect competition with
heterogeneous upward sloping marginal cost curves. In contrast, the original structure-conduct-
performance researchers emphasized the path from exogenous mergers to the joint outcome
of high concentration and higher prices and reduced consumer welfare, which offers an equally
coherent story. One can also tell a story in a differentiated products context, in which a
reduction in search or trade costs may shift market share towards firms with high quality
products, increasing both concentration and consumer welfare (as emphasized in Autor et al.
2017).

In short, there is no well-defined "causal effect of concentration on price," but rather a set of
hypotheses that can explain observed correlations of the joint outcomes of price, measured
markups, market share, and concentration.1 As Bresnahan (1989) argued three decades ago, no
clear interpretation of the impact of concentration is possible without a clear focus on
equilibrium oligopoly demand and "supply," where supply includes the list of the marginal cost
functions of the firms and the nature of oligopoly competition.

Some of the recent literature on concentration, profits, and markups has simply reasserted the
relevance of the old-style structure-conduct-performance correlations. For economists trained
in subfields outside industrial organization, such correlations can be attractive. Our own view,

1
 As a more specific example, in the Cournot model, the Lerner Index of price-cost markups is
equal to the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index divided by the absolute value of the market demand
elasticity (Cowling and Waterson 1976). If we could somehow empirically identify an industry-
specific coefficient on the Herfindahl in a regression of the correctly measured Lerner Index on
concentration, we would learn only one demand parameter, not nearly enough to know (for
example) how a merger would affect industry markups. Even within the Cournot model,
reductions in marginal cost will produce one kind of joint effect on the Herfindahl index and
markups, whereas a merger will produce an altogether different set of joint effects (Farrell and
Shapiro 1990). Most industries are, of course, not well-approximated by the Cournot model and
extracting causal predictions from those industries is even harder.



                                                5
based on the well-established mainstream wisdom in the field of industrial organization for
several decades, is that regressions of market outcomes on measures of industry structure like
the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index should be given little weight in policy debates. Such
correlations will not produce information about the causal estimates that policy demands. It is
these causal relationships that will help us understand what, if anything, may be causing
markups to rise.


Detailed Industry Studies of Market Power

What kind of studies might provide better-grounded evidence on the underlying causes of shifts
in concentration or mark-ups?

As a starting point, we might seek to establish a descriptive baseline for analysis, without
jumping to causal statements. Is concentration in general rising across many firms and
industries or a relatively small number? Are accounting markups rising? Are prices rising? What
are the descriptive correlations across these variables? The answers to these questions can
often point to fruitful areas for detailed study as well as rule out concerns that are unsupported
by the facts. We can then consider approaches to interpreting these fact patterns that may lead
us to firmer policy conclusions.

As an example, Ganapati (2018a) builds on and extends recent work to address some of these
correlational issues. In common with other papers, he finds a rising economy-wide trend
toward increased concentration. Using industry-level price indices, in a difference-in-difference
analysis he finds that "concentration increases are positively correlated to productivity and real
output growth, uncorrelated with price changes and overall payroll, and negatively correlated
with labor's revenue share." Autor et al. (2017) use firm-level panel data to document that the
increase in concentration is largely due to reallocation of market share toward the pre-existing
set of large and productive firms. This change is associated with a decrease in the labor share.
Autor et al. provide a model that attributes these correlations to the rise of "superstar"
productive firms. Although a number of authors report findings of increasing concentration
across a wide range of industries, this finding is not universal. For example, Rossi-Hansberg,
Sarte, and Trachter (2019) find falling concentration in local product markets, in part because
entry of national firms will increase competition in local markets.

In an alternative approach, there has been a recent wave of "production function" approaches
to measuring mark-ups. These studies often use data from the financial accounts of firms to
estimate firm-level production functions, which in turn serve as a basis to estimate the size of
mark-ups. One advantage of this approach is that it directly addresses the issue of markups in
the economy as a whole. Another advantage is that these papers do not use measures of
industry concentration, and thus not suffer from the fundamental methodological flaws of
papers that use the structure-conduct-performance paradigm. However, a corresponding
disadvantage of broad-based approaches to estimating markups using financial accounting data
or aggregate data is that modeling and estimation approaches that fail to model industry


                                                6
specific characteristics restrict the range of answers that we can learn from data. We believe
that this research provides persuasive evidence that markups have been rising, although open
questions remain about the magnitude and causes of the effect. In this symposium, the papers
by Basu and by Syverson discuss this approach in detail.2

However, the main focus of this paper is to discuss what we can conclude from industry-specific
studies about the sizes and causes of markups and therefore what policy responses would be
appropriate. In these industry-level studies it may be plausible to identify markups from data
on prices and output, together with data on demand and cost shifters and some industry
appropriate assumptions on competitive behavior. Detailed industry studies can provide direct
evidence on the causes and consequences of imperfect competition. The relatively narrow
focus of industry specific studies may frustrate economists who are accustomed to working
with all firms in one model and dataset, as is often the case in macro and finance. But the
nature of demand, costs, and competitive setting that affect firm choices are inherently
heterogeneous.

Here, we do not try to review the vast literature in this area, but instead focus on a few recent
studies which illustrate some contexts in which this research is done, and how the welfare
implications of such research can be ambiguous, combining elements of lower cost, improved
quality, and decreased competition.

As a first example, Ganapati (2018b) studies the large wholesaling sector of the economy.
Ganapati notes that, in 2012, wholesalers accounted for 50 percent of sales to downstream
buyers in the US manufactured goods market and that, contrary to prominent examples of
large retailers disintermediating wholesalers, the wholesale sector overall is growing in size. As
the wholesale sector has grown, it has become more concentrated, and accounting markups
have increased. This has happened largely due to increases in the market shares of the largest
wholesalers. This increase in concentration has been accompanied by increased spending on
information technology, by the opening of warehouses closer to consumers, and by increased
dual sourcing from domestic and foreign sources. Purely from the descriptive data, this story

2
  Prominent examples of this production function approach with US data include De Loecker
and Eeckhout (2017, 2018), Hall (2018), and Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold (2018). For
example, De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) in their primary analysis use firm-level financial
statements from Compustat, including measures of sales, spending on inputs, capital stock, and
industry classifications. Studies using this general approach international data include De
Loecker and Eeckhout (2018) and Calligaris, Criscuolo and Marcolin (2018). All of these papers
find evidence of positive and rising markups. These studies are not just rising markups overall,
but the fact that the rise in markups is due to a small number of firms. Again, for additional
details, see the papers by Basu and by Syverson in this symposium. For other careful
discussions, see also Yurukoglu (2018) and Raval (2019), as well as De Loecker and Eeckhout
(2018b) for a response to criticisms.




                                                7
seems more complicated than either "perfect competition" or a classic Cournot-style oligopoly
story of increased homogeneous goods concentration leading to higher prices and reduced
output.

To interpret these trends, Ganapati (2018a) applies a series of standard empirical industrial
organization models of demand, pricing, and entry. These models are fit to detailed US Census
data, with identification coming from "supply and demand"-style instrumental variable
methods (Berry and Haile 2014). In particular, he uses data on the number of wholesalers by
type and location, on market size, and on shifters of marginal cost. Ganapati concludes that the
growth in the wholesale sector is driven by a combination of lower marginal costs and
increased demand, which is in turn driven by an improved warehouse network as well as
improved sourcing quality from both domestic and foreign locations.

The benefits of these improvements for downstream customers are constrained by lessened
competition that yields an increase in markups over marginal cost. In Ganapati's (2018a) entry
model, the improved product quality and lower marginal costs are associated with higher fixed
costs that are created by the firm's location, quality, and sourcing decisions (similar to the
"endogenous fixed cost" models of Sutton 1991). However, Ganapati does not attempt to
attribute these fixed costs to any specific source. They could be the information technology
costs of improved logistics or the sunk costs of building out a warehouse structure.
Alternatively, they could represent a rent due to oligopolistic behavior and (perhaps) first-
mover advantages in establishing wholesale networks. The findings indicate that in this sector,
while concentration and markups are rising, quality is rising and costs are falling, thus leading to
a setting that is not easy to evaluate. Research on a number of other prominent industries finds
patterns with similarly ambiguous welfare implications.

Note that, unlike the structure-conduct-performance or the production function approaches
mentioned earlier, Ganapati is able to make statements about demand, marginal costs and
fixed cost. While these statements depend on a significant number of maintained assumptions,
they lead to a rich story about the underlying forces behind markup changes and they lead to
both positive and normative implications associated with those changes. Ganapati's work on
wholesaling reveals an evolving industry with endogenous tradeoffs in product quality,
marginal cost and fixed cost.

The airline industry provides another example of increasing markups being associated with
some degree of product improvement and marginal cost decline (Berry 1990), but it also
illustrates that poorly policed mergers can increase prices. Debates over airline mergers often
pivot on the negative effects of increased markups on some concentrated nonstop routes
versus the potential for improved route structures leading to better choices and increased
competition on other (often connecting) itineraries.3 Borenstein (1990) notes the strong
evidence that prices rose after at least two Reagan-era mergers of airlines with largely

3
 These debates follow on the emphasis on improved airline product quality in Carlton, Landes, and Posner (1980)
versus the emphasis on airline market power in Borenstein (1990).


                                                       8
overlapping route networks. A more recent airline merger wave has consolidated the
remaining legacy carriers into three large firms that face competition from Southwest Airlines
and a group of new low-cost carriers. We still await a full academic evaluation of these mergers.
The many years of near zero-profit operations of major airlines (Borenstein 2011), lasting up
until the demand boom and merger wave of recent years, suggests that for a long time high
markups over marginal cost in the industry were offset by the costs of running a large hub and
spoke networks. These networks create large benefits by providing low-priced and convenient
connections through hubs to many destinations. But they also have allowed airlines to charge
high markups on many direct flights out of hub airports (Berry, Carnall. and Spiller, 2006).

Airlines, then, provide a rich but mixed example of the sources of markups. Running a hub and
spoke network does involve endogenous fixed and sunk costs, but the possible effects of
mergers on prices suggests a large role for antitrust policy in reducing harmful effects on
consumers. The firms that provide local cable television and internet broadband may offer
another example of monopoly rents (from deregulated physical connections at the household
level) plus improved product quality (from new channels and increased speed), with markups
protected in large part by the high fixed cost of adding new wired connections at the household
level. It may well be that consumer surplus (and "output") is increasing in this industry, but not
by as much as it would under alternative regulatory structures.

In other industry studies, higher concentration and markups do not seem to be accompanied by
any improvement in quality. For example, many studies have shown that hospital consolidation
between close competitors leads to substantial increases in price and markups without
improving quality (for example, Town and Vistnes 2001; Capps, Dranove, and Satterthwaite
2003; Gowrisankaran, Nevo, and Town 2015; Ho and Lee 2017), or reductions in quality in
price-regulated markets such as Medicare or the English National Health Service (Kessler and
McClellan 2000; Cooper et al. 2011; Gaynor, Moreno-Serra, and Propper 2013; Gaynor,
Propper, and Seiler 2016). For an overall review of this literature, see Gaynor, Ho, and Town
(2015). With the exception of the associations identified by Cooper at al. (2019), research has
not focused on identifying the major industry-wide factors driving higher hospital prices or
markups. There has been little work examining entry or recovering fixed costs (for an exception
see Abraham, Gaynor, and Vogt, 2007), or whether fixed costs are rising. Moreover, it should
be noted that separately identifying costs and rents is a challenge in the hospital industry. Many
hospitals (particularly the largest) are not-for-profit, thus rents tend to be spent and appear as
expenses (as is true for not-for-profit firms in general). Identifying and understanding the major
factors driving increased hospital markups is a key next step in understanding this market.

A final issue is that when markups are measured as a ratio of prices to marginal costs, the rise in
markups may be driven by very low marginal costs, as in a number of media and internet
markets. For example, Waldfogel (2015) documents that in the recorded music industry,
digitization lowered marginal distribution costs and the fixed costs of production, although
"quality" is still produced via endogenous fixed costs. These lower costs led to an explosion of
product variety. In such media and internet information markets, the "macro-production
markup," measured as the ratio of price to marginal cost, may go to near infinity as marginal


                                                9
cost of product the product declines to near zero, as long as price remains clearly positive.
Similarly, monopsony power can in principle also be a driver of increased markups via reduced
marginal costs.

We have provided examples of three kinds of results from detailed industry studies. In some
cases like wholesaling), investments may be generating product quality improvement together
with a shift from marginal to fixed costs, generating an improvement in consumer welfare. In
other industries like airlines, markups may be associated with some quality improvement, but
some mergers have also clearly resulted in price increases. In other markets like hospitals,
there is no evidence that consolidation is resulting in systematic product quality improvements,
or clear cost reductions, but there is strong evidence of price increases (or quality reductions).
The diversity of results across these industries is evidence of the value and richness that can be
obtained from careful industry studies. It also serves as a caution of the difficulties of drawing
useful inferences from aggregate studies across industries.

Industrial organization industry studies, taken as a whole, do provide evidence against some
particularly simple or stylized models. These studies clearly reject models that would closely
approximate perfect competition. Similarly, these studies emphasize important game-theoretic
oligopoly features of markets, rejecting simple interpretations associated with the "Chicago
School" of antitrust (for example, Bork 1978).

Instead, these industrial organization studies also suggest a nuanced reality, in which large
firms are in fact changing products and production methods, including the mix of marginal and
fixed costs, over time. The industry studies seem to suggest is that "fixed costs" are often
actually sunk costs that are built up through time via investments in networks, product quality,
geographic location, and so forth. An interesting question is how this possible reallocation from
marginal to fixed costs affects labor demand. Another important question is whether the share
of labor in variable cost is higher or lower than the share of labor in fixed costs.4

Of course, the discussion here covers just a small collection of industry studies. In our view,
industry-level studies are required to understand the forces shaping markets in the modern
economy, and thereby to craft appropriate policies. These studies will have to take on broader
segments of the overall economy if they are to fully respond to questions about aggregate

4
 As a contrast with this portrayal of evolving industries, a number of studies of mark-ups are
based on stronger assumption. As one example, consider the (intentionally) highly stylized
model of Autor et al. (2017). In that model, firms exogenously differ in their Hicks-neutral
productivity shocks. There is a fixed labor requirement, common to all firms, which explains
the negative correlation between firm size and the labor share. Motivated by the results from
their firm-level production-side data, changes in industry average markups over time are then
explained by a reallocation of market share (as through lower trade or search costs). As more
consumers purchase from the largest firms, the fixed labor requirement is spread over yet more
units, raising markups still further.



                                               10
markup trends. Also, while many existing industrial organization industry-level studies provide
information on the level of markups, we would welcome a surge of industry-level research
focused on trends in markups, to discover where they are rising and why. By their nature,
detailed industry studies will tend to produce estimates and explanations for markups that are
more complex than those advanced in studies making use of broad-based financial accounting
data or Census data aggregated across large numbers of firms in very different industries.
Focusing at the industry level allows researchers to study the ways in which firms seek to create
competitive advantages with a mixture of strategies, including investment in fixed capital,
changes in product quality, geographic advantage, and consolidation by merger.


Factors Leading to Rising Markups

It seems plausible that some of the primitives modern industrial organization--cost, conditions,
demand conditions, and pricing environment-- have been changing over the last few decades.
For example, the adoption of information technology is often a fixed cost involved hardware,
such as servers, or software, such as enterprise resource planning software. Thus, firms and
industries that have had information technology grow in importance have rising fixed costs,
which leads to rising markups, and can lead to markets dominated by one or a small number of
large firms. On the demand side, growing importance of network effects can lead to one or a
small number of firms dominating a market and thus commanding higher markups. With regard
to firm conduct, increased managerial exploitation of market power can lead to rising markups,
as can the documented slow decline in US antitrust enforcement (for example, Baker 2019). In
this section, we consider the available evidence on the factors that have been leading to rising
markups.


Rising Fixed and Sunk Costs

We have already mentioned models of Shaked and Sutton (1982) and Sutton (1991), where
fixed (and often sunk) costs at the firm level partly reflect endogenous choices of product
quality, production techniques, and marketing. Under the assumptions of these models,
industries do not deconcentrate even as market size grows, because there is always an
incentive for some firm to become large, relative to the market, by making a sunk investment
that drives up demand for its product.

Sutton (1991) gives examples where the better product does not involve much higher marginal
cost (or can even involve reduced marginal cost) and therefore competition from lower quality
competitors does not compete away the markup of the firm producing the high quality product.
He argues that, during the period from the late nineteenth to mid twentieth century,
decreasing transportation costs and national marketing strategies allowed many consumer
goods products to trade higher fixed costs for national sales dominance. These firms
maintained high markups and high national market shares in the absence of important scale
economies of production. If Census data on production had existed during that period, it might


                                               11
have revealed a trend of increasing markups in consumer goods markets, with much of the
markup attributable to a small number of "superstar" products.

What changes in the last few decades might allow firms to pursue a similar strategy of higher
fixed costs and sustained market dominance? If a rise in the quality of services can be achieved
with higher spending on information technology, and if a large component of information
technology spending represents fixed costs, then the proportion of fixed to variable cost will be
rising across the decades of increasing technological advancement. For example, Bessen (2017)
provides evidence that customized software ­ used routinely by large corporations today ­
requires large upfront fixed sunk costs. Calligaris, Criscuolo and Luca (2018) find higher markups
in more digitally intensive industries, and in addition find that differences in markups between
digitally intensive and non-intensive industries have grown.

These patterns are consistent with the hypothesis that rising fixed sunk costs and lower
marginal cost due to increases in information technology investments could be a significant
driver of increasing markups. In studying this hypothesis, how can researchers measure fixed
and sunk costs? As noted, industrial organization economists have often been suspicious of
attempts to directly measure fixed costs from accounting or Census data, because accounting
rules do not follow economic principles for expensing, depreciation, rents on existing assets and
so forth.5 Thus, industry-level studies typically estimate fixed (or sunk) costs as a kind of
residual that explains the observed equilibrium market structure (or pattern of entry and exit)
(Bresnahan and Reiss 1990; Berry 1992; Ciliberto and Tamer 2009; Berry, Eizenberg, and
Waldfogel 2016). Fixed costs are bounded above by the level that would render existing firms
unprofitable, and below by the level that would induce incremental entry.

However, this approach treats fixed costs as exogenous. In some instances, a firm can choose
its fixed costs, like how its level of advertising and promotion, or of research and development.
Treating fixed costs as endogenous is also consistent with evidence for the increased
importance of intangible assets, which include management effectiveness, business processes,
intellectual property, branding, and the effective use of information technology, as
documented by Corrado, Hulton and Sichel (2009), Haskel and Westlake (2017), and Bhandari
and McGrattan (2018). Firms' market shares are positively correlated with their intangible
assets, as Crouzet and Eberly (2018) demonstrate. Moreover, they show that in some sectors
like consumer goods, higher intangible assets are positively correlated with higher productivity,
while in other sectors like health care, intangible assets are correlated with higher measured
markups. A rising role of intangible assets will further complicate the use of accounting data to
discuss markups, since these assets may be treated in an inconsistent fashion in accounting
data (Yurokoglu 2018).

The welfare consequences of increasing sunk and fixed costs in an industry are complex,
probably industry-specific, and may vary across antitrust and regulatory regimes. On the

5
 This point is related to arguments in Fisher and McGowan (1985) and Schmalensee (1989) about general
problems with depreciation, accounting data, and measured components of profit and cost.


                                                     12
consumer side, higher fixed costs may enable a rise in product quality, which is generally good.
However, fixed costs may be duplicated by competitors, such that oligopoly generates
excessive entry from the social welfare perspective (Mankiw and Whinston 1986; Berry and
Waldfogel 1999). Moreover, better products may contribute to higher markups, especially if the
high fixed (and/or sunk) costs limit the number of competing firms and drive up prices.
Alternatively, higher markups can reflect falling marginal costs, rather than higher prices.

On the firm side, fixed costs must be offset by positive markups in order for the firm to survive.
Therefore, industries with high markups may or may not be profitable. Profits in excess of those
necessary to cover current fixed costs might reflect a return on past investments; indeed, the
expectation of a current stream of profits may have been necessary to bring forth a socially
valuable innovation. In other cases, current profits may reflect a rent on past luck or may result
from a past sunk investment is that preventing socially desirable entry (for the modern game
theory of sunk costs and entry barriers, see Tirole 1988). It is difficult to see how cross-industry
studies can capture the industry-level complexity that results from high fixed and sunk costs.

The distributional consequences of higher fixed costs, perhaps combined with lower marginal
costs, can be equally complex. For example, it is easy to imagine cases where labor is
particularly associated with variable product costs, while (for example) fixed costs are
associated with the employment of software engineers and with returns to various forms of
intellectual property. In some cases, imputed fixed costs may reflect rents that do not serve an
efficiency-enhancing purpose. For example, one possible rent involves a return to a (possibly
lucky) first-mover advantage in a network industry, as we discuss in the next subsection.

In our opinion, both industry studies and accounting data studies point to the broad category of
endogenously increasing fixed and sunk costs as an important, perhaps the most important,
source of the apparent pattern of rising global markups. In the next section, we focus on the
specific case of network effects, which create particular complexities.


Network Effects

Network effects have become important in many sectors of the economy. In particular, they are
often strongly present in digital platforms (US Bureau of Economic Analysis 2018), where many
consumers rely on platforms with user-provided content regarding restaurants, hotels, traffic,
and news. Network effects lead to markets dominated by one or a small number of firms, as in
social media.

A rising importance of network effects can lead to weaker competition and thus higher
markups in various ways. First, network effects tend to lead to consumer lock-in, enhancing
firms' short-run market power while making new entry difficult. Second, network effects can
make fixed costs more important, including expansions of information technology, distribution,
delivery and promotion in order to reach a larger number of customers. Third, the aggregation
of eyeballs and consumer information by platforms may give an advantage to the dominant


                                                13
business in selling advertising, and thus perpetuate a concentrated market structure
(Bergemann and Bonatti 2018). For these reasons, the locus of competition in network markets
often turns out to be for the market, not in the market. Once a firm has come to dominate a
network market. its market position is not easily eroded.

The lucky first-mover in a market with network effects will benefit from these effects. Thus,
markups in this instance include a rent on that luck, and there is no reason to believe that the
(expected) market rent was required to generate the initial investment effort. Of course, the
network can also create substantial consumer surplus. The policy question is whether some
alternative antitrust or regulatory structure could improve the market outcome, while retaining
the consumer benefits.


Growing Monopsony Power

Claims have been made that the concentration of employers is growing in labor markets, and
that more concentrated employer markets are associated with lower wages (Azar, Marinescu,
and Steinbaum 2019; Azar, Marinescu, Steinbaum, and Taska 2018; Naidu, Posner, and Weyl
2018).6 To the extent that these forces trended toward more monopsony power or more
exercise of monopsony power over the last decades, the declining cost of labor, typically a
variable cost, may have contributed to the trend in markups.

There is long-standing evidence of monopsony power in some labor markets, notably the
markets for nurses (Sullivan 1989; Currie, Farsi, and MacLeod 2005; Staiger, Spetz, and Phibbs
2010) teachers (Ransom and Sims 2010), and fast food workers (Card and Krueger 1994).
However, there is evidence that the extent of monopsony power in the labor market, has
grown over the years (Manning 2003). Some possible reasons include the decline in union
membership, in the powers available to unions, and in legal remedies available to individual
workers, all of which have weakened worker bargaining power (Farber et al 2018). There is also
some evidence of the use of outsourcing by firms ("fissuring") to facilitate wage discrimination
in a way that leads to lower average wages and higher markups (Weil 2011). There is
speculation that the rise of the "gig" economy may be holding down worker wages as well
(Dube 2010, Chen et al 2017). Another feature of labor markets that likely grew over the last
decades but has only been uncovered recently is the use of non-compete clauses by employers
in some industries (Starr, Prescott, and Bishara 2018), particularly for low wage workers in fast
food and other franchises (Krueger and Ashenfelter 2018). 7


6
  The finding is not universal. Lipsius (2018) and Rinz (2018) find that employer concentration has fallen, implying
that monopsony power has fallen, not risen.
7
  The Washington State Attorney General has challenged these noncompete agreements and by 2019 had
achieved many dozens of settlements to not enforce and remove the provisions. Also, the Department of Justice
has recently prosecuted multiple cases of firms explicitly agreeing not to hire away each other's workers (the "no
poach" agreements), as well as naked collusion to fix wages that occurred over many years. One of the first of this
recent group of cases involved many of the top employers among the Silicon Valley tech firms such as Apple,


                                                         14
A main difficulty in this area is that most of the existing studies of monopsony and wages follow
the structure-conduct-performance: that is, they argue that greater concentration of
employers can be applied to labor markets, and then proceed to estimate regressions of wages
on measures of concentration. For the same reasons we discussed previously, studies like this
may provide some interesting descriptions of concentration and wages, but are not ultimately
informative about whether monopsony power has grown and is depressing wages.

Recent efforts are being made to take a more sound empirical approach. Card et al. (2018)
reviews the evidence on labor markets and reconciles a variety of empirical results via a model
of "differentiated jobs" that recalls industrial organization models of differentiated products.
Azar, Berry, and Marinescu (2019) estimate an industrial organization style model of
differentiated job vacancy demand at the level of the job applicant applying for a specific job
title within a commuting zone. They find moderately positive levels of firm market power even
in labor markets that are not highly concentrated. However, this work estimates levels of labor
market power, not trends over time.

Linkages can also arise between mergers and increased monopsony power. Prager and Schmitt
(2019) examine the effect of mergers in the hospital industry, and find evidence that mergers
between nearby hospitals depress wage growth for workers with hospital job-specific skills (but
not for workers with general job market skills).

At present, the extent to which any decreased competition in the labor market is a major driver
of increased markups is not clear, and research which sheds light on this question would be
most welcome.

Increased Rent Seeking

Yet another potential explanation for higher markups that is that managers are increasingly
better trained (perhaps in economics or MBA programs) to find and exploit situations where
their firms face inelastic demand. Firms in many industries including airlines, entertainment,
and retail have improved over time in their ability to price discriminate, presumably raising
some markups while lowering others, with an uncertain implication for the distribution of
markups. Traditionally, the economics profession has treated these situations as arbitrage of
informational rents that guide economic activity and lead to an increase in efficiency (an idea
attributed to Friedrich von Hayek). But once exposed to public scrutiny, these instances are
often portrayed and perceived as exploitation of consumers.

Some firms have gone beyond more aggressive price discrimination, and have raised prices by
engaging in holdup of a relationship-specific investment or by reneging on agreements that are
not sufficiently protected by contract. As one example, pharmaceutical industry CEO Martin

Google, Adobe, Intel, Intuit, and Pixar (In re: High-Tech Employee Antitrust Litigation, N.D. Cal. Case 11-CV-02509-
LHK [2015]).


                                                         15
Shkreli sharply increased the price of a generic drug in a marketplace where it takes several
years for a competitor to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration (Pollack 2015). In
another, holders of standard essential patents demanded high royalties from handset makers
after networks implementing the standard were fully built out and could not be changed (Scott
Morton and Shapiro 2016). In yet another example, hedge funds bought up the television
stations that were needed to re-pack spectrum, so it could be used by wireless carriers, and
strategically withheld those stations to raise the price of their assets (Doraszelski et al 2017).
Physicians who are out-of-network with a certain insurer charge patients in the in-network
hospital where they work three times as much as in-network physicians would charge (for an
example of out-of-network billing for emergency care, see Cooper, Scott Morton, and Shekita
2018). When one of the outsourcing companies that perfected this strategy was written up in
the New York Times and the strategy became public (Creswell, Abelson, and Sanger-Katz. 2017),
insurers used the subsequent call for regulation to improve their bargaining positions in new
contracts and the outsourcing company's profits fell.

To the extent that firms and their managers are becoming more sophisticated in their pursuit of
inelastic niches where they can create and exploit market power, the relevant markups will rise.
Research that sheds some light on the extent of this phenomenon, whether it has grown, and
whether and to what extent it has contributed to increased markups would be beneficial.


Globalization

Although globalization is not our focus here, it may also be part of the explanation of rising
markups for the highest markup firms. A market that contains some firms that globalize and
others that do not could generate this pattern. Firms with a global supply chain will have access
to lower cost inputs and may then achieve economies of scale, leading to a higher markup. If
that globalized firm gains share at the expense of domestic rivals, industry markups will rise.
Thus, increased globalization may play a role in both increasing markups and the unequal
distribution of the increase. Uncovering what effects globalization may have had on markets
and markups seems a potentially fruitful area for future research.


Antitrust Enforcement

There were undoubtedly some cases of overly aggressive enforcement of antitrust laws in the
1960s and `70s: in one much-discussed case, courts upheld blocking a merger that would have
resulted in a combined market share of 7.5 percent (United States v. Von's Grocery Co., 384 U.S.
270 [1966]). However, courts in recent decades have been steadily dialing back antitrust
enforcement, both through economic assumptions built in to jurisprudence as well as practical
changes such as raising the pleading standards for plaintiffs (Baker 2019; Gavil 2019). Mergers
in markets with more than two firms are much less likely to be challenged now than in past
decades (Kwoka 2016)). The recent Ohio v. American Express Co. (138 S. Ct. 2274 (2018))



                                               16
Supreme Court ruling has been interpreted by some as possibly ending the government's ability
to bring an antitrust case against a platform that operates in a two-sided market (Khan 2019).

The decline of antitrust enforcement in recent decades may be a contributor to rising markups,
although more research is needed to substantiate this conclusion firmly (Kulick 2017; Baker
2019; Wollmann 2019). However, antitrust enforcement and competition policy is important in
this context, because unlike shifts in fixed costs and technology, it can be directly addressed via
policy. Moreover, regardless of the role of changing antitrust enforcement in explaining a rise in
markups, higher markups imply a world that may require increased antitrust vigilance.

Here, we provide an overview of some commonly-mentioned concerns about under-
enforcement of antitrust that are especially applicable to the large, high-markup firms most at
issue: vertical restraints, coordinated effects, digital platforms, exploitation of intellectual
property, acquisitions of potential competitors, and exclusionary conduct. These issues have
been discussed in more detail in a number of other policy venues, including this issue (Shapiro
2019, Scott Morton et al 2019, Federico et al 2019, Baker 2019). We then offer some
concluding thoughts on the appropriate perspective of antitrust enforcement given the current
state of knowledge in these areas.

Some Specific Concerns about Underenforcement of Antitrust

Vertical restraints describes contracts between firms with a vertical relationship that may have
anticompetitive effects depending on the type of restraint, the party using it, market structure,
and so forth (Segal and Whinston 2000; Crawford et al. 2017; Conlon and Mortimer 2013; Asker
2016). These issues seem potentially important in the current situation where certain markets
have come to be dominated by one or a small number of large firms. A common situation is
that high-markup platform firms succeed by offering valuable (often digital) goods and services
to consumers, but then competition issues arise when the platform either begins to supply the
complementary products itself, or contracts over price, quality, or technology in a way that
limits the independent complements on the platform. Raising rivals' costs, foreclosure, and
exclusion are among the possible theories of harm that can be raised in this setting. The
Vertical Merger Guidelines of the US Department of Justice were last updated in 1984, and the
federal agencies rarely bring such cases. The government litigated its first vertical merger case
in 40 years in 2018, arguing that proposed vertical merger between AT&T and Time Warner was
anticompetitive, but lost convincingly at the federal appeals court level (US v. AT&T INC.,
DirecTV Group Holdings, LLC, and Time Warner Inc. 310 F.Supp.3d 161 [2018]).

Coordinated effects refers to a situation in which concentrated industries or sectors may be
more susceptible to tacit collusion (Tirole 1988). Recent empirical work has found tacit collusion
to be unexpectedly prevalent (Miller and Weinberg 2017; Ciliberto and Williams 2015; Schmitt
2018), but in general the economics profession has contributed little to this policy area. In a
world with trends towards concentration, more understanding and measurement of tacit
collusion would be valuable.



                                                17
The rise of digital platforms has been an important change in the economy, sparking rising calls
from some quarters for antitrust action against firms like Amazon, Facebook, and Google (Khan
2016, Wu 2018, Hughes 2019 ). The European Commission has been active in this area, raising
issues that include allegations of exclusionary bundling, anticompetitive exclusive contracts,
vertical foreclosure, and anticompetitive mergers. In our view, establishing robust theories of
harm and tools to evaluate the evidence for or against digital platforms are valuable activities
for the antitrust agencies as well as academic economists. However, US antitrust agencies have
not been active in this area with the exception of the investigation by the Federal Trade
Commission (US Federal Trade Commission 2013) that led to a settlement but no case.

Firms may use patents or other intellectual property to engage in exclusionary conduct in
related markets. For example, branded drugs have long used patent litigation settlements as a
way to pay generic rivals to stay out of the market (called "reverse payments" or "pay for
delay"). It took 18 years from the time the Federal Trade Commission first identified this
strategy to the time when the US Supreme Court ruled that it can, under certain conditions, be
illegal (FTC v. Actavis, Inc., 570 U. S. 136 [2013]). Pharmaceutical firms have also used "patent
thickets" and "product hopping" (for example, changing dosages or packaging) to prevent
competitive entry or substitution. Patent litigation can be used as a strategy by firms with large
portfolios to discourage investment and innovation or to partner with an incumbent firm to
disadvantage rivals: as one example, the Federal Trade Commission successfully sued
Qualcomm for such tactics involving the use of a key semiconductor device used in
smartphones (for background, see https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-proceedings/141-
0199/qualcomm-inc ). A similar result occurs when a standard-setting organization for an
industry sets a standard that requires the use of an essential patent--and then the firm holding
that patent denies rivals access to patent on fair, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory terms. In
work on causes behind a rise in dominant firms and a fall in US business dynamism, Akcigit and
Ates (2019) suggest that one cause is "a heavy use of intellectual property protection by market
leaders to limit the dissemination of knowledge."

Acquiring potential entrants when they are still small can be a way for a dominant firm to
improve quality, or to fold a complement into its core product--or just to block a future
potential entrant. Traditional antitrust enforcement has often focused more on whether a
merger led to an immediate significant increase in market share, not on how it affected
potential or nascent competition. But when a market is subject to strong network effects,
competition is for the market, and the possibility that the nascent entrant could contest the
incumbent is an important source of competition. Frequently mentioned anecdotes include big
tech companies' acquisitions of small firms in adjacent product markets, such as Facebook's
acquisitions of Instagram and WhatsApp. In a study of the pharmaceutical industry,
Cunningham, Ederer and Ma (2018) conclude that about 6.4 percent of pharma acquisitions are
"killer acquisitions," where the acquisition eliminates entry by a potential competitor. However,
both the probability and the value of potential entry are uncertain, and research on identifying
or measuring these effects in different settings would be extremely useful.




                                               18
"Exclusionary conduct" arises when large incumbent firms with low marginal costs undertake
activities that deter entry or disadvantage existing rivals. Two of the many possible examples of
exclusionary conduct especially relevant in the current context include most-favored-nation
contracts and refusals to deal.

"Most-favored-nation" (MFN) contracts (a term lifted from international trade treaties) specify
that a seller must give the buyer who has such a contract as good a price as that seller gives to
any other buyer. This may appear pro-competitive. But notice that MFN makes price discounts
more costly for the seller ­ any discount to any other buyer must also be provided to the buyer
with the MFN contract. For example, imagine the firms interacting on a large digital platform,
like hotels, agree to sign an MFN contract with the platform (Boik and Corts 2016; Baker and
Scott Morton 2018). If a rival digital platform with a lower commission (say, 10 percent instead
of 25 percent) enters and contracts with the same hotels, the hotel room must be priced as
high on the low-margin platform as it is on the high-margin platform, and the lower-cost
distribution channel may fail to gain traction. These practices have been challenged in Europe,
but not in the United States (Mantovani, Piga, and Reggiani 2019).

Refusals to deal and foreclosure can be an attempt to weaken competition. The EC's case
against Google's search engine illustrates this issue (European Commission 2017). Suppose a
provider of local service listings is a complement to general search; namely, a consumer can
search on Google and find a Yelp page that holds the desired information. Displaying the Yelp
page and letting consumers learn about it may allow Yelp to establish an independent
relationship with consumers. The platform can use its rules to determine the display of organic
results and the selection of ads shown, and in this way may be able to steer consumers away
from such a complement. The platform could have a financial interest in doing so because of
the risk that consumers learn to go straight to Yelp, reducing single-homing and the market
power of the platform. This strategy might be even more attractive if the platform sells its own
(vertically integrated) similar local search product, and can divert revenues from local search
advertising to itself by steering customers to its own product. (Or perhaps it could raise its
rival's costs by requiring it to purchase an ad in order to obtain consumers.) Foreclosure
strategies of this type can reduce competition in either the underlying platform market, or
possibly in competition among services provided on the platform.

As the economy becomes increasingly digital, possessing data can be another way to limit
competition. For example, health care systems often refuse or make it difficult to transmit
patients' data to alternative health care providers, with the explicit goal of retaining patients
(Savage, Gaynor, and Adler-Milstein 2019). Anticompetitive use of data is another method of
exclusion. The US Department of Justice recently settled a case against a large hospital system
for employing clauses in their contracts with insurers that prevented insurers from providing
patients information or incentives that would direct them to lower cost or higher value
hospitals (United States and the State of North Carolina v. Carolinas Healthcare System,
https://www.justice.gov/atr/case/us-and-state-north-carolina-v-charlotte-mecklenburg-
hosptial-authority-dba-carolinas). Another such case is being pursued by the Attorney General



                                                19
in California (People of the State of California Ex. Rel. Xavier Becerra v. Sutter Health,
https://oag.ca.gov/system/files/attachments/press_releases/Sutter%20Complaint.pdf).

Moving Forward with Antitrust in a Situation of Uncertainty

Much of the evidence regarding rising markups seems to us plausible and worthy of further
investigation, although uncertainty remains as to the most important causes of rising markups.
Despite these uncertainties, the research base does provide some guidance for policy (for a
decision theoretic approach to antitrust enforcement, see Baker 2015). We do know that
competitive markets are generally beneficial for consumers. We also know that market power,
once acquired, can be durable due to many of the economic and strategic issues discussed
above. In particular, a substantial game-theoretic literature emphasizes the role of sunk costs in
maintaining high markups (Tirole 1986). There are many examples in US economic history,
including IBM and Microsoft, in which substantial market power persisted over decades.

The potential benefits of a number of forms of antitrust enforcement are robust to the
magnitudes that future research on these issues may uncover. If the goal is to reduce market
power, the most useful focus for antitrust enforcers is likely to be on conditions of entry,
including acquisitions by existing of recent or potential entrants, along with exclusionary
conduct. Without rules to ensure there is competition on the merits, existing market power
can be leveraged to create future market power and generate the durability that appears in the
data. Consistent vigorous antitrust enforcement can ensure that concentration does not
perpetuate itself because entry is not protected.

       It's worth remembering that government agencies besides the antitrust authorities at
       the Federal Trade Commission and the US Department of Justice can have significant
       impacts on entry, market structure, and competition. For example, rules from the Food
       and Drug Administration hinder entry of biosimilar drugs. The Department of Health and
       Human Services permits higher fees to be charged for the same physician service if the
       service is provided in a doctor's office owned by a hospital, and permits hospitals (but
       not doctors) to obtain substantial discounts on expensive drugs (like those for treating
       cancer) that are administered by physicians (the "Section 340B" program). These
       policies unintentionally encourage consolidation, since hospitals and physician practices
       can share the rents from these regulatory loopholes if the practices are owned by
       hospitals. Rules from the US Department of Transportation (2017) affect the
       transparency of airline fees. The US Patent and Trademark Office's (PTO) decisions to
       issue low quality patents enables the activities of patent trolls. The Federal
       Communications Commission sets rules that give multichannel video programming
       distributors greater or lesser power to limit content provision by online video providers.
       At the state level, legislatures respond to the desires of incumbent car dealers by
       passing laws preventing the entry of new car brands into the state (Tesla Motors, Inc. v.
       Johnson et al., W.D. Mich. Civil Action 16-cv-1158 [2017]; Gavil, Feinstein, and Gaynor
       2014).



                                               20
In summary, a wave of industry-level econometric studies are needed to help us understand
shifts in mark-ups, the underlying causes, and more broadly how markets in our modern
economy are functioning and evolving. Many of the likely causes of rising markups in this paper
involve economic shifts that do not have any direct policy response. But whatever the
underlying cause and size of rising markups, there are several policy levers along the lines
mentioned here that could be used to promote competition.




                                              21
References
Abraham, Jean M., Gaynor, Martin, and William B. Vogt. 2007. "Entry And Competition In Local
        Hospital Markets." Journal of Industrial Economics, 55(2): 265-288.
Akcigit, Ufuk, and Sina T. Ates. 2019. "What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?" Becker
        Friedman Institute Working Paper. April 15. https://bfi.uchicago.edu/working-
        paper/what-happened-to-u-s-business-dynamism/./
Asker, John. 2016."Diagnosing Foreclosure Due to Exclusive Dealing." Journal of Industrial
        Economics. 64(3): 375-410.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2017.
        "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms." NBER Working Paper No.
        23396.
Azar, José , Steven Berry, and Ioana Marinescu. 2019. "Estimating Labor Market power."
        Unpublished.
Azar, José , Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall Steinbaum. 2017. "Labor Market
        Concentration."NBER Working paper No. 24147.
Azar, José , Ioana Marinescu, Marshall Steinbaum, and Bledi Taska. 2018. "Concentration in US
        Labor Markets: Evidence from Online Vacancy Data." NBER Working Paper No. 24395.
Baker, Jonathan B. 2015. "Taking the Error Out of 'Error Cost' Analysis: What's Wrong with
        Antitrust's Right." Antitrust Law Journal.
Baker, Jonathan B. 2019. The Antitrust Paradigm. Harvard University Press.
Baker, Jonathan B., and Fiona Scott Morton. 2018. "Antitrust Enforcement Against Platform
        MFNs." The Yale Law Journal 127 (7): 1742-2203.
Barkai, Simcha. 2017. "Declining Labor and Capital Shares." Working Paper, London Business
        School.
Benmelech, Efraim, Nittai Bergman, and Hyunseob Kim. 2019. Strong Employers and Weak
        Employees: How Does Employer Concentration Affect Wages? Working Paper,
        Northwestern University.
Bergemann, Dirk , and Alessandro Bonatti. 2018. "Markets for Information: An Introduction."
        Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 2142.
Berry, Steven T. 1990. "Airport Presence as Product Differentiation." The American Economic
        Review 80 (2): 394-399.
Berry, Steven. 1992. "Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry." Econometrica
        60(4): 889­917.
Berry, Steven, Mike Carnall and Pablo Spiller (2006), "Airline Hubbing, Costs and Demand," in
        Advances in Airline Economics, Vol. 1: Competition Policy and Anti-Trust, D. Lee, ed.
        Elsevier Press 183-214.
Berry, Steven, Alon Eizenberg, and Joel Waldfogel. 2016. "Optimal product variety in radio
        markets." RAND Journal of Economics ( RAND Corporation) 47 (3): 463-497.
Berry, Steven, and Philip Haile. 2014. "Identification in Differentiated Products Markets Using
        Market Level Data." Econometrica vol. 82(5): 1749-1797.



                                              22
Berry, Steven, and Joel Waldfogel. 1999. "Free Entry and Social Inefficiency in Radio
        Broadcasting." The RAND Journal of Economics 30(3): 397-420.
Bessen, James E. 2017. "Information Technology and Industry Concentration." Boston University
        School of Law, Law and Economics Research Paper No. 17-41.
Bhandari, A, and E R McGrattan. 2018. "Sweat Equity in U.S. Private Business." NBER Working
        Paper No. 24520. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 560.
Boik, Andre, and Kenneth S. Corts. 2016. "The Effects of Platform MFNs on Competition and
        Entry." The Journal of Law and Economics 59 (1): 105-134.
Borenstein, Severin. 1990. "Airline Mergers, Airport Dominance, and Market Power." American
        Economic Review 80(2): 400-404.
Borenstein, Severin. 2011. "Why Can't US Airlines Make Money?" American Economic Review
        101(3): 233-237.
Bork, Robert H. 1978. The Antitrust Paradox. New York: Free Press.
Bresnahan, Timothy f. 1989. "Empirical studies of industries with market power." In Handbook
        of Industrial Organization, edition 1, volume 2, , edited by Richard Schmalensee &
        Robert Willig , 1011-1057. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Peter C. Reiss. 1990. "Entry in Monopoly Markets." The Review of
        Economic Studies 57(4): 531-553.
California Attorney General Press Release. 2018. "Attorney General Becerra Sues Sutter Health
        for Anti-competitive Practices that Increase Prices for California Families." State of
        California Department of Justice - Office of the Attorney General. March 30.
        https://oag.ca.gov/news/press-releases/attorney-general-becerra-sues-sutter-health-
        anti-competitive-practices-increase.
Calligaris, Sara, Chiara Criscuolo, and Marcolin Luca . 2018. "Mark-Ups in the Digital Era." OECD
        Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2018/10.
Capps, Cory, David Dranove, and Mark Satterthwaite. 2003. "Competitition and Market Power
        in Option Demand Markets." RAND Journal of Economics 34(4): 737­63.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2018. "Firms and Labor Market
        Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory." Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1): S13-S70.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the
        Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania." American Economic Review 84 (4):
        772-793.
Carlton, Dennis W., William M. Landes, and Richard A. Posner. 1980. "Benefits and Costs of
        Airline Mergers: A Case Study." Bell Journal of Economics 11(1): 65­83.
Chen, M. Keith, Judith Chevalier, Peter Rossi, and Emily Oehlsen. 2017. "The Value of Flexible
        Work: Evidence from Uber Drivers," NBER working paper 23296.
Ciliberto, Federico, and Tamer Elie. 2009. "Market Structure and Multiple Equilibria in Airline
        Markets." Econometrica 77 (6): 1791-1828.
Ciliberto, Federico, and Jonathan W. Williams. 2015. "Does Multimarket Contact Facilitate Tacit
        Collusion? Inference on Conduct Parameters in the Airline Industry." 45 RAND Journal of
        Economics 45(4):764-91.
Conlon, Christopher T., and Julie Holland Mortimer. 2013. "Efficiency and Foreclosure Effects of
        Vertical Rebates: Empirical Evidence." NBER Working Paper 19709.



                                               23
Cooper, Zack, Craig, Stuart V., Gaynor, Martin, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "The Price Ain't
        Right? Hospital Prices and Health Spending on the Privately Insured." The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 134(1): 51­107.
Cooper, Zack, Stephen Gibbons, Simon Jones, and Alistair McGuire. 2011. "Does Hospital
        Competition Save Lives? Evidence from the English NHS Patient Choice Reforms."
        Economic Journal 121 (554): F228­60.
Cooper, Zack , Fiona Scott Morton, and Nathan Shekita. 2018. "Surprise! Out-of-Network Billing
        for Emergency Care in the United States." NBER Working Paper No. 23623.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. 2009. "Intangible Capital and Economic
        Growth." Review of Income and Wealth.
Cowling, Keith , and Michael Waterson. 1976. "Price-Cost Margins and Market Structure."
        Economica, vol. 43, issue 171 267-274.
Crawford, Gregory S. , Robin S. Lee, Michael D. Whinston, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2017. "The
        Welfare Effects of Vertical Integration in Multichannel Television Markets."
        Econometrica 43(171):267-74.
Creswell, Julie , Reed Abelson, and Margot Sanger-Katz. 2017. "The Company Behind Many
        Surprise Emergency Room Bills." The New York Times, July 24 2017.
Crouzet, Nicolas, and Janice Eberly. 2018. "Intangibles, Investment, and Efficiency." AEA Papers
        and Proceedings 108(1): 426­31.
Cunningham, Colleen , Florian Ederer, and Song Ma. 2018. "Killer Acquisitions."
        https://ssrn.com/abstract=3241707.
Currie, Janet , Mehdi Farsi, and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2005. "Cut to the Bone? Hospital
        Takeovers and Nurse Employment Contracts." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58
        (3): 471-93.
De Loecker, Jan , and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. "The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic
        Implications." NBER Working Paper No. 23687.
De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2018a. "Global Market Power." NBER Working Paper No.
        24768.
De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2018b. "Some Thoughts on the Debate about (Aggregate)
        Markup Measurement." http://www.janeeckhout.com/wp-
        content/uploads/Thoughts.pdf.
Demsetz, Harold. 1973. "Industry Structure, Market Rivalry, and Public Policy." Journal of Law
        and Economics 16(1): 1-9.
Doraszelski, Ulrich , Katja Seim, Michael Sinkinson, and Peichun Wang. 2017. "Ownership
        Concentration and Strategic Supply Reduction." NBER Working Paper No. 23034.
Dube, Arindrajit and Ethan Kaplan. 2010. "Does Outsourcing Reduce Wages in the Low-Wage
        Service Occupations? Evidence from Janitors and Guards" Industrial and Labor Relations
        Review. 63(2): 287-306.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. , Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold. 2018. "Kaldor and Piketty's Facts:
        The Rise of Monopoly Power in the United States." NBER Working Paper No. 24287.
European Commission. 2017. Google Search (Shopping), CASE AT.39740
Farber, Henry S., Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. 2018. "Unions and
        Inequality Over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data." NBER Working
        Paper No. 24587.


                                              24
Farrell, Joseph , and Carl Shapiro. 1990. "Horizontal Mergers: An Equilibrium Analysis." The
         American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 1 107-126.
Federico, Giulio, Fiona Scott Morton and Carl Shapiro. Forthcoming. "Antitrust and Innovation:
         Welcoming and Protecting Disruption." Chap. 4 in Innovation Policy and the Economy,
         vol. 20, edited by Josh Lerner and Scott Stern. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fisher, Franklin , and John McGowan. 1983. "On the Misuse of Accounting Rates of Return to
         Infer Monopoly Profits." American Economic Review, vol. 73(1): 82-97.
Furman, Jason. 2015. "Business investment in the United States: Facts, explanations, puzzles,
         and." Technical report, Council of Economic Advisers, Executive Office of the President of
         the United States.
Furman, Jason, and Peter Orszag. 2018. "A Firm-Level Perspective on the Role of Rents in the
         Rise in Inequality." Chap. 1 in Toward a Just Society: Joseph Stiglitz and Twenty-First
         Century Economics, edited by Martin Guzman, 19­47. New York: Columbia University
         Press.
Ganapati, Sharat. 2018a. "Oligopolies, Prices, Output, and Productivity."
         https://ssrn.com/abstract=3030966.
Ganapati, Sharat. 2018b. "The Modern Wholesaler: Global Sourcing, Domestic Distribution, and
         Scale Economies."
         https://www.tuck.dartmouth.edu/uploads/content/Ganapati_Wholesalers_2016_copy.
         pdf.
Gavil, Andy, Debbie Feinstein, and Marty Gaynor. 2014. "Who Decides How Consumers Should
         Shop?" Competition Matters (blog), US Federal Trade Commission, April 24, 2014.
         https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/blogs/competition-matters/2014/04/who-decides-
         howconsumers-should-shop.
Gaynor, Martin , Kate Ho, and Robert J. Town. 2015. "The Industrial Organization of Health-Care
         Markets." Journal of Economic Literature 53(2): 235-284.
Gaynor, Martin, Rodrigo Moreno-Serra, and Carol Propper. 2013. "Death By Market Power:
         Reform, Competition, and Patient Outcomes in the National Health Service." American
         Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(4): 134­66.
Gaynor, Martin, Carol Propper, and Stephan Seiler. 2016. "Free to Choose? Reform, Choice, and
         Consideration Sets in the English National Health Service." American Economic
         Review 106(11): 3521-57.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town. 2015. "Mergers When Prices Are
         Negotiated: Evidence from the Hospital Industry." American Economic Review 105 (1):
         172­203.
Grullon, Gustavo , Yelena Larkin, and Roni Michaely. Forthcoming. "Are U.S. Industries
         Becoming More Concentrated?" Review of Finance.
Gutiérrez, Germán , and Thomas Philippon. 2017a. "Declining Competition and Investment in
         the U.S." NBER Working Paper No. 23583.
Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon. 2017b. "Investment-less Growth: An Empirical
         Investigation." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2017(Fall): 89-169.
Hall, Robert. 2018. "New Evidence on the Markup of Prices over Marginal Costs and the Role of
         Mega-Firms in the US Economy." NBER Working Paper No. 24574.



                                                25
Haskel, Jonathan , and Stian Westlake. 2017. Capitalism without Capital: the rise of the
        intangible economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ho, Kate, and Robin S. Lee. 2017. "Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets." Econometrica
        85(2): 379-417.
Huges, Chris. 2019. "It's Time to Break up Facebook" The New York Times, 9 May 2019.
        https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/opinion/sunday/chris-hughes-facebook-
        zuckerberg.html
Kessler, Daniel P., and Mark B. McClellan. 2000. "Is Hospital Competition Socially Wasteful?"
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(2): 577­615.
Khan, Lina. 2016 "Amazon's Antitrust Paradox" Yale Law Journal 126(3):710-805.
Khan, Lina. 2019. Blog post at https://www.vox.com/the-big-
        idea/2018/7/3/17530320/antitrust-american-express-amazon-uber-tech-monopoly-
        monopsony
Krueger, Alan, and Orley Ashenfelter. 2018. "Theory and Evidence on Employer Collusion in the
        Franchise Sector." NBER Working Paper No. 24831.
Kulick, Robert. 2017. "Ready-to-Mix: Horizontal Mergers, Prices, and Productivity." US Census
        Bureau Center for Economic Studies Working Paper CES-WP-17-38.
        https://ssrn.com/abstract=2637961.
Kwoka John E. Jr. 2016. "The Structural Presumption and the Safe Harbor in Merger Review:
        False Positives, or Unwarranted Concerns?" https://ssrn.com/abstract=2782152.
Lipsius, Ben. 2018. "Labor Market Concentration Does Not Explain the Falling Labor Share."
        https://ssrn.com/abstract=3279007.
Mankiw , N. Gregory, and Michael Whinston. 1986. "Free Entry and Social Inefficiency." Rand
        Journal of Economics 17(1): 48-58.
Manning, Alan. 2003. Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets. Princeton
        NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mantovani, Andrea , Claudio A. Piga, and Carlo Reggiani. 2017. "The Dynamics of Online Hotel
        Prices and the EU Booking.Com Case ." Networks, Electronic Commerce and
        Telecommunications (NET) Institute Working Paper 17-04.
        https://ssrn.com/abstract=3049339.
Miller, Nathan H., and Matthew C. Weinberg. 2017. "Understanding the Price Effects of the
        MillerCoors Joint Venture" Econometrica 85(6): 1763-91.
Pollack, Andrew. 2015. "Drug Goes From $13.50 a Tablet to $750, Overnight," New York Times,
        September 20, 2015. https://www.nytimes. com/2015/09/21/business/a-huge-
        overnightincrease-in-a-drs-price-raises-protests.html.
Posner, Eric A., Glen Weyl, and Suresh Naidu. 2018. "Antitrust Remedies for Labor Market
        Power." Harvard Law Review 132(2): 536­601.
Prager, Elena , and Matt Schmitt. 2018. "Employer Consolidation and Wages: Evidence from
        Hospitals." Washington Center for EquitableGrowth Working Paper Series.
        https://equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/employerconsolidation-and-wages-
        evidence-from-hospitals/.
Ransom, Michael, and David Sims. 2010. "Estimating the Firm's Labor Supply Curve in a "New
        Monopsony" Framework: School Teachers in Missouri." Journal of Labor Economics 28
        (2): 331-355.


                                             26
Raval, Devesh. 2019. "Testing the Production Approach to Markup Estimation."
         https://ssrn.com/abstract=3324849.
Ravenscraft, David. 1983. "Structure-Profit Relationships at the Line of Business and Industry
         Level", Review of Economics and Statistics 65(1): 22-31.
Rinz, Kevin. 2018. "Labor Market Concentration, Earnings Inequality, and Earnings Mobility." US
         Census Bureau Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications Working
         Paper 2018-10. https://www.census.gov/library/workingpapers/2018/adrm/carra-wp-
         2018-10.html.
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter. 2019. "Diverging Trends in
         National and Local Concentration." https://www.princeton.edu/~erossi/DTNLC.pdf.
Savage, Lucia, Martin Gaynor, and Julia Adler-Milstein. 2019. "Digital Health Data and
         Information Sharing: A New Frontier for Health Care Competition?" Antitrust Law
         Journal 82(2): 592-621.
Schmalensee, Richard. 1989. "Inter-industry studies of structure and performance." In
         Handbook of industrial organization, by Richard Schmalensee and Robert Willig, 951-
         1009. Elsevier.
Schmitt, Matt. 2018. "Multimarket Contact in the Hospital Industry." American Economic
         Journal: Economic Policy 361-387.
Scott Morton, Fiona, Pascal Bouvier, Ariel Ezrachi, Bruno Jullien, Roberta Katz, Gene
         Kimmelman, A. Douglas Melamed, and Jamie Morgenstern. 2019. Committee for the
         Study of Digital Platforms: Market Structure and Antitrust Subcommittee Report. Draft.
         Chicago: Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, University of
         Chicago Booth School of Business. https://research.chicagobooth.edu/-
         media/research/stigler/pdfs/market-structure---report-as-of-15-may-2019.pdf.
Scott Morton, Fiona, and Carl Shapiro. 2016. "Patent Assertions: Are We Any Closer to Aligning
         Reward to Contribution?" Chap. 4 in Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 16, edited
         by Josh Lerner and Scott Stern, 89­133. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Segal, Ilya R., and Michael D. Whinston. 2000. "Naked Exclusion: Comment." American
         Economic Review 90 (1): 296-309.
Shaked, Avner , and John Sutton. 1982. "Relaxing Price Competition Through Product
         Differentiation,." The Review of Economic Studies Vol. 49, No. 1, 3-13.
Shapiro, Carl. 2019. "Protecting Competition in the American Economy: Merger Control, Tech
         Titans, Labor Markets" Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Smith, Noah. 2017. "America's Superstar Companies Are a Drag on Growth." Bloomberg,
         September 1, 2017. https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2017-09-01/america-
         s-superstar-companies-are-a-drag-on-growth.
Staiger, Douglas, Joanne Spetz, and Ciaran Phibbs. 2010. "Is There Monopsony in the Labor
         Market? Evidence from a Natural Experiment." Journal of Labor Economics 28 (2): 211-
         236.
Starr, Evan, J.J. Prescott, and Norman Bishara. 2018. "Noncompetes in the U.S. Labor Force." U
         of Michigan Law & Econ Research Paper No. 18-013.
         https://ssrn.com/abstract=2625714.
Sullivan, Daniel. 1989. "Monopsony Power in the Market for Nurses." Journal of Law and
         Economics 32(2): S135-78.


                                              27
Sutton, John. 1991. Sunk costs and market structure, price competition, advertising, and the
         evolution of concentration. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Tirole, Jean. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Town, Robert, and Gregory Vistnes. 2001. "Hospital Competition in HMO Networks." Journal of
         Health Economics 20(5): 733­53.
US Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2018. "Initial estimates Show Digital Economy Accounted for
         6.5 Percent of GDP in 2016." BEA Wire, March 15, 2018.
         https://www.bea.gov/news/blog/2018-03-15/initial-estimates-show-digital-economy-
         accounted-65-percent-gdp-2016.
US Department of Justice. 2016. "Justice Department and North Carolina Sue Carolinas
         Healthcare System to Eliminate Unlawful Steering Restrictions." Department of Justice -
         Office of Public Affairs. June 9. https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-and-
         north-carolina-sue-carolinas-healthcare-system-eliminate-unlawful.
US Department of Transportation. 2017. "DOT withdraws two proposed rulemakings." News
         Digest - DOT 91-17. December 7. https://www.transportation.gov/briefing-
         room/dot9117.
US Federal Trade Commission. 2013. "Google Agrees to Change Its Business Practices to Resolve
         FTC Competition Concerns In the Markets for Devices Like Smart Phones, Games and
         Tablets, and in Online Search. January 3, 2013. https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-
         releases/2013/01/google-agrees-change-its-business-practices-resolve-ftc.
Waldfogel, Joel. 2015. "Digitization and the Quality of New Media Products: The Case of Music."
         In NBER book Economic Analysis of the Digital Economy, by Shane M. Greenstein, and
         Catherine E. Tucker, editors Avi Goldfarb, 407 - 442. University of Chicago Press.
Weil, David. 2011. "Enforcing Labour Standards in Fissured Workplaces: The US Experience."
         The Economic and Labour Relations Review 22(2): 33-54.
Weiss, Leonard. 1990. Concentration and Price. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wollmann, Thomas. 2019. "Stealth Consolidation: Evidence from an Amendment to the Hart-
         Scott-Rodino Act." American Economic Review: Insights, 1(1): 77-94.
Wu, Tim. 2018. The Curse of Bigness: Antitrust in the New Gilded Age. New York: Columbia
         Global Reports.
Yurukoglu, Ali. 2018. Discussion of The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic
         Implications By De Loecker and Eeckhout. NBER Winter Inustrial Organization Meeting,
         February 9-10, 2018, Stanford, CA.




                                               28
