                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE FAILURE OF FREE ENTRY

                                       Germán Gutiérrez
                                       Thomas Philippon

                                      Working Paper 26001
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26001


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We are grateful to Luis Cabral, Larry White, Janice Eberly, Steve Davis, and seminar participants
at NBER, University of Chicago, and New York University for stimulating discussions. We are
grateful to the Smith Richardson Foundation for a research grant. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Germán Gutiérrez and Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Failure of Free Entry
Germán Gutiérrez and Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 26001
June 2019
JEL No. D4,D6,E22,E23,K2,L0,O3,O4

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the entry and exit of firms across U.S. industries over the past 40 years. The elasticity
of entry with respect to Tobin's Q was positive and significant until the late 1990s but declined to
zero afterwards. Standard macroeconomic models suggest two potential explanations: rising entry
costs or rising returns to scale. We find that neither returns to scale nor technological costs can
explain the decline in the Q- elasticity of entry, but lobbying and regulations can. We reconcile
conflicting results in the literature and show that regulations drive down the entry and growth of
small firms relative to large ones, particularly in industries with high lobbying expenditures. We
conclude that lobbying and regulations have caused free entry to fail.


Germán Gutiérrez
NYU Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street
KMC 9-190
New York, NY 10012
ggutierr@stern.nyu.edu

Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu
                                       The Failure of Free Entry
                                    Germán Gutiérrez and Thomas Philippon

                                                        June 2019




                                                          Abstract

       We study the entry and exit of firms across U.S. industries over the past 40 years. The elasticity of entry
       with respect to Tobin's Q was positive and significant until the late 1990s but declined to zero afterwards.
       Standard macroeconomic models suggest two potential explanations: rising entry costs or rising returns
       to scale. We find that neither returns to scale nor technological costs can explain the decline in the Q-
       elasticity of entry, but lobbying and regulations can. We reconcile conflicting results in the literature and
       show that regulations drive down the entry and growth of small firms relative to large ones, particularly
       in industries with high lobbying expenditures. We conclude that lobbying and regulations have caused
       free entry to fail.

The efficiency of a market economy requires free entry. Free entry plays a critical role for allocative effi-
ciency and incentives. As industries adapt to various economic shocks, economic efficiency requires exit
from less profitable industries and entry into more profitable ones. This naturally leads to a Q-theory of
entry, similar to that for investment. Just as scaling up a high-Q firm generates economic value, reallocating
firms from low- to high-Q industries also generates value. This paper studies the evolution of Free Entry in
the US over the past 40 years.
    Figure 1 provides the main motivation for our paper: it shows that free-entry rebalancing has diminished
in the U.S. economy over the past 20 years. Figure 1 shows the elasticity of changes in the number of firms
to the industry-median Q over the past 40 years. This elasticity used to be around 0.4: when the median
value of Q in a particular industry increased by 0.1 (say from 1.1 to 1.2), the standardized change in the
number of firms would be 4% higher over the following 2 years, relative to other industries. Firms used to
enter more and exit less in industries with larger values of Tobin's Q, exactly as free entry would predict.
In recent years, however, this elasticity has been close to zero. The decline ­ further documented in section
1 ­ is consistent across data sources and is stronger outside manufacturing, as we explain in greater detail
below.1 The contribution of our paper is to document and explain this fact.
    Our first contribution is to shift the focus away from the average decline in entry and towards the cross-
sectional allocation of entry, as illustrated in Figure 1. A series of important papers has documented declines
   
    We are grateful to Luis Cabral, Larry White, Janice Eberly, Steve Davis, and seminar participants at NBER, University of
Chicago, and New York University for stimulating discussions. We are grateful to the Smith Richardson Foundation for a research


                                                              1
                            Figure 1: Elasticity of Number of Firms to Q Across U.S. Industries

                                                                                              All




                                               1.5
                             Elasticity of dLogN(t,t+2) w.r.t. Q(t)
                                   0          .5
                                               -.5        1




                                                                      1975         1985         1995         2005

                                                                        CPSTAT (Firm)         QCEW (Estab)          SUSB (Firm)


Note: Figure plots the coefficient t of year-by-year regressions of changes in the log-number of firms/establishments on the
industry-median Q (i.e.,  log (N )j                         j    j
                                   t,t+2 = t + t med (Q)t + t , where j is an industry index). Compustat and SUSB series
based on the number of firms by NAICS-4 industry. QCEW series based on the number of establishments by SIC-3 industry up to
1997 and NAICS-4 industries afterwards. Changes in the number of firms standardized to have mean zero and variance of one to
ensure comparability across data sources. Industry-median Q based on Compustat. See Section 1 and the Data Appendix for more
details.


in entry, exit, and reallocation in the U.S. economy: Davis et al. (2006) find a secular decline in job flows,
and Decker et al. (2015) show that the decline is widespread, including in the traditionally high-growth
information technology sector.
    Focusing on the allocation of entry helps us distinguish among competing explanations for the decline
in dynamism. Moreover, an efficient allocation improves welfare irrespective of the average level of entry.
Several papers, for example, argue that the decline in population (and labor force) growth might be responsi-
ble for the decline in business formation (Hathaway and Litan, 2014; Karahan et al., 2015; Hopenhayn et al.,
2018). Such demographic trends can explain changes in the number of entrepreneurs. But they would strug-
gle to explain the decreasing correlation with Q documented in Figure 1. Even if entrepreneurs are few, they
should still enter first in high-Q industries. In fact, the smaller the aggregate pool of entrepreneurs, the more
important it is to allocate them efficiently. An increase in the shadow price of entrepreneurship increases the
incentives to allocate them to high Q industries. Demographic explanations, therefore, predict a stable or
increasing elasticity of entry to Q, not a decrease as we find in the data.
    The timing of the decrease in figure 1 is also informative. Unlike measures of average entry rates, which



grant.
   
     New York University
   
     New York University, CEPR and NBER
     1
       We show later that panel regression of the elasticity of  log N to Q turns negative after 1999 for services. Covarrubias et al.
(2019) show that the turnover of industry leaders has decreased since the late 1990s; and that the rank correlation of firm has
increased. All of these effects are stronger for service industries. In unreported tests, we also find that future growth of sales no
longer predicts entry after 1999.


                                                                                          2
collapse after 2008, ours is not much affected by the great recession.2 The drop happens earlier, in the early
2000s. This rules out a host of cyclical explanations. For instance, Davis and Haltiwanger (2019) argue that
the collapse of the market for home-equity loans has made it harder for would-be entrepreneurs to get access
to capital. That might explain the decline in the average entry rate after the Great Recession, but it cannot
explain our main fact.
    To study the forces underlying figure 1, we present a simple model of entry in section 2. The model is
driven by three shocks: industry demand (or productivity) shocks as in the macroeconomic literature; entry
cost shocks, as in the IO and political economy literatures; and shocks to production technologies affecting
returns to scale. Holding production technologies constant, we show that the elasticity of entry to Q reveals
the relative importance of demand and entry cost shocks. Demand shocks create a positive correlation
between entry and Q, while entry cost shocks lead to a negative correlation: they decrease the number of
entrants at the same time as they raise the market value of incumbents. A shift from an economy dominated
by demand and productivity shocks, as in standard models, towards an economy where entry cost shocks
play a more important role may, therefore, explain the trends in figure 1. But this is not the only explanation.
Changes in production technology that increase returns to scale also increase the profits and Q of incumbents
while decreasing the entry of smaller firms. So we have two potential explanations for figure 1: either the
importance of entry costs relative to demand and productivity shocks increased; or there has been a shift
towards increasing return technologies ­ perhaps due to the rise of intangibles (Crouzet and Eberly, 2018).
The rest of the paper aims to differentiate between these explanations.
    We begin with returns to scale. We estimate returns to scale at the industry-level by applying the method-
ology of Basu et al. (2006) to the BLS KLEMS accounts ­ while incorporating the instruments of Hall
(2018). We find a small increase after 2000 ­ from 0.78 to 0.8, on average. These estimates follow well-
established approaches but have limited power given the availability of a single time series per industry. To
complement our results, we also estimate returns to scale at the firm-level following Syverson (2004) and
De-Loecker et al. (2019). We do not find evidence of a broad increase in returns to scale over the past 20
years, which is consistent with Ho and Ruzic (2017) for manufacturing in the US, and Salas-Fumás et al.
(2018); Diez et al. (2018) for all industries globally. Moreover, the estimated changes in returns to scale
in our panel of industries are uncorrelated with the decline in the Q-elasticity of entry. We conclude that
returns to scale cannot be the main explanation for the failure of free entry, which leaves us with entry costs.
    Entry costs come in several varieties, from regulation to technology and financial frictions. We construct
proxies for all these costs and we test whether they can explain the failure of free entry. We find strong
support for regulation, and limited or no support for the remaining hypotheses. We therefore focus on
regulations in the remainder of the paper.
    Regulations are endogenous, and the regulation of entry is the subject of a long literature in political
economy. Following Pigou (1932), the public interest theory emphasizes corrective regulations to deal with
externalities and protect consumers. Public choice theorists are suspicious of this idea, however. Stigler
(1971) argues that "as a rule, regulation is acquired by the industry and is designed and operated primarily
for its benefit." In an influential paper, Djankov et al. (2002) document large differences in entry costs across

   2
       If anything, the cross-sectional elasticity of of d log N to Q increases as firms in low-Q industries exit.


                                                                    3
countries, and provide empirical support for the public choice theory. We present five tests to (i) document
the role of regulation in the failure of free entry and (ii) distinguish between benign regulation à la Pigou
(1932) and captured regulation à la Stigler (1971).
    Our first test follows directly from the model. Proposition 2 says that the link between entry and Q
                                                                                  2 ) and the volatility of
depends on the difference between the volatility of industry output growth rates (y
changes in entry costs (2 ). Consistent with the prediction of the model, we find that the variance of output

growth rates has remained stable, while the variance of regulation shocks has increased. Our second test
studies the elasticity of entry to Q directly, and shows that measures of regulation are correlated with the
decline in the elasticity of entry to Q.
    Our third test focuses on large versus small firms. Under the public choice theory, large firms are more
likely to influence regulators. Consistent with this prediction, we find that regulations hurt small firms, and
lead to declines in business dynamism (employment growth, establishment creation, establishment growth)
in small relative to large firms. Regulations do not always harm large firms and this explains why there are
conflicting results in the literature (e.g., Goldschlag and Tabarrok, 2018; Bailey and Thomas, 2015).
    Next, we look at changes in the profitability of incumbents around large regulatory changes. Large
changes are most likely to motivate lobbying efforts. Until 2000, we find that large regulatory changes
were not correlated with changes in incumbents' profits. After 2000, however, we find that large regulatory
changes are systematically followed by significant increases in incumbents' profits. Since regulatory com-
plexity and lobbying expenditures increased after 2000, this suggests that large firms may be increasingly
able to influence regulation to their benefit.
    Our last test, therefore, considers lobbying. We know that lobbying is overwhelmingly done by large
firms. Under the public choice theory, we would expect lobbying to hurt small firms relative to large ones,
and indeed, this is what we find ­ both regressing lobbying directly and instrumenting lobbying with shocks
to incumbents' free cash-flows. When we interact regulation and lobbying expenditures, we find that the
confluence of lobbying and regulation are particularly harmful to small firms.
    Overall, our analyses suggest that rising entry costs and a shift from benign regulation à la Pigou (1932)
towards increasingly captured regulation à la Stigler (1971) explain the failure of free entry.

Related Literature      Free entry is a central concept in economics, and the subject of a large theoretical
literature. One useful way to classify the literature is as follows. A first class of papers considers dynamic
competitive entry models. Jovanovic (1982) and Hopenhayn (1992) are the standard models of competitive
entry with decreasing returns to scale. In Jovanovic (1982) fundamental productivity is constant but un-
known and firms learn it over time as they produce. His theory of noisy selection can then explain why large
firms survive while small firms exit, why inequality among firms tends to grow as a cohort ages, and why
average industry profits and productivity increase over time. In Hopenhayn (1992) fundamental productivity
is observable and follows a Markov chain. His model predicts that older firms are larger, more profitable
and more likely to survive.
    A second class of papers considers non-strategic models of imperfect competition. Spence (1976) and
Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) study the welfare properties of entry and product selection under monopolistic com-


                                                       4
petition. The basic issue is that product selection and entry decisions depend on expected revenues, but rev-
enues differ from welfare in two ways. On the one hand, revenues do not include consumer surplus, therefore
entry can be inefficiently low. On the other hand, revenues are partly diverted from one firm to another, there-
fore entry can be inefficiently high. We have known since Spence (1976) and Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) that
the strength of these two effects depends on the curvature of the utility aggregator.3 Dhingra and Morrow
(2016) generalize the analysis to a setting where firms have different levels of productivity. A key assump-
tion in the non-strategic literature is the free entry condition. It ensures that positive ex-post profits are just
enough to cover sunk entry costs.
     In strategic models, instead, the threat of mutually destructive actions plays a key role in entry decisions.
Salop (1979) explains that "a more efficient entrant may be deterred by an established firm who has sunk
sufficient costs to make his own exit uneconomical, and hence, entry mutually destructive." Wilson (1992)
distinguishes three categories of strategic entry deterrence: (i) preemption, where early investments become
a credible commitment to stay and fight would-be entrants; (ii) signaling with costly actions to send cred-
ible information about private costs; and (iii), predation, by fighting current entrants to build a reputation
to deter future entrants. Entry, exit and reallocation play a key role for productivity growth in deregulated
industry. Olley and Pakes (1996), for instance, find that the reallocation of output from less to more pro-
ductive plants accounts for the entire increase in productivity of the telecommunications equipment industry
after its deregulation.
     The political economy literature has also studied entry costs. Arthur Pigou, building on Marshall, agues
that governments can intervene to correct externalities that create a gap between the social net product
and the private net product of an activity. For instance, Pigou argues that "The private net product of any
unit of investment is unduly large relatively to the social net product in the businesses of producing and
distributing alcoholic drinks. Consequently, in nearly all countries, special taxes are placed upon these
businesses."(Pigou, 1932). Stigler (1971) and the social choice school emphasize the capture of regulators
and politicians. The empirical evidence is that corruption is more prevalent in poor countries, and so are
barriers to entry via regulation. De Soto (1990) discusses the failures of government-enforced regulations
regarding property rights and how underground economies have became a dominating presence in Peru
as a result. Djankov et al. (2002) measure entry cost in a large number of countries. They find that entry
regulations are associated with higher levels of corruption and that countries with more open and accountable
political systems regulate entry less.
     Much of the literature following Djankov et al. (2002) used the U.S. as a benchmark for competitive
markets and free entry. Alesina and Giavazzi (2006) captured well the common wisdom of the late 1990s
and early 2000s when they wrote "If Europe is to arrest its decline [..] it needs to adopt something closer
to the American free-market model."4 However, a growing literature documents a decline in dynamism

    3
       Under constant elasticity of substitution, entry is efficient in partial equilibrium (i.e., with fixed factor supplies). The intuition
is that a planner maximizes u (ci ), while firm i maximizes pi ci . Consumer demand implies pi = u (ci ), hence firm i maximizes
u (ci ) ci . If we define  = cu /u, we can equivalently say that firms maximize u. If  is constant ­ i.e., if preferences are CES ­
this is equivalent to maximizing u. The CES case is often used in application in macro and trade, as in Melitz (2003) for instance.
If  is increasing, existing firms will expand beyond what the planner would choose and, given the resource constraint, firms will
be at the same time too few and too large. Reciprocally, if  is decreasing, there is excess entry.
     4
       Multilateral agencies such as the World Bank and the OECD provided similar advice around the world. In 1999, the OECD


                                                                     5
and a rise in concentration, profits, and markups in the US. Haltiwanger et al. (2011) find that "job creation
and destruction both exhibit a downward trend over the past few decades." Grullon et al. (2019) show
that concentration and profit rates have increased across most U.S. industries (see also Barkai (2017) and
De-Loecker et al. (2019)). Furman (2015) and CEA (2016) argue that the rise in concentration suggests
"economic rents and barriers to competition." Covarrubias et al. (2019) argue that concentration in the US
has shifted from mostly beneficial in the 1980s and 1990s to mostly harmful in the 2000s. Lee et al. (2016)
­ perhaps the closest paper to our work ­ documents that capital stopped flowing to high Q industries in
the 2000s and Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) link the decrease in corporate investment to the decline in
competition. Gutiérrez and Philippon (2018) show that competition policy (i.e., antitrust and regulation)
has weakened in the US relative to Europe. Kozeniauskas (2018) concludes that increasing fixed costs are
the main explanation for the decline in entrepreneurship.5 Jones et al. (2019) estimate a structural DSGE
model with cross-sectional firm and industry data and find that the model-implied entry costs align well with
independent measures of entry regulation and M&A.
    Finally, there is much disagreement in the empirical literature on the impact of regulation on business
dynamism. Bailey and Thomas (2015) argue that dynamism declines in industries with rising regulation,
but Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018) ­ using similar dataset ­ argue that regulation is not to blame for de-
clining business dynamism. A contribution of our paper is to clarify and reconcile this conflicting results by
emphasizing the heterogenous impact of regulations on small and large firms.


1 Evidence on the Q-Elasticity of Entry
In this section we present more details about the allocation of entry. The Appendix summarizes the evolution
of entry, profits and growth of young firms. These average trends are consistent with increasing entry costs,
but may also be explained by other trends (e.g., demographics). As argued in the introduction, however,
demographic trends cannot readily explain the decrease in the allocation of entry towards high Q industries,
which is the focus of our paper.

The Decline in the Q-Elasticity of Entry is Economically and Statistically Significant Let us first
present the empirical regression behind Figure 1. Our baseline statistical model relates the growth in the
number of firms Ntj in industry j between year t and t + 2 to the median value of Tobin's Q in that industry


noted that the "United States has been a world leader in regulatory reform for a quarter century. Its reforms and their results
helped launch a global reform movement that has brought benefits to many millions of people". The idea that free and competitive
markets work best is supported by much empirical evidence, and the gospel of free market spread relatively successfully. For
instance, Djankov et al. (2002) report that it took 15 procedures and 53 days to begin operating legally in France in 1999, versus
3 procedures and 3 days in New Zealand. In 2016, it took only 4 days to start a business in France and 1 day in New Zealand.
Gutiérrez and Philippon (2018) provide a detailed and quantitative discussion of how EU markets became free(er). Over the same
period, however, the entry delay in the US went up from 4 days to 6 days. This is not an isolated indicator. The OECD's Product
Market Regulation indices (discussed in detail later) show clear decreases in entry regulation over the past 20 years in all countries
except the US.
     5
       He uses a model of occupational choice to study the contribution of four explanations to the decline in entrepreneurship:
changes in wages driven by skill-biased technical change; changes in technology facilitating the expansion of large firms; changes
in the fixed costs (which combine sunk entry costs and per-period operating costs); and changes in demographics.


                                                                  6
                                                 Table 1: Elasticity of  log(N ) to Q
Table reports panel regression results of the 2Y log-change in the number of firms on median industry Q. Columns 1-3 include all
industries, columns 4-6 manufacturing industries and columns 7-9 service industries. For each group, the first column focuses on
the pre-1998 period, second on the post-1999 period; third includes the full period but interacts Q with a dummy variable equal
to one after 1999. All regressions based on Compustat, following NAICS-4 industries. Standard errors in brackets clustered at
industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                      All Sectors                             Manufacturing                     Services
                              (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)     (7)       (8)         (9)
                             74-98       99-16        74-16        74-98         99-16        74-16   74-98     99-16       74-16
 M ed(Qt )                  0.389        0.056       0.389        0.441         0.270     0.441       0.339     -0.080     0.339
                            (0.065)     (0.082)      (0.065)      (0.031)       (0.048)   (0.031)     (0.103)   (0.091)    (0.103)
 M ed(Qt )×  99                                     -0.334                                -0.172                           -0.418
                                                     (0.109)                               (0.064)                          (0.139)
 Year FE                       Y           Y           Y             Y             Y            Y       Y         Y           Y
 R2                           .17        .084          .2           .33           .28          .36     .15      .091         .21
 Observations                7,039       4,298       11,337        2,108         1,388        3,496   4,131     2,472       6,603




                                      log Ntj+2 - log Ntj = t +  medij {Qi,t } + j
                                                                                 t,

over the sample period  . We include year dummies t to remove any common aggregate trend between the
two series. Figure 1 plots the elasticity  , estimated year by year. For simplicity, in Table 1 we estimate
the model separately over two samples:  = 1974 - 1998 and  = 1999 - 2016. The overall elasticity has
decreased from 0.39 to 0.056. It remains positive, albeit smaller, in manufacturing. Outside manufacturing,
the point estimate in the recent sample is negative.6

Entry, not Exit, Explains the Decline                  Let us then establish one more basic fact. Figure 1 shows that the
elasticity of the number of firms to the industry-median Q. The growth in the number of firms depends on
entry and exit. Exit rates have in fact been relatively stable (see appendix figure 11). Figure 2 shows that the
decline in the elasticity of  log(N ) to Q is primarily due to a decline in entry sensitivity.


2 Model
Let us now introduce a simple model to help us understand Figures 1 and 2. The key features of the model
are entry costs and returns to scale. Entry costs are taken as fixed technological parameters in most modern
models. Clementi and Palazzo (2016), for instance, build a DSGE model with investment where firms'
dynamics follow Hopenhayn (1992). In their model, a positive shock to productivity (or demand) makes
entry more appealing ­ introducing a form of Q-theory of entry (Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2001). Figure
1 shows that this is no longer a good description of the economy. There are two leading explanations for
the stylized facts that we have documented above: fixed costs and returns to scale. The model will help us
sharpen the predictions of each explanation.
    6
        Appendix figure 15 plots the time series of elasticities by sector.


                                                                     7
                                                    Figure 2: Elasticity of Entry Rate to Q Across U.S. Industries

                                                                                                    All




                                                                   1.5
                            Elasticity of Entry(t,t+2) w.r.t. Q(t)
                                     .5           0 1




                                                                         1975   1985                1995             2005

                                                                                  CPSTAT (Firm)                    SUSB (Estab)


Note: Figure plots the coefficient t of year-by-year regressions of the 2Y firm/establishment entry rate on the median industry
Q i.e., Entry ratej                   j    j
                    t,t+2 =  med (Q)t + t . Both series based on NAICS-4 industries j . Compustat series based on entry of
firms to the dataset. SUSB series based on the average establishment start-up rate. Entry rates standardized to have mean zero and
variance of one to ensure comparability across data sources.


2.1 Setup and Steady State
Consider the following simplified model of an industry. Let Nt be the number of active firms in the industry
in period t. There are three levels of analysis in this model. At the firm level, there is production yi,t and
price pi,t . At the industry level there is an aggregation of firm level outputs and a price index Pt . Finally,
at the aggregate level there is a final good which is a composite of all the industry goods. We normalize the
price index of the final composite good to 1. Let us start by describing the demand system. The industry
good is defined by
                                                                                       -1           Nt      -1
                                                                                 Yt    
                                                                                            =            yi,t di
                                                                                                0

where  > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between different firms in the industry. This demand structure
                                                          N
implies that there exists an industry price index Pt1-  0 t p1   -
                                                               i,t di such that the demand for variety i is

                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                    pi,t
                                                                                  yi,t = Yt
                                                                                                    Pt

At the aggregate level, the demand for the industry good is Yt = (Pt )-¯
                                                                         Dt with Dt = d~t Y
                                                                                          ¯t , where Y
                                                                                                     ¯t
is real GDP and d~t is an industry demand shifter. To keep the model simple, we assume Cobb-Douglas
aggregation across industries so ¯ = 1 and therefore nominal industry output Pt Yt = Dt is exogenous to
industry specific supply shocks.
    Let us now describe the production side. Firms use the final good as an input in production. Let ai be
the productivity of firm i. We assume for simplicity that ai is fixed at the firm level but it is straightforward



                                                                                                8
to extend our results when a changes over time. The profits of firm i are then given by

                                                                yi,t
                                            i,t = pi,t yi,t -        - i
                                                                ai

where i is a fixed operating cost. Firm i sets a markup µ over marginal cost

                                                            1+µ
                                                   pi,t =
                                                             ai
                                µ
so that its profits are i =        a-1 P  Y - i . If we assume monopolistic competition, the optimal
                             (1+µ) i
                   1                µ
mark-up µm = -       1 maximizes (1+µ) . But we do not need to consider only this case. We could assume
                                      1
limit pricing at some mark-up µ < -     1 , strategic interactions among firms, and so on. The industry price
index is
                                                            1+µ
                                                  Pt =          1
                                                         At Nt-1
                                  1
where At           a-1 dFt (a)    -1
                                       is the average productivity and Ft is the distribution of a across active
firms. We can finally write the flow profit function as
                                                                          -1
                                                          µ         a          Dt
                               (a, ; At , Dt , Nt ) =                             - .                        (1)
                                                         1+µ        At         Nt

Our model is highly stylized, but it captures the key elements that are important in the data. In particular,
profits depend on markups, fixed costs, relative productivity, nominal industry demand, and the number of
firms.
    Let us now turn to the dynamics of entry and exit. Active firms disappear with probability  and it takes
one period to enter. Let nt be the number of new firms. The number of firms evolves according to

                                            Nt+1 = (1 - ) Nt + nt .                                          (2)

Let Vt be the value of an existing firm. It solves

                                                         1-
                                            Vt = t +            Et [Vt+1 ]                                   (3)
                                                         1 + rt

where the expectations are taken under the risk neutral measure. Entry requires an entry cost t . Free entry
requires
                                              Et [Vt+1 (a, )]
                                                               t .                                           (4)
                                                   1 + rt
Equation (4) should be evaluated using the parameters (a, ) of potential entrants and must hold with equal-
ity when nt > 0.
    Consider a symmetric steady state with a = A where V and N are constant. From (1) and (3), we obtain




                                                          9
      1+r     µD
V =   r +   (1+µ)N   -  . Entry is such that V = (1 + r ) , therefore

                                                   µ        D
                                           N=                                                                   (5)
                                                 1 + µ (r + )  + 

The solution is unique and from (2), we know that n = N . As expected, entry increases with demand and
profit margins, and decreases with entry costs, discount rates and fixed costs.

Proposition 1. In steady state, an increase in entry cost  leads to a proportional increase in firm value V
and a decrease in the number of firms N . An increase in fixed operating costs  or a decrease in demand D
lead to a decrease in N .


2.2 Entry Costs and the Q-elasticity of Entry
Let us consider a symmetric equilibrium with fixed technology (a = A) and random entry costs t . The
Bellman equation of an active firm is

                                             µ Dt      1-
                                    Vt =            -+        Et [Vt+1 ]
                                           1 + µ Nt    1 + rt

The endogenous state variable of the model is N , the number of firms. As usual, we index the value
function by t to capture its dependence on the exogenous stochastic processes t and Dt . Let us consider an
equilibrium path with strictly positive entry at all times. In that case we must have, for all t:

                                             Et [Vt+1 ] = (1 + rt ) t

From the Bellman equation we get

                                               µ Dt
                                      Vt =            -  + (1 - ) t .
                                             1 + µ Nt

                                                                                                     µ Et [Ht+1 ]
The Bellman equation is truncated by free entry. Combining the two, we get (1 + rt ) t =            1+µ Nt+1        -
 + (1 - ) Et [t+1 ]. We can therefore solve the equilibrium in closed form:
                                                       µ
                                                      1+µ Et [Ht+1 ]
                                Nt+1 =                                         .
                                           (1 + rt ) t +  - (1 - ) Et [t+1 ]

All that is left to do is to specify the stochastic processes for the shocks. We assume that demand and entry
costs are random walks, so Et [Ht+1 ] = Dt and Et [t+1 ] = t . In that case we have simply Nt+1 =
  µ
     D
 1+µ t
+(rt +)t    and thus

                                     Nt+1    + (rt-1 + ) t-1 Dt
                                          =                     .
                                      Nt      + (rt + ) t Dt-1
This equation is intuitive: the growth rate of the number of firms rises with demand growth, and decreases
with entry costs and discount rates. In this paper, we focus on micro evidence from the cross-section of firms


                                                       10
and industries where changes in discount rates are not important. Jones et al. (2019) discuss in details the
role of discount rates and risk premia. We assume that the parameters are such that gross entry is positive:
Nt+1
 Nt      > 1 - .

Lemma 1. Current market values are increasing in concentration, demand shocks, and entry cost shocks.
Entry is increasing in demand shocks, and decreasing in entry cost.

    To be consistent with the empirical discussion, we need to relate entry to the Tobin's Q of incumbents.
In the model, entry is the only investment decision, so  is the book value of assets. For simplicity, we
assume that  is constant until time t, so all incumbents have the same book value t-1 . Incumbents' Q
can therefore be defined as

                                           Vt
                                   Qt 
                                          t-1
                                            µ    Dt                                  t
                                        =              -               + (1 - )
                                          1 + µ t-1 Nt         t-1                   t-1
                                                                Dt               t
                                        = r++                      -    + (1 - )
                                                  t-1          Dt-1 t-1          t-1

              2  VAR                 Dt                                            2  -COV                     t -1 t
Let us define y                     D t -1   as the variance of demand growth, and                             t ;  t -1    , which,
to a first order, is simply the variance of the growth of entry costs. We can then state our main result
                                                   Nt+1
Proposition 2. The covariance COV                   Nt ; Q t   between entry rates and Q increases with the variance of
demand shocks and decreases with the variance of entry cost shocks:

    When  is small,7 we have the simple formula

                                                 Nt+1                    2          2
                                        COV           ; Qt      ( r +  ) y - (1 - )   .
                                                  Nt

Proposition 2 offers an interpretation of Figure 1. The decreasing correlation between entry rates and Q
reveals that entry cost shocks have become relatively more prevalent than demand shocks (or TFP shocks)
in recent years.


2.3 Increasing Returns and the Q-elasticity of Entry
The other main hypothesis put forward in the literature to explain the changing dynamics of industries is
that of increasing returns to scale. Suppose that firms can choose between two technologies after entry: low
fixed cost & low productivity (AL , L ) or high fixed cost & high productivity (AH , H ). Profits are then

                                                                               -1
                                                            µ          a            Dt
                                             t (a, ) =                                 -
                                                           1+µ         At           Nt

    7                                                                 Dt
        Note that   t-1
                          is of the order of r +  , and as long as   Dt-1
                                                                            - 1 is small ­ as it is in the data, a few percents ­ then
          Dt                                                             Dt                t
t-1      Dt-1
                - 1 is second order small and we have Qt  (r +  )       Dt-1
                                                                               + (1 -  )   t-1
                                                                                               .


                                                                 11
The choice clearly depends on the size of the market, the elasticity of demand and the fixed-cost productivity
                                                                                                         µ Dt
bundles. Assume that technology L was optimal until time t. Profits were L,t =                          1+µ Nt   - L . Free entry
required VL,t = (1 + r ) t . In steady state we have L = (r + )  and therefore

                                                            µ        D
                                                 NL =                       .
                                                          1 + µ (r + )  + L

Now imagine a one time shock that makes technology H more appealing and leads firms to switch. In the
new steady state we have
                                                            µ        D
                                                 NH =                       .
                                                          1 + µ (r + )  + H
The switch happens if H dominates L at the old steady state, so H - L needs to be small enough.8 The
following proposition characterizes the change in the economy.

Proposition 3. A switch to increasing return technology leads to more concentration and higher productiv-
ity. With idiosyncratic risk, we would also observe higher profits and higher Q.

    Our simple model has ignored idiosyncratic risk for simplicity. If we take into account idiosyncratic risk
­ so that firms draw their productivity from a distribution with mean A ­ then we have the standard selection
effect that low productivity firms drop out, as in Hopenhayn (1992). It is straightforward to show that this
selection effect is stronger with technology H (see Covarrubias et al. (2019) for a discussion and further
references). We therefore have a second potential explanation for the failure of the Q-entry condition. If
industry dynamics are dominated by shocks that increase the degree of returns to scale, then we could
observe the decline in Figure 1.
    In the rest of the paper, we test the two explanations: entry costs, and returns to scale.


3 The Stability of Returns to Scale
Proposition 3 says that the appearance of technologies with stronger returns to scale can generate a decline
in the entry-Q relationship. In this section, we test this explanation directly by estimating returns to scale
over time. We perform the test at the industry level following Basu et al. (2006) and then at the firm level
following Syverson (2004) and De-Loecker et al. (2019).




                                                                                       -1
    8                                                                    µ     AH           D                        µ  D
        We need profitable entry at the old equilibrium, so H (NL ) =   1+µ    AL           NL
                                                                                                 - H > L (NL ) =    1+µ NL
                                                                                                                             - L , or
                                 -1
                µ  D       AH
H - L <        1+µ NL      AL
                                      - 1 . Using the old free entry condition we can write the profitability requirement simply as

                                                                               -1
                                                   H - L               AH
                                                               <                    - 1.
                                                  L + (r +  )          AL
The simplest way to think about the experiment is that this condition was violated until time t, and that it became satisfied at time t
thanks to an improvement in the high returns to scale technology. Note that the switch can also happen when  increases, as in the
"winner-take-most" argument.


                                                                  12
3.1 Industry-level
Let us begin with industry-level estimates of return to scale. We apply the methodology of Basu et al. (2006)
to the BLS KLEMS tables, which cover 1987 to 2016. Assume that all firms in a given industry have the
same production function and seek to minimize their costs given quasi-fixed capital stock and number of
employees. As shown in Basu et al. (2006), we can recover returns to scale estimates i for industry i by
estimating
                                        d log yi,t = ci + i d log xi,t + j dhi,t + i,t                                              (6)

where y denotes output, x denotes total inputs (capital, labor, and materials), h denotes detrended hours
worked. The residual captures log differences in total factor productivity. We restrict  to be the same for
three broad sectors, indexed by j : manufacturing, services and other industries. We instrument the change
in inputs with the lagged price of oil, four government defense spending items, real GDP, real non-durable
consumption and real non-residential investment in fixed assets.9 Appendix figure 16 plots the long-run
return to scale estimates.
    To evaluate whether returns to scale increase after 2000, we estimate:

                        d log yit = ci + i0 d log xit + 1j d log xit 1year2000 + j dhit + it

where 1j captures the increase in returns to scale after 2000 for manufacturing, services and other industries.
We obtain low and insignificant estimates ^1 of 0.02 for manufacturing, 0.005 for services and 0.037 for the
remaining industries. Taking the weighted average by output, this implies a small increase in returns to
scale from 0.78 to 0.8. Alternatively, if we estimate a different 1i for each industry, we observe a large
heterogeneity in results, with no clear pattern among industries and no correlation with changes in entry
rates. The results 1i are available upon request.


3.2 Firm-level
Industry-level estimates follow well-established approaches. However, the limited data availability implies
that we can only estimate long-run average changes ­ such as an increase from before to after 2000. To obtain
more robust time-varying estimates, we follow De-Loecker et al. (2019) ­ who in turn follow Syverson
(2004) ­ and we estimate returns to scale using firm-level data from Compustat. We estimate the average
return to scale  across all firms from


                               log qit =  [V  log v + K  log k + X  log x] + ,                                                      (7)
     9
       See appendix C for the complete details and results. Like Basu et al. (2006), we exclude farm and mining and use the
Christiano and Fitzgerald band pass filter. We also exclude `petroleum and coal products' and `pipeline transportation' due to large
variation in prices due to oil. Basu et al. (2006) use the categories durable manufacturing, non-durable manufacturing and the rest
while we use manufacturing, services and the rest. The results are barely affected, and our categorization facilitates the exposition of
changes after 2000. The choice of the price of oil and government defense spending as instruments (Equipment, Ships, Software and
Research and Development) is common in the literature and our particular implementation follows Hall (2018). We add aggregate
business cycle indicators under the assumption that they are uncorrelated with industry-specific technological improvements (such
as during the Great Recession, for instance). The results are robust to estimating industry-specific  's instead of using industry
groups, as shown in appendix C.


                                                                  13
where v , k and x denote, respectively, costs of goods sold (COGS), capital costs and overhead costs (SG&A).
                                PV V
The fraction V =          P V V +rK +P X X
                                              denotes the cost-share of COGS, and likewise for K and X . As in
De-Loecker et al. (2019), we deflate COGS and SG&A with the GDP deflator, capital costs with the relative
price of investment goods. Capital costs are set equal to 12% times the deflated value of gross property, plan
and equipment (Compustat PPEGT). We weight observations by deflated sales.10
    We use a specification in log-differences because the De-Loecker et al. (2019) model relies on OLS and
we cannot control for firm-level prices. If we estimated (7) in levels, an increase in the mark-ups of large
relative to small firms would appear as an increase in quantities, and result in an over-estimation of the
change in returns to scale. Growing mis-measurement of intangible capital would have a similar effect.
Another way to mitigate these issues is to add firm fixed effects to the levels regression. This yields similar
conclusions as the specification based on changes. Figure 3 reports the results. The left plot reports returns to
scale estimates based on a pooled regression across all firms, while the right one reports the sales-weighted
average of separate estimates across NAICS-2 industries. Our estimates of returns to scale have remained
relatively stable since 1980 ­ in line with our industry-level estimates and with much of the literature.11
    We do not find a significant, secular increase in returns to scale ­ in line with Ho and Ruzic (2017) for
manufacturing in the US; Salas-Fumás et al. (2018) for all EU industries and Diez et al. (2018) globally. We
conclude that the broad decline in the Q-elasticity of entry cannot be explained by returns to scale and we
turn next to entry costs. Of course we do not rule out that returns to scale might matter for some industries
in some time periods (see Covarrubias et al. (2019) for details on industry specific changes), and we control
for estimated returns to scale in our tests below.


4 Entry Costs
Entry costs may have increased for a variety of reasons, most prominently changes in technology or regu-
lation. Appendix D builds several proxies for each of these explanations, including measures of intangible
intensity, IT intensity and patenting for the former; and regulation and lobbying for the latter.12 We use
these proxies to test whether these explanations are consistent with the decline in the level and elasticity of
entry to Q. Measures of technological change are correlated with the decline in the level of entry, but cannot
explain the decline in the elasticity of entry to Q.13 By contrast, we find that lobbying and regulation exhibit
   10
       Using changes implies that new firms are excluded in the first observations. In unreported tests, we confirm that adding an
observation with near zero sales and near zero inputs at the year prior to a firm entering Compustat does not affect our conclusions.
    11
       De-Loecker et al. (2019) ­ using a specification in levels ­ estimate increases from 0.97 to 1.08 overall and from 0.99
to 1.04 and when aggregating industry estimates, respectively. Using the methodology of De Loecker and Warzynski (2012),
De-Loecker et al. (2019) estimate a similar increase from 1.03 to 1.08 but again the lack of firm-level prices may affect the re-
sults. The level of return to scale estimates differ widely when using industry vs. firm-level data. This can reflect sample selection
as public firms likely use more advanced technologies than small and medium enterprises. It is also consistent with different ad-
justment costs at the firm and industry levels. A firm can expand by hiring already trained workers from its competitors, while an
expansion at industry might require more training.
    12
       In unreported tests, we also consider globalization (rising foreign competition and foreign profits) and financial frictions
(including measures of external finance and bank dependence). Neither of these explanations appear to explain the decline in the
Q-elasticity of entry so we omit them for brevity.
    13
       These results align with the common wisdom that, as far as technology is concerned, it has never been easier to start a
business. Recent advances in technology have lowered search costs (online marketing, etc.) and drastically reduced fixed IT costs
(cloud-based computing and data storage).


                                                                 14
                                                Figure 3: Firm-level Returns to Scale Estimates

                                Aggregate RTS                                                            Average of Industry-level RTS
    1.05




                                                                                    1.04
                                                                                    1.02
    1




                                                                                    1
                                                                                    .98
    .95




                                                                                    .96
           1960   1970        1980             1990        2000         2010               1960   1970         1980             1990     2000          2010
                                        year                                                                             year

                   In levels w FFE, unwtd             In changes, wtd, MA5                        In levels w FFE, uwtd, MA5           In changes, wtd, MA5


Notes: Firm-level return to scale estimates based on Compustat. Left plot based on a pooled regression across all firms in Com-
pustat. Right plot based on the sales-weighted average of separate estimates across NAICS-2 industries. Green series based on
log-level specification with firm fixed effects. Red dotted series based on log-differences. See text for details.


significant correlations with both levels and elasticities ­ consistent with a political economy interpretation
of entry costs. We therefore focus on regulation and lobbying in the remainder of the paper.


4.1 The Rise of Regulation
Let us start by describing the data on regulations. Figure 4 shows the rise in Federal regulations in the US
along with the decline in the firm entry rate. As emphasized by Davis (2017), the 2017 vintage of the Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) spans nearly 180,000 pages following an eight-fold expansion over the past
56 years.
    The number of restrictions is based on RegData, which serves as our main proxy of regulation. Bailey and Thomas
(2015) and Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018) also use RegData to study the effects of regulation on business
dynamism. RegData is a relatively new database ­ introduced in Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin (2015) ­ that
aims to measure regulatory stringency at the industry-level. It relies on machine learning and natural lan-
guage processing techniques to count the number of restrictive words or phrases such as `shall', `must' and
`may not' in each section of the Code of Federal Regulations and assign them to industries.14 Federal laws
are written by congress but more than 60 executive agencies can issue subordinate regulations. Executive
agencies issue thousands of new regulations each year. Federal Regulations are compiled in The Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR).15

   14
       This represents a vast improvement over simple measures of `page counts', but it is still far from a perfect measure.
Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018) provide a detailed discussion of the database and its limitations, including several validation anal-
yses that, for example, compare RegData's measure of regulatory stringency to the size of relevant regulatory agencies and the
employment share of lawyers in each industry. Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018) conclude that "the relative values of the regulatory
stringency index capture well the differences in regulation over time, across industries, and across agencies."
    15
       One limitation is that the main RegData database covers only federal regulation. State and Local governments also have
regulatory responsibilities ­ which further add to the regulatory burden. It is hard to summarize the scale or growth of State and
Local regulation, but the increase has also been significant. Occupational Licensing is an area that has received substantial attention.
CEA (2016), for example, show that the share of workers required to obtain a license increased from under 5 percent in the 1950s
to over 25 percent in 2008 ­ in large part because greater prevalence of licensing requirements at the State-level.


                                                                               15
                                                          Figure 4: Regulation Index and Firm Entry Rate




                                                                                                                   5000
                                              16




                                                                                                                          Median # of Restrictions (NAICS-4)
                                                                                                                   4000
                                              14
                            Firm Entry Rate




                                                                                                                   3000
                                              12




                                                                                                                   2000
                                              10




                                                                                                                   1000
                                              8




                                                   1975           1985                1995       2005       2015

                                                                         Entry rate          Restrictions


Source: Firm entry rates from Census' Business Dynamics Statistics. Regulatory restrictions from RegData. See text for details.


    Figure 4 is consistent with the hypothesis that regulation hurts entry, but the trends could also be ex-
plained by some common factor, perhaps linked to changing demographics. More importantly, we know
from Proposition 1 that the long-run number of firms is proportional to the average entry cost. If entry costs
rise steadily, average firm size increases and the number of firms declines. The elasticity of the entry rate to
Q, however, would remain stable. To understand the allocation of entry, we need to look at shocks.

4.1.1    Dispersion of Output and Regulations
                                                                                         2 and that of entry
Proposition 2 says that the link between entry and Q depends on the volatility of output y
costs  2 . Figure 5 shows the standard deviation of industry output. It does not show a trend.

    Figure 6, on the other hand, shows increasing dispersion in regulatory changes. The timing is also
consistent with our hypothesis since we observe a significant increase in the late 1990s, roughly at the same
time as we observe the decline in the Q-elasticity of entry. Entry cost shocks driven by regulation are thus a
plausible explanation for the decrease in the Q-Elasticity of Entry.

4.1.2    Regulation and the Q-Elasticity of Entry

We can test this directly by estimating


                 log (N )j                j              j            j    j       j
                         t,t+2 = 1 log(Regt ) + 2 log(Regt ) × med (Q)t + Xt + t + t ,
                                                                            j
where 2 measures the impact of regulation on the Q-elasticity of entry and Xt denotes return to scale
controls. We include only year fixed effects t because we want to compare elasticities across industries.
As shown in Table 2, increases in regulation appear to explain the decline in the elasticity of entry to Q
across all datasets.


                                                                                      16
                                                                                Figure 5: Standard Deviation of Industry Output




                                                  .1
                            Std Dev of Change in Real GO
                            .04          .06      .02 .08




                                                                         1975            1985          1995          2005         2015


Note: Standard Deviation of changes in log real gross output across U.S. industries. Based on the most granular industries in the
BEA's GDP By Industry Accounts (file GDPbyInd_GO_1947-2017), which roughly follow NAICS-3 .




                                                                            Figure 6: Median Absolute Change in Regulations
                                                  200
                            MAD of Change in # of Restrictions (3Y MA)
                                     100          50   150




                                                                         1975            1985          1995          2005         2015


Note: Median Absolute Change in the number of Regulatory Restrictions among NAICS-4 industries, as measured by RegData.




                                                                                                      17
                                  Table 2: Explaining the Elasticity of Entry relative to Q
Table reports panel regression results of changes in the number of firms, entry rate and number of establishments on Q and measures
of regulation. Number of firms and entry rates based on Compustat; number of establishments from QCEW. Regressions based on
NAICS-4 industries. Standard errors in brackets clustered at industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                                     (1)                         (2)                         (3)
                                            log (#of F irms)j,t,t+2         EntryRatej,t,t+2        log (#of Estabs)j,t,t+2
  log(RegIndexj,t )                                   0.017                       0.015                        0.010
                                                      (0.007)                     (0.006)                      (0.004)
  M edianQj,t                                         0.104                       0.115                       0.067
                                                      (0.031)                     (0.037)                     (0.022)
  M edianQj,t × log(RegIndexj,t )                     -0.010                      -0.010                      -0.007
                                                      (0.004)                     (0.004)                      (0.003)
  RT Sj,t                                              0.017                       -0.024                       -0.018
                                                      (0.032)                     (0.026)                      (0.019)
  M edianQj,t × RT Sj,t                                -0.001                      -0.001                       0.002
                                                      (0.007)                     (0.008)                      (0.004)
  Year FE                                                Y                           Y                            Y
  R2                                                    .14                         .15                          .13
  Observations                                         4,780                       4,779                        2,783


4.2 The Effect of Regulation on Small and Large Firms
A rise in entry costs due to regulation yields several predictions in addition to a decline in the elasticity of
entry to Q. Proposition 1, in particular, shows that a rise in entry costs leads to a decline in the number of
firms and an increase in the profits of incumbents. The decline would be particularly pronounced among
smaller, less productive firms. We test these predictions next.

4.2.1    Impact of Regulation on Firm Creation and Growth

The impact of regulation on business dynamism is controversial. Bailey and Thomas (2015) use RegData
to argue that business dynamism declined in industries with rising regulation. Yet Goldschlag and Tabarrok
(2018) use essentially the same datasets to argue the opposite: that regulation is not to blame for declining
business dynamism.16 In this section, we reconcile these apparently contradictory results, and propose an
   16
      Bailey and Thomas (2015) use RegData 2.0 and consider NAICS-4 industries over the 1998 to 2011 period, focusing on
establishment entry, establishment exit, and new hires. They estimate regressions for all firms, as well as small and large firms
separately. They find a negative and significant relationship between regulation and business dynamism for all firms and for small
firms. For large establishments the point estimate is negative but often insignificant. By contrast, Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018)
use RegData 2.1 and consider NAICS-3 industries from 1999 to 2013. They focus on `flow' measures of dynamism (start-up,
job creation and job destruction rates) and find a positive but insignificant relationship ­ either in the aggregate or separating
small and large firms. They conclude that, if anything, regulation has a positive effect on business dynamism and point to other
explanations for declining dynamism such as globalization. Measures of business dynamism in both Bailey and Thomas (2015)
and Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018) are based on the Census' SUSB. The new version of RegData (3.0) covers fewer NAICS-
3 and NAICS-4 industries. We cannot replicate previous results exactly because RegData versions prior to 2.2 are no longer
available. That said, we are able to obtain similar conclusions. A substantial source of discrepancy appears to be granularity:
following the same specification as Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018) but using NAICS-4 industries, our results are closer to those of
Bailey and Thomas (2015) ­ albeit still insignificant. See Appendix Section E.1 for a more detailed discussion of our reconciliation
efforts.


                                                                18
alternate empirical specification that better controls for firm heterogeneity and industry-specific trends.
    Our main idea is to compare the impact of regulation on large versus small firms within each indus-
try. This comparison controls for time-varying industry trends, such as technological change affecting both
industry dynamism and the need for regulation. Prior studies included only industry fixed effects, which
address unobservable variation that is fixed over time but not time-varying variation. If, for example, reg-
ulators focus their attention on growing (aging) industries, we would recover a spurious positive (negative)
relationship. We run the following set of regressions



                       jt = 0 + 1 ln(Reg Indexjt ) + 2 ln(Reg Indexjt ) × I{Small}
                            + 3 I{Small} + 4 RT Sjst × I{Small} + j + t + jt

where j indexes industry-by-size groupings, and jt denotes a given outcome.17 To control for the role of
returns to scale, we include the estimates based on levels regressions with firm fixed effects at the NAICS-2
industry-level (return to scale estimates based on changes are even less correlated to firm dynamics). We
report the coefficients on returns to scale in some but not all columns for readability but the interaction with
size is included throughout.
    Table 3 considers the growth in the number of firms (columns 1-3) and the growth in total employment
(columns 4-6) and payroll (columns 7-9). When we pool all firms together, we find that regulation has
a negative but insignificant impact, consistent with the controversy in the literature. This noisy `average'
effect, however, hides an important degree of heterogeneity. Regulations have strong negative impact on
small firms relative to large firms ­ even after controlling for returns to scale. As shown in column 2, a
doubling of the regulation index, leads to a 2.5% lower annual growth rate in the number of small firms
relative to large ones ­ a sizable effect considering that measures of regulation doubled since 1995. The
effect on small firm employment is similar. Columns 3, 6 and 9 disaggregate the small firm buckets to show
that the effect is monotonic in firm size.18 Appendix E shows similar results for establishment dynamism.

4.2.2    Impact of Regulation on Incumbent Profit Rates

Let us now consider the impact of large changes in regulations on incumbent profit rates. We focus on
large changes because they are the most likely to involve significant lobbying efforts by industry insiders.
We define large changes in two ways. We first look at the industry with the largest increase in the number
of restrictions in any given year. Figure 7 shows the average change in profitability among incumbents
in Compustat, in industries that experience these large changes in regulations. By definition we have one

   17
       The comparison between small and large firms is also natural. As Davis (2017) explains, "the burdens of regulation and
regulatory complexity tend to fall more heavily on younger and smaller businesses for three reasons. First, there are fixed costs of
regulatory compliance... Second, there are one-time costs of learning the relevant regulations, developing compliance systems and
establishing relationships with regulators... Third, compared to smaller, newer and would-be competitors, larger and incumbent
firms have greater capacity and incentive to lobby for legislative exemptions, administrative waivers, and favorable regulatory
treatment."
    18
       We focus on firms larger than 10 employees to ensure economic significance. Coefficients are similar, but sometimes noisier,
for firms with less than 10 employees.


                                                                19
                        Table 3: Impact of Regulation on Firms, Employment and Payroll Growth
Table reports panel regression results of the growth in the number of firms (columns 1-3) and growth in total employment (columns
4-6) and payroll (columns 7-9) on the log-number of regulatory restrictions. Index j measures NAICS-4 industry-by-size groupings,
where size is measured by the number of employees. All regressions include return to scale controls, as well as industry-by-size and
year fixed effects. Observations weighted by total payroll. Number of firms and employees from the Census' SUSB. Regulation
indexes from RegData. Standard errors in brackets clustered at industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                         log (N )j,t,t+2                   log (Emp)j,t,t+2                 log (P ay )j,t,t+2
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)
 RT Sjt-1                         8.74        -3.46      -4.63          -5.18     -1.92     -2.56      4.98        12.23       12.10
                                 (14.87)     (10.62)    (11.78)        (14.52)   (21.67)   (21.87)    (11.18)     (12.23)     (12.32)
 RT Sjt-1 × < 500                             -6.01                               -8.03                            -22.23
                                             (14.87)                             (29.36)                          (20.68)
 log(Reg )jt                      -0.34       1.91        1.00         -3.15     -0.27     -0.70        0.83        3.43       3.33
                                 (2.57)      (1.92)      (1.98)        (3.82)    (3.84)    (3.96)      (6.45)      (6.92)     (7.01)
 log(Reg )jt × < 500                        -5.10                                -5.63                             -6.24
                                             (1.65)                              (2.77)                            (3.81)
 log(Reg )jt × 10 - 19                                  -6.48                              -8.82                             -10.68
                                                         (2.35)                             (2.93)                            (4.08)
 log(Reg )jt × 20 - 99                                  -4.52+                             -6.47                              -9.81
                                                        (2.29)                             (2.84)                             (4.13)
 log(Reg )jt × 100 - 499                                  -1.96                             -2.56                              -1.43
                                                         (2.37)                            (2.98)                             (3.89)
 Year FE                            Y          Y           Y             Y         Y          Y          Y           Y           Y
 Ind x Size FE                      Y          Y           Y             Y         Y          Y          Y           Y           Y
 RTS Controls                       Y          Y           Y             Y         Y          Y          Y           Y           Y
 R2                                .28        .28          .3           .36       .34        .34        .37         .37         .36
 Observations                     1,878      3,680       7,305         1,759     3,419      6,778      1,759       3,432       6,795




                                                                  20
                                    Figure 7: Impact of Large Changes in Regulation on Profits




                             .04
                             .02
                             0
                             -.02




                                       inter70a    inter80a       inter90a      inter00a      inter10a


Note: Figure plots the coefficients  d of firm-level regressions of operating profit margin (Compustat OIADP/SALE) on regulatory
increases

                                           OIADPit
                                                   =           d × post × d + i + t + jt ,
                                           SALEit        d

where j , d and t are industry, event-decade and year indexes. post is an indicator equal to one for the two years following an event,
where an event is defined as the firm's NAICS-3 industry j having the largest absolute increase in the number of restrictions in that
year. Note that d measures event-years (not calendar years), hence remains constant for the three years following the event. We
include all US-headquartered firms in Compustat, and control for firm and year fixed effects. See text for more details.


industry per year so we group the data by decades. We measure profitability as operating income after
depreciation over sales, and we compute sales-weighted averages at the industry level. The coefficient,
therefore, measures changes in profitability relative to other industries. In the 1970's, 80's and 90's we do
not observe economically significant changes in profits after large bursts of regulation. The effect is negative
but small in the 1970s, and rather precisely zero during the 1980s and 1990s. In recent years, however, large
increases in regulations are followed by large increases in relative profit margins. The impact is statistically
and economically significant. The sales-weighted average OIAD/Sales in our sample is around 13% and the
increase in the recent decade is about 4 percentage points.
    Alternatively, we can define large changes in absolute terms. We say that an industry experiences a large
increase in regulation when the number of regulatory restrictions increases by more than 5,000. Figure 8
shows that this captures on average between 1 and 2 industries each year. Importantly, there is no trend
in that number, which means that our measure is comparable over time. This new definition only rein-
forces our previous conclusion. In recent years, industries that experienced large increase in regulation also
experienced large increases in profit margins over the following three years, relative to other industries.




                                                                  21
                                                          Figure 8: Impact of Large Changes in Regulation on Profits




                                                                                           .06
                           4




                                                                                           .04
            # of industries with dRest>5k
                                       3




                                                                                           .02
            1              2




                                                                                           0
                                                                                           -.02
                           0




                                            1970   1980    1990     2000   2010     2020          inter70w   inter80w   inter90w   inter00w   inter10w


Note: Left plot shows the number of NAICS-3 industries where the number of regulatory restrictions increased by more than 5,000
in a given year. Right plot shows the coefficients  d of firm-level regressions of operating profit margin on regulatory increases

                                                                  OIADPit
                                                                          =        d × post × d + i + t + jt ,
                                                                  SALEit      d

where j , d and t are industry, event-decade and year indexes. post is an indicator equal to one for the two years following an event,
where an event is defined as the number of regulatory restrictions in firm's NAICS-3 industry increasing by more than 5,000.


4.3 The Effect of Lobbying on Small and Large Firms
Our results so far show that regulations have negatively affected small firms relative to large ones. The
divergence appears to have exacerbated after 2000, precisely when lobbying and regulatory complexity
increased. We now study whether these two trends are related ­ namely, whether the confluence of lobbying
and regulation are negatively affecting small firms.

4.3.1    Impact of Lobbying on Firm Creation and Growth

We begin by studying lobbying individually. Lobbying is skewed towards large firms, so we again study
the effects on small relative to large firms. Table 4 presents the results, which replicate Table 3 above, but
replacing the regulation index with total lobbying expenditures at the industry-level as measured by the
Center for Responsible Politics. Like Regulation, lobbying appears to negatively affect firm, employment
and payroll growth of small firms.

4.3.2    Interaction of Lobbying and Regulation

Lobbying is primarily used to influence regulators, so that lobbying and regulations are likely to interact with
each other. Table 5 replicates the above results but interacting regulation with lobbying. Because lobbying is
highly skewed, we further disaggregate firms and compare those with more than 1,000 employees to smaller
ones. As shown, the confluence of lobbying and regulation has a negative effect on small firms.




                                                                                      22
                        Table 4: Impact of Lobbying on Firms, Employment and Payroll Growth
Table reports panel regression results of the growth in the number of firms (columns 1-3) and growth in total employment (columns
4-6) and payroll (columns 7-9) on industry lobbying expenditures. Index j measures NAICS-4 industry-by-size groupings, where
size is measured by the number of employees. All regressions include return to scale controls, as well as industry-by-size and
year fixed effects. Observations weighted by total payroll. Number of firms and employees from the Census' SUSB. Lobbying
expenditures from OpenSecrets.com. Standard errors in brackets clustered at industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                          log (N )j,t,t+2                  log (Emp)j,t,t+2                 log (P ay )j,t,t+2
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)
 RT Sjt-1                          2.00        -5.28       -5.95        -14.04    -4.06     -4.64      -7.88        2.22       1.92
                                  (10.00)     (8.06)      (8.75)       (10.84)   (12.07)   (12.30)    (10.47)     (10.76)    (10.79)
 RT Sjt-1 × < 500                              -7.00                              -18.14                           -19.81
                                              (10.53)                            (15.78)                          (13.92)
 log(Lobby )jt                      -0.75      1.49        1.53        -1.05      0.63       0.66      -1.85      -0.71       -0.64
                                   (1.24)     (1.08)      (1.15)       (1.53)    (1.70)     (1.78)     (1.86)     (1.91)      (1.99)
 log(Lobby )jt × < 500                       -2.95                               -3.09                            -2.16+
                                              (0.86)                              (1.16)                          (1.18)
 log(Lobby )jt × 10 - 19                                 -3.61                             -3.46                             -3.03
                                                          (0.90)                            (1.15)                            (1.16)
 log(Lobby )jt × 20 - 99                                 -3.12                             -3.11                             -2.19+
                                                          (0.97)                           (1.23)                            (1.27)
 log(Lobby )jt × 100 - 499                               -3.34                             -3.10                               -1.77
                                                          (0.87)                           (1.26)                             (1.24)
 Year FE                             Y          Y          Y             Y         Y         Y           Y           Y         Y
 Ind x Size FE                       Y          Y          Y             Y         Y         Y           Y           Y         Y
 RTS Controls                        Y          Y          Y             Y         Y         Y           Y           Y         Y
 R2                                 .28        .28        .29           .36       .35       .34         .38         .37       .36
 Observations                      4,416      8,648      17,282        4,138     7,982     15,992      4,140       8,050     16,082




                                                                  23
                                                                     Table 5: Interaction of Lobbying and Regulation
     Table reports panel regression results of the growth in the number of firms (columns 1-3) and growth in total employment (columns 4-6) and payroll (columns 7-9) on measures of
     regulation and lobbying. Index j measures NAICS-4 industry-by-size groupings, where size is measured by the number of employees. All regressions include return to scale controls,
     as well as industry-by-size and year fixed effects. Observations weighted by total payroll. Interactions of regulation x size and lobbying x size are omitted for presentation purposes.
     Number of firms and employees from the Census' SUSB. Regulation indexes from RegData. Lobbying expenditures from OpenSecrets.com. Standard errors in brackets clustered at
     industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                                                             log (N )j,t,t+2                      log (Emp)j,t,t+2                      log (P ayroll)j,t,t+2
                                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)            (9)
           log(Reg )jt-1                                            0.730      -9.949+      -10.989        -1.073     -12.294      -13.227      -1.233      -15.820+      -16.181+
                                                                   (4.636)     (5.602)       (5.355)      (6.770)     (8.653)      (8.668)     (8.512)       (8.358)       (8.396)
           log(Lobby )jt-3                                         -0.205      -14.664      -13.181+       2.505      -16.694      -16.327      0.881       -36.941       -36.744
                                                                   (4.513)      (6.779)      (6.958)      (4.871)    (10.540)     (10.281)     (5.805)       (12.292)      (12.375)
           log(Reg )jt-1 × log(Lobby )jt-3                          -0.508      1.900        1.778         -0.775      1.777        1.669       -0.523       3.944         3.899
                                                                   (0.552)      (0.762)      (0.827)      (0.542)     (1.241)      (1.211)     (0.603)       (1.164)       (1.154)
           log(Reg )jt-1 × log(Lobby )jt-3 × < 500                             -2.077+                                -2.523+                                -4.642
                                                                               (1.095)                                 (1.487)                                (1.648)
24




           log(Reg )jt-1 × log(Lobby )jt-3 × 500 - 999                           -1.772                               -3.159+                                -4.514
                                                                                (1.236)                               (1.702)                                (2.068)
           log(Reg )jt-1 × log(Lobby )jt-3 × 10 - 19                                          -1.916                                -1.981                                -4.185
                                                                                             (1.199)                               (1.497)                                 (1.596)
           log(Reg )jt-1 × log(Lobby )jt-3 × 20 - 99                                         -2.500                                -2.495+                                -4.713
                                                                                             (1.129)                               (1.437)                                 (1.584)
           log(Reg )jt-1 × log(Lobby )jt-3 × 100 - 499                                       -3.009                                -3.313                                 -5.512
                                                                                             (1.298)                               (1.626)                                 (1.875)
           log(Reg )jt-1 × log(Lobby )jt-3 × 500 - 999                                        -1.816                               -3.186+                                 -4.529
                                                                                             (1.223)                               (1.695)                                 (2.066)
           Year FE                                                    Y           Y              Y           Y           Y            Y           Y             Y             Y
           Ind x Size FE                                              Y           Y              Y           Y           Y            Y           Y             Y             Y
           RTS Controls                                               Y           Y              Y           Y           Y            Y           Y             Y             Y
           R2                                                        .33         .35            .37          .4         .42          .42         .42           .43           .43
           Observations                                             1,586       2,912          5,967       1,471       2,505        5,305       1,471         2,593         5,397
4.3.3    Instrumenting Lobbying with Incumbent Cash Flows

Our results so far show that regulations and lobbying are bad for small firms relative to large ones. They
are consistent with lobbying being used strategically by large firms to protect their rents à la Stigler (1971).
But they could also be consistent with a more benign or even positive view of lobbying. For instance,
rising regulation (and regulatory complexity) may provide little benefits yet hurt all firms. Anticipating a
rise in regulation, large firms may lobby to protect themselves. Lobbying could then be beneficial as it
could prevent the negative impact of inefficient regulations on some large firms. To test this idea we need
a "lobbying shock" that is not driven by overly zealous regulators. We use changes in incumbent free cash
flows as an instrument. Free cash flows are not exogenous, so they cannot rule out all explanations. In
particular, they would not be a valid instrument to test the returns to scale explanation. They can, however,
help us test the regulatory zeal hypothesis, to the the extent that free cash flow shocks mostly reflect shocks
to demand and production costs, which is the standard assumption in the corporate finance literature.
    We therefore estimate the following regressions (first and second stages):

                                                               A2
                                              1
                             log (Lobby )jt = 0   1
                                                + 1 log (CF )M      1      1   1
                                                             jt-1 +  Xjt + t + jt ,                                               (8)


                                     jt = 0 + 2 log (Lobby )jt + Xjt + t + jt                                                     (9)

where Xjt denotes industry controls (log-total employment as a measure of industry size and the industry
mean Q), and t denotes year fixed effects. We use NAICS-3 as opposed to NAICS-4 industries in the above
results because cash-flow shocks and lobbying are noisy.
    Tables 6 report the results for growth in the number of firms. Column 1 shows the first stage result corre-
sponding to column 2. Columns 2-4 regress the growth in the number of firms for all firms combined, firms
above 500 employees and firms with 100-499 employees, respectively. Columns 5 interacts (instrumented)
lobbying with firm size.19 As shown, lobbying has a negative effect, on average, which is concentrated on
small firms.20
    Table 6 presents the results for payroll. Again, instrumented lobbying has a negative effect on payroll
across all firms, with the effect being more severe at the smallest ones.


5 Conclusion
In standard models, the elasticity of entry with respect to Tobin's Q is an important determinant of allocative
efficiency. We show that it has declined towards zero in the US over the past 20 years. We find that returns
to scale cannot explain this phenomenon. Returns to scale have not increased significantly, and they are not
correlated with the decline in the entry elasticity across firms and industries.


   19
      We add the interaction of cash-flows and size as the second instrument
   20
      In unreported tests we add industry fixed effects. These fixed effects absorb a substantial amount of variation, which reduces
the weak identification F-statistic below 10 and increases the standard error on the coefficients. Nonetheless, the coefficients point
to the same conclusion and are sometimes significant.


                                                                 25
                     Table 6: Impact of Instrumented Lobbying on Growth in the Number of Firms
Table reports panel regression results following Equations 8 and 9. Columns (1) reports first stage results. Columns 2 to 4 present
second stage results for individual size-groupings. Columns 5 and 6 interact (instrumented) lobbying with firm size. Higher
cash flows lead to higher lobbying, which in turn leads to lower firm and employment growth ­ particularly at smaller firms.
All regressions based on NAICS-3 industries. Business dynamism data from the Census' SUSB. Regulation data from RegData.
Lobbying expenditures from OpenSecrets.com. Industry cash flows based on all US-headquartered firms in Compustat. Standard
errors in brackets clustered at industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01. See text for details.
                                         log(Lobby )jt                           log (N )j,t,t+2
                                               (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)
                                            1st Stage         Total          500+          <500        Small vs. Large
        M eanQjt                              0.026          1.228         3.354          1.233            2.940
                                             (0.029)         (0.519)       (0.817)        (0.519)          (0.693)
        log(CF MA2 )jt-1                     0.113
                                             (0.036)
        log(Emp)jt                            0.069         -10.376       -12.813       -10.234           -12.635
                                             (0.051)         (1.182)       (1.663)       (1.167)           (1.694)
        log(Lobby )jt                                        -2.584          -1.396       -2.853           -2.949
                                                             (1.283)        (1.482)       (1.327)          (1.295)
        log(Lobby )jt × 10 - 19                                                                            -0.323+
                                                                                                            (0.178)
        log(Lobby )jt × 20 - 99                                                                            -0.468
                                                                                                            (0.136)
        log(Lobby )jt × 100 - 499                                                                            -0.112
                                                                                                            (0.116)
        Year FE                                 Y               Y             Y              Y                 Y
        Ind FE                                  N               N             N              N                 N
        RTS controls                            Y               Y             Y              Y                 Y
        R2                                     .98             .16           .14            .15               .13
        Observations                          1,076           1,076         1,076          1,076             3,974
        Weak id F-stat                                          54            54            54                 13




                                                               26
                              Table 7: Impact of Instrumented Lobbying on Payroll Growth
Table reports panel regression results following Equations 8 and 9. Columns (1) reports first stage results. Columns 2 to 4 present
second stage results for individual size-groupings. Columns 5 and 6 interact (instrumented) lobbying with firm size. Higher
cash flows lead to higher lobbying, which in turn leads to lower firm and employment growth ­ particularly at smaller firms.
All regressions based on NAICS-3 industries. Business dynamism data from the Census' SUSB. Regulation data from RegData.
Lobbying expenditures from OpenSecrets.com. Industry cash flows based on all US-headquartered firms in Compustat. Standard
errors in brackets clustered at industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01. See text for details.
                                         log(Lobby )jt                        log (P ayroll)s
                                                                                            j,t,t+2

                                               (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)
                                               1st            Total          500+          <500        Small vs. Large
        M eanQjt                              0.026          5.119         6.182          3.802            4.556
                                             (0.029)         (0.903)       (1.065)        (0.875)          (0.892)
        log(CF MA2 )jt-1                     0.113
                                             (0.036)
        log(Emp)jt                            0.069         -18.633       -19.290       -16.354           -16.735
                                             (0.051)         (3.300)       (3.531)       (3.244)           (2.678)
        log(Lobby )jt                                       -5.973         -6.560        -6.797            -6.033
                                                             (2.066)        (2.326)       (2.075)           (1.818)
        log(Lobby )jt × 10 - 19                                                                            -0.851
                                                                                                            (0.286)
        log(Lobby )jt × 20 - 99                                                                            -0.880
                                                                                                            (0.260)
        log(Lobby )jt × 100 - 499                                                                          -0.456
                                                                                                           (0.223)
        Year FE                                 Y               Y              Y             Y                 Y
        Ind FE                                  N               N              N             N                 N
        RTS Controls                            Y               Y              Y             Y                 Y
        R2                                     .98              .2            .17           .15               .12
        Observations                          1,076           1,000           978           984              3,981
        Weak id F-stat                                         53              52           52                 13




                                                               27
By contrast, we find that regulations and lobbying explain rather well the decline in the allocation of entry. In
doing so we reconcile conflicting results in the literature and show that regulations have a negative impact on
small firms, especially in industries with high lobbying expenditures. Our results also show that regulations
have a first order impact on incumbent profits and suggest that the regulatory capture may have increased in
recent years.




                                                       28
References
Al-Ubaydli, O. and P. A. McLaughlin (2015). Regdata: A numerical database on industry-specific regula-
  tions for all united states industries and federal regulations, 1997 to 2012. Regulation & Governance.

Alesina, A. and F. Giavazzi (2006). The Future of Europe: Reform or Decline. MIT Press. Translations:
  Greek, Korean, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish.

Bailey, J. and D. Thomas (2015). Regulating away competition: The effect of regulation on entrepreneurship
  and employment. Mercatus Working Paper.

Barkai, S. (2017). Declining labor and capital shares. University of Chicago.

Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, and M. S. Kimball (2006). Are technology improvements contractionary? American
  Economic Review 96(5), 1418­1448.

CEA (2016, April). Benefits of competition and indicators of market power. Issue Brief.

Clementi, G. L. and B. Palazzo (2016, July). Entry, exit, firm dynamics, and aggregate fluctuations. Ameri-
  can Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8(3), 1­41.

Covarrubias, M., G. Gutiérrez, and T. Philippon (2019). From good to bad concentration? u.s. industries
  over the past 30 years. NBER Macroannuals.

Crouzet, N. and J. Eberly (2018). Understanding weak capital investment: the role of market concentration
  and intangibles. Technical report, Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium.

Davis, S. (2017). Regulatory complexity and policy uncertainty: Headwinds of our own making. Booth
  Working Paper.

Davis, S., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2006). Volatility and dispersion in business growth
  rates: Publicly traded versus privately held firms. In D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford (Eds.),
  Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge. NBER.

Davis, S. J. and J. C. Haltiwanger (2019). Dynamism diminished: The role of housing markets and credit
  conditions. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

De-Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2019). The rise of market power and the macroeconomic
  implications.

De Loecker, J. and F. Warzynski (2012, May). Markups and firm-level export status. American Economic
  Review 102(6), 2437­71.

De Soto, H. (1990). The Other Path. New York, NY: Harper and Row.

Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2015, November). Where has all the skewness
  gone? the decline in high-growth (young) firms in the u.s. Working Papers 15-43, Center for Economic
  Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.

                                                    29
Dhingra, S. and J. Morrow (2016). Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity under firm
  heterogeneity. LSE Working Paper.

Diez, F. J., J. Fan, and C. Villegas-Sanchez (2018). Global declining competition.

Dixit, A. K. and J. E. Stiglitz (1977, June). Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity.
  American Economic Review 67(3), 297­308.

Djankov, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2002). The regulation of entry. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117(1), 1­37.

Furman, J. (2015). Business investment in the united states: Facts, explanations, puzzles, and policies.

Goldschlag, N. and A. Tabarrok (2018). Regulatory burden. Economic Policy.

Grullon, G., Y. Larkin, and R. Michaely (2019). Are us industries becoming more concentrated? Review of
  Finance.

Gutiérrez, G. and T. Philippon (2017). Declining competition and investment in the u.s.

Gutiérrez, G. and T. Philippon (2018). How eu markets became more competitive than us markets: A study
  of institutional drift. NBER Working Paper 24700.

Hall, R. E. (2018). New evidence on the markup of prices over marginal costs and the role of mega-firms in
  the us economy. NBER WP 24574.

Haltiwanger, J., R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2011, March). Historically large decline in job creation from
  startup and existing firms in the 2008­2009 recession. Census Bureau Report.

Hathaway, I. and R. E. Litan (2014, November). What's driving the decline in the firm formation rate? a
  partial explanation. Brookings Economic Studies.

Ho, S.-J. and D. Ruzic (2017). Returns to scale, productivity measurement and trends in u.s. manufacturing
  misallocation. Working paper.

Hopenhayn, H. (1992). Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium. Econometrica 60(5), 1127­
  1150.

Hopenhayn, H., J. Neira, and R. Singhania (2018). From population growth to firm demographics: Implica-
  tions for concentration, entrepreneurship and the labor share. Technical report, NBER.

Jones, C., G. Gutiérrez, and T. Philippon (2019). Entry costs and the macroeconomy. NBER Working Paper
  25609.

Jovanovic, B. (1982). Selection and evolution of industry. Econometrica 50, 649­670.

Jovanovic, B. and P. L. Rousseau (2001). Why wait? a century of life before IPO. AER paper and proceed-
  ings 91, 336­341.

                                                     30
Karahan, F., B. Pugsley, and A. Sahin
                                ¸     (2015). Understanding the 30-year decline in the startup rate: a
  general equilibrium approach. NY Fed Working Paper.

Kozeniauskas, N. (2018). What's driving the decline in entrepreneurship?

Lee, D. W., H.-H. Shin, and R. M. Stulz (2016, September). Why does capital no longer flow more to the
  industries with the best growth opportunities? Fisher College of Business Working Paper 2016(15).

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity.
  Econometrica 71(6), 1695­1725.

OECD (1999). Regulatory reform in the united states. OECD Reviews of Regulatory Reform.

OECD (2009). Indicators of regulatory management systems. Regulatory Policy Committee.

Olley, G. S. and A. Pakes (1996). The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment
  industry. Econometrica 64(6), 1263­1297.

Pelkmans, J. (2010). Product market reforms in eu countries: Are the methodology and evidence sufficiently
  robust? CEPS Working Document No. 332.

Peters, R. H. and L. A. Taylor (2016). Intangible capital and the investment-q relation. Journal of Financial
  Economics.

Pigou, A. C. (1932). The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan and Co.

Salas-Fumás, V., L. San Juan, and J. Vallés (2018). Corporate cost and profit shares in the euro area and the
  us: the same story?

Salop, S. C. (1979). Strategic entry deterrence. The American Economic Review 69(2), 335­338.

Spence, M. (1976). Product selection, fixed costs, and monopolistic competition. The Review of Economic
  Studies 43(2), 217­235.

Stigler, G. J. (1971). The theory of economic regulation. Bell Journal of Economics 3(21).

Syverson, C. (2004, December). Market structure and productivity: A concrete example. Journal of Political
  Economy.

Wilson, R. (1992). Chapter 10 strategic models of entry deterrence. Volume 1 of Handbook of Game Theory
  with Economic Applications, pp. 305 ­ 329. Elsevier.




                                                     31
Appendices

A    Data Appendix
The following section describes our main data sources. Some ancillary datasets are used for aggregate
analyses and/or robustness. The details for those data-sources are provided in the relevant figures and/or in
the following section.


A.1 BLS KLEMS
We use the BLS multifactor tables (2018 edition) for the estimation of returns to scale. This includes data
on real output, input and hours worked from 1987 to 2016, at (roughly) the 3-digits NAICS industry level.
We complement these data with several instruments:

    · WTI crude oil price

    · B.E.A. accounts for government defense spending items Equipment, Ships, Software and Research
      and Development

    · Real GDP

    · Real non-durable consumption and

    · Real non-residential investment in fixed assets.


A.2 Compustat
Our firm-level data source is the CRSP-Compustat merged database, available through WRDS. We down-
load tables Funda and Company from Compustat, and table msf from CRSP. We also download the CRSP-
Compustat linking table (ccmxpf_linktable) to match the datasets. We apply standard screens to the Com-
pustat dataset (consol = "C", indfmt = "INDL", datafmt = "STD", popsrc = "D" and curcd = "USD") and
merge the CRSP and Compustat files using the linking table. We keep firm-year observations located in
the USA (loc = "USA"), with non-missing year and gvkey. We apply additional screens as necessary for
individual analyses.
    We use the industry codes in the Compustat Company table. NAICS codes are populated for all firms
that existed after 1985, but are sometimes missing for firms that exited beforehand. We map those firms to
the most common NAICS-4 industry among those firms with the same SIC code and non-missing NAICS.
We also map all retired/new NAICS codes from the 1997, 2002 and 2012 versions to NAICS 2007 using the
concordances in link.

Industry Q.    We estimate firm-level Q as the ratio of market value to total assets (AT). We compute market
value as the market value of equity plus total liabilities (LT) and preferred stock (PSTK), where the market
value of equity is defined as the total number of common shares outstanding (item CSHO) times the closing


                                                     32
stock price at the end of the fiscal year (item PRCC_F). When either CSHO or PRCC_F are missing in
Compustat, we fill-in the value using CRSP. We cap Q at 10 and winsorize it at the 2% level, by year to
mitigate the impact of outliers. Last, we aggregate firm-level Q to the industry level by taking the mean,
median and asset-weighted average across all firms in a given industry-year.

Number of Firms.           Similarly, we define the number of firms in Compustat as the total number of firms
that satisfy the above restrictions and belong to a given industry in a given year.


A.3 SUSB
We gather the number of firms, employment and payroll from the Statistics of US Businesses (SUSB), avail-
able at the industry x firm size-level. SUSB is derived from the Business Register, which contains the Census
Bureau's most complete, current, and consistent data for the universe of private non-farm US business es-
tablishments. Data are available following NAICS 2 to 6 industries from 1998 to 2017. Additional tables
provide year-to-year employment changes at the establishment level, split by births, deaths, expansions, and
contractions. These more detailed data are used in Appendix E.21 SUSB uses multiple NAICS vintages. We
use the Concordances provided by the Census to map across NAICS hierarchies. In particular, we assume
equal weighting for each match at the 3- or 4-digit NAICS level, depending on the analysis.


A.4 QCEW
The main drawback of SUSB is that it covers only the most recent 20 years. To complement it, we also
gather the number of establishments in a given industry x year from the Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages. We use the code available in Gabriel Chodorow-Reich's website to download the data at the
US-wide level. Data following SIC 2 to 4 industries are available from 1975 to 2000. Data following NAICS
2 to 6 industries are available from 1991 to 2016.We use only privately owned firms as of the fourth quarter
of every year. We apply the same process to map between SIC and NAICS vintages as described above.
Unfortunately, concordances for SIC are only available for Manufacturing industries, at link.


A.5 Regulation Index
We gather industry-level regulation indices from RegData 3.1, available at link and introduced in Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin
(2015). RegData aims to measure regulatory stringency at the industry-level. It relies on machine learning
and natural language processing techniques to count the number of restrictive words or phrases such as
`shall', `must' and `may not' in each section of the Code of Federal Regulations and assign them to indus-
tries.22 Note that most, but not all industries are covered by the index.
   21
       One limitation of SUSB data is that the number of firms shows a positive bias in Economic Census years due to census
processing activities. To control for this, all our analyses include year-specific fixed effects.
    22
       This represents a vast improvement over simple measures of `page counts', but it is still far from a perfect measure.
Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018) provide a detailed discussion of the database and its limitations, including several validation anal-
yses that, for example, compare RegData's measure of regulatory stringency to the size of relevant regulatory agencies and the
employment share of lawyers in each industry. Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018) conclude that "the relative values of the regulatory
stringency index capture well the differences in regulation over time, across industries, and across agencies."


                                                                33
A.6 Lobbying Expenditures
Data for Lobbying Expenditures if gathered from the Center for Responsive Politics (CRP), at link. We
use the `lob_indus' table, which provides total lobbying expenditures by CRP Industry code. CRP industry
codes roughly follow the SIC 1987 hierarchy. In fact, CRP provides a one-to-many mapping between CRP
codes and SIC industries. We assign lobbying expenditures to SIC codes using the relative shares of wages
across SIC codes, as measured by QCEW. We then map SIC-1987 codes to NAICS-07 industries, using the
SIC 1987 to NAICS-02 and NAICS-02 to NAICS-07 concordance. We assume equal weighting from SIC-4
to NAICS-4 industries.




                                                   34
                                          Figure 9: Firm Entry Rate vs Non-Financial Business OS/K




                                                                                                         .18
                            16




                                                                                                         .16
                                   14
                   Firm entry rate




                                                                                                         OS/K (NFB)
                                                                                                            .14
                        12




                                                                                                         .12
                            10
                            8




                                                                                                         .1
                                           1980           1990                2000                2010
                                                                       year

                                                          Entry Rate                 OS/K (NFB)


Note: Annual data. Entry rate from Census' Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS). OS/K for Non-Financial Business sector based
on the Financial Accounts of the US (via FRED).


B Additional Facts about Entry
B.1     Evolution of Average Entry Rates
Entry is Low relative to Profits and Q. We begin with a well-known fact: aggregate entry has decreased
while profits have increased. Figure9 show the entry rate from the Census' Business Dynamics Statistics
(BDS) against the profit rate, defined as operating surplus over the replacement cost of the capital stock from
the Financial Accounts. The decline in aggregate entry is not explained by changes in industry composition
(see Appendix).
      Consider the following regression, estimated in a panel of industries:

                                         log (N )j,t,t+1 = 1 Qj,t + 1 GOS/V Aj,t + j + t + jt ,                       (10)

where j indicates an industry, t a year, N is the number of firms, Q the average (or median) ratio of market
to book value, and GOS/V A is gross operating surplus over value added. Figure 10 plots the year fixed
effects t . Somewhere in the late 1990s or early 2000s, the entry rate dropped and remained low.
      Figure 11 repeats the exercise of Figure 10, but separating entry and exit. As shown, average exit rates
controlling for Q and profits have been stable (except for a jump during the great recession. By contrast,
average entry rates declined, which explains the decline in average  log(N ).

Entrants are Growing more Slowly.                        In the model of Section 2, entry happens in one step. In reality,
young firms start small and grow over time, so when we talk about entry, we should combine the raw entry

                                                                       35
                           Figure 10: Year Fixed Effects of log (N ), controlling for Q and Profits




                         .04
                         .02
                     Year FEs
                        0-.02
                         -.04




                                1980                 1990                  2000                   2010

Notes: Figure shows the year fixed effects of a regression of log (N )j,t,t+1 following equation (10), normalized to match the
weighted average change in number of firms on 1978. Number of firms across 9 SIC sectors from the Census' BDS. GOS/VA from
the BEA Industry Accounts (following SIC sectors up to 1997, and mapped from NAICS to SIC afterwards). Q from Compustat.


                Figure 11: Year Fixed Effects of Firm Entry and Exit Rates, controlling for Q and Profits
                         .14
                         .12
                     Year FEs
                       .1.08
                         .06




                                1980                  1990                   2000                   2010

                                                           Entry rate               Exit rate


Notes: Figure shows the year fixed effects of separate regressions for the entry and exit rates following equation (10). Fixed effects
are normalized to match the weighted average entry and exit rates as of 1978. Entry and exit rates across 9 SIC sectors from the
Census' BDS. GOS/VA from the BEA Industry Accounts (following SIC sectors up to 1997, and mapped from NAICS to SIC
afterwards). Q from Compustat.



                                                                 36
                                                    Figure 12: Firm Size by Vintage and Age




                                 11
                    Wtd. Avg. Firm Employment
                      7       8  6   9    10




                                                0    1             2              3           4           5
                                                                            Age

                                                      02-06                  07-11                12-15
                                                      Pre-01 CI              Pre-01 Mean


Notes: Annual data from Census BDS. See text for details.


rate and with the evolution of the size of young firms. Figure 12 shows that, in addition to the decline in the
raw entry rate, there has been a decline in size of young firms: entrants are fewer, they start smaller and grow
more slowly. The figure plots the average firm size by vintage of creation and age. We track the average firm
size for each vintage as firms go from age zero to age five. The solid and dotted gray lines plot the mean
and confidence interval of firm sizes across vintage groups before 2001. The colored lines show mean firm
sizes for vintages 2002-2006, 2007-2011 and 2012-2015 periods. For example, the solid gray line at year
five shows that, on average, vintages before 2001 had 10.5 employees. Recent vintages have started smaller
and grown more slowly than older ones.

Young firms account for a smaller share of the economy.                            Combined, the decline in entry and slower
growth has translated into a decreasing share of the economy captured by young firms, as shown in Figure
13. This is a well-known fact, emphasized in Decker et al. (2015).
      Moreover, if we think more broadly about business dynamism, Figure 14 shows that the decline in entry
of new firms explains most of the decline in job and establishment creation rates. Job and Establishment
creation rates among existing firms have remained broadly stable.


B.2     Sectoral Evolution of Entry Elasticities
Figure 15 shows the elasticity of the growth in the number of firms to Q, separately for manufacturing and
services. The Compustat and QCEW series exhibit similar trends of declining elasticities. The decline is
more pronounced in services. SUSB starts too late to shed light on trends but confirms that the elasticity of
number of firms to Q has been close to zero since 2000. It exhibits similar trends as QCEW.

                                                                       37
                          Figure 13: Percent of Firms, Establishments and Employment in Young Firms




                                   .5
                    Share of young firms (<=5 years)
                       .2         .3
                                   .1         .4




                                                       1980                   1990                    2000                  2010

                                                                   # of Firms              # of Establishments              Employment


Notes: Annual data from Census BDS.



                                              Figure 14: Net Job and Establishment Creation: New vs. Existing Firms


                                                              Net Job Creation Rate                    Establishment Creation Rate
                                                                                                 15
                           5




                                                                                                 10
                           0




                                                                                                 5
                           -5
                           -10




                                                                                                 0




                                                       1980     1990   2000      2010    2020         1980    1990   2000     2010   2020


                                                                                Existing Firms               New Firms

Notes: Annual data from Census' BDS. Establishment and Job Creation rates of new firms defined as the ratio of establishment
and net job creation among establishments of age 0 over the total stock of initial establishments and the Davis-Haltiwanger-Schu
(DHS) denominator, respectively.




                                                                                            38
                                                               Figure 15: Elasticity of  log(N ) to Q, by sector


                                                                                   Manufacturing
                                      2
                   Elasticity of dLogN(t,t+2) w.r.t. Q(t)
                              0       -1    1




                                                              1975          1985             1995           2005

                                                                CPSTAT (Firm)              QCEW (Estab)            SUSB (Firm)



                                                                                     Services
                                                          1
                   Elasticity of dLogN(t,t+2) w.r.t. Q(t)
                             0        -.5 .5




                                                              1975          1985             1995           2005

                                                                CPSTAT (Firm)              QCEW (Estab)            SUSB (Firm)


Note: Figure plots the coefficient t of year-by-year regressions of changes in the log-number of firms/establishments on the
industry-median Q (i.e.,  log (N )j                         j    j
                                   t,t+3 = t + t med (Q)t + t , where j is an industry index). Compustat and SUSB series
based on the number of firms by NAICS-4 industry. QCEW series based on the number of establishments by SIC-3 industry up to
1997 and NAICS-4 industries afterwards. Changes in the number of firms standardized to have mean zero and variance of one to
ensure comparability across data sources. Industry-median Q based on Compustat. See Section 1 for more details.




                                                                                      39
C              Additional Results on Returns to scale
Figure 16 shows the level estimates of returns to scale for each industry for the whole sample (1987-2017).

                                                                                             Figure 16: Return to Scale Estimates by Industry

                                               RTS estimates, Manufacturing                                                                                                                                             RTS estimates, Services
  1.5




                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                                                    1
  1




                                                                                                                                                                    .5
  .5




                                                                                                                                                                    0
  0




                                                                                                                                                                                ry

                                                                                                                                                                                          ls

                                                                                                                                                                                                    n


                                                                                                                                                                                                              t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rv


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           g

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rt

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rv

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rv


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     v

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     od
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              na




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                          gm




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       en

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 go
                                                                                                                                                                                                    io




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 po
                                                                                                                                                                                      ta
                                                                                                                                                                              to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           se

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     se

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             oc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             io

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rm




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         at
               r

                        l

                                al

                                          g

                                                  tic

                                                         al

                                                                   d

                                                                            c

                                                                                  al

                                                                                          ry

                                                                                                    al

                                                                                                          od

                                                                                                                   al

                                                                                                                            re

                                                                                                                                  ile

                                                                                                                                             r

                                                                                                                                                      p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      em
                                                                                                                                                                                      pi
                      re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x_
                                                                                                                                                                           la




                                                                                                                                                                                                         _m
             pe




                                                                                                                                           te




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               up
                                                                        is




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l_




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c_

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r_
                                      tin




                                                                  oo




                                                                                                                                                  ns




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             at
                             et




                                                        ric




                                                                                 ic



                                                                                                et




                                                                                                                   et




                                                                                                                                                                                               re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      od
                                                                                        ne




                                                                                                                        tu




                                                                                                                                                                                     os
                                              as




                                                                                                                                  xt




                                                                                                                                                                          bu
                   pa




                                                                                                         fo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fo
                                                                                                                                        pu
                                                                       _m




                                                                                                                                                                                                               ga




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                te




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ag
          pa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _s
                                                                             em




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         uc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is
                         _m

                                     in




                                                                                               _m




                                                                                                               m




                                                                                                                                                 ra




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ac
                                                              _w




                                                                                                                                                                                           ec

                                                                                                                                                                                                     te
                                                                                                                        ni




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lth
                                                                                                                                 te
                                                        ct




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                      hi



                                                                                                     r_




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  er
                                                                                                                                                                                _h
                                            pl




                                                                                                                                                                      m
                 ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pu
                                                                                                                                      om




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                  pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Le




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           er
                                                                                                              on

                                                                                                                    ur




                                                                                                                                               _t




                                                                                                                                                                                                    as




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 an
        r_




                                                    le



                                                                   ur




                                                                                                                             r_




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ed
                                                                                     ac




                                                                                                                                                                                          _r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ea
                                          r_




                                                                                                    du




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _p
                                                                            ch
                                                             ur
                       rim




                                                                                           ab




                                                                                                                                                                    _a

                                                                                                                                                                               lth
                                r_




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       th
             r_




                                                                                                                                           ur




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ad




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         om
                                                  _e




                                                                                                                   _f
     du




                                                                   D




                                                                                                                            du
                                                                                                          _n




                                                                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                                                      ts




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                  _c
                                       du




                                                                                 _m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ac
                                                         D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                        r_




                                                                                                on




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ts
                                                                                          _f




                                                                                                                                                                lth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                             du




                                                                                                                                                                          ea
            du




                                                                                                                   ur




                                                                                                                                           D
                   _p




                                                                                                                                                                                     Ar
                                               ur
 on




                                                                                                                        on
                                                                                                         ur




                                                                                                                                 ur




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C
                                     on




                                                                       du




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c_
                                                                                        ur

                                                                                               N



                                                                                                               D
                                                                                ur




                                                                                                                                                               ea
                           on




                                                                                                                                                                          H
        on




                                              D
                  ur




                                                                                                     D




                                                                                                                             D
 N




                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                      D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ac
                                  N




                                                                   on

                                                                            D




                                                                                                                                                           H
               D

                        N
        N




                                                                   N




                                                                                                                                      RTS estimates, Others
                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                  1
                                                                                  .5
                                                                                  0

                                                                                                    an ta

                                                                                                                ir
                                                                                                     te ion

                                                                                             Tr Ut m
                                                                                                   sp ies


                                                                                                          r r
                                                                                           nc _p ce
                                                                                          Fi se lish

                                                                                           F ce ies

                                                                                            sp e_ s

                                                                                            an se s
                                                                                                   _s er

                                                                                           R nst ge
                                                                                                   l_ on
                                                                                                   an ing

                                                                                           ho ail ail

                                                                                             Tr le_t e
                                                                                                               de

                                                                                            Tr l_E ck
                                                                                                   sp ate

                                                                                                               er
                                                                                                  In the




                                                                                         an nc nk

                                                                                          Tr pas nd
                                                                                                 In p_a




                                                                                                 sa ad
                                                                                                Tr _da




                                                                                                            co




                                                                                                sp ng




                                                                                                            at
                                                                                        W et p_r




                                                                                                ea u
                                                                                         na Inf an




                                                                                                           ra

                                                                                                ta cti




                                                                                                an ra
                                                                                                an ilit




                                                                                                           rit
                                                                                               In mot




                                                                                                Tr as




                                                                                               an st
                                                                                               e_ ub


                                                                                      Tr ina _ba




                                                                                              R p_tr
                                                                                                          fu




                                                                                              le _tr
                                                                                                       _o




                                                                                                       _w
                                                                                                        le




                                                                                              C to
                                                                                             na cu




                                                                                             en ru
                                                                                                        s




                                                                                                      le

                                                                                              R s
                                                                                                        f




                                                                                                     su
                                                                                                     In


                                                                                                    f_




                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                  f_




                                                                                                n




                                                                                                o
                                                                                               _
                                                                                      Fi




Notes: Primarily based on the 2018 BLS multi-factor tables, which include output, input and hours worked. Instruments based on
BEA accounts (government expenditures and aggregate business cycle variables) and FRED (WTI crude oil price).




D              Explaining the Rise in Entry Costs: A Horse-Race
Several explanations for the rise in entry costs and the decline in the level of entry have been put forth in
the literature. This section explores these explanations using empirical proxies for them. The explanations
we consider are summarized in Table 8. For each proxy, we estimate two separate regressions: the first one
aims to explain the decline in the level of entry:


                              log (N )j           j              j                    j             j
                                      t,t+3 = +1 Xt-1 + 2 med (Q)t-1 + 3 med log (age)t-1 + t + j + t ,



                                                                                                                                                          40
                                 Table 8: Summary of data fields by potential explanation


   Potential explanation                             Relevant data field(s)
                           1. RTS                    Based on change specification
                                                     Balance sheet Intangibles/Assets
                           2. Intangibles
                                                     Peters & Taylor Intangibles/Assets (Peters and Taylor, 2016)
   Technological           3. IT intensity           % of employees in IT
   Change                                            Patent concentration (Herfindahl / share of Patent MV owned by top X
                           4. Patents                firms)
                                                     Patent intensity (total value of patents in industry)
                           5. Productivity           Log-labor productivity difference between top-20% and rest of firms
                           divergence                Log-TFP difference between top-20% and rest of firms
   Regulation              6. Regulation             Mercatus industry-level regulation index (restriction count)
                                                     Share of foreign profits/sales, as proxy for foreign activities
   Globalization           7. Globalization          (Compustat)
                                                     Chinese import competition (Mfg only)



       j
where Xt denotes a given empirical proxy. We include year as well as industry fixed effects (t and j ,
respectively) because want to compare changes within industries, controlling for common trends over time.
    The second set of regressions aim to explain the decline in the elasticity of entry to Q. It follows

    log (N )j          j        j            j            j                    j       j
            t,t+3 = 1 Xt-1 + 2 Xt-1 × med (Q)t + 3 med (Q)t-1 + 4 med log (age)t + t + t ,

                                                     j
where we add an interaction between the given proxy Xt and the median industry Q. We include only year
fixed effects t because we want to compare elasticities across industries.
    The significance for explaining the decline in the level and elasticity of entry are summarized in Table 9.
Tables 10 and 2 present the underlying results for the leading explanations ­ after including simultaneously
including the explanations that are significant in single-variable regressions, and dropping those with the
lowest significance one by one. The single-variable regression results underlying Table 9 are available upon
request. As shown, Patents and Frontier differences emerge as the leading explanations for the decline in
the level of entry. This is consistent with a rise in fixed costs. Regulation emerges as the leading explanation
for the decline in the elasticity of entry with respect to Q.




                                                              41
                                      Table 9: Summary of Industry and Firm-level results


                                                                                  Level of Entry                       Elasticity to Q
  Explanation                             Empirical Proxy                 logN        Entry        log       logN         Entry      log
                                                                                      Rate         Estab                  Rate       Estab
                      1. RTS              Syverson (2004)
                                          BS Intan/AT
                      2. Intangibles
                                          PT Intan/Assets
  Technological       3. IT intensity     % IT employment
  Change                                  Patent concentration                                      -
                      4. Patents
                                          Patent intensity                                          -
                      5.                  Log-LP difference
                      Productivity        Log-TFP difference                                                    -
  Regulation          divergence
                      6. Regulation       Regulation index
                      7. Foreign          Import Penetration                              -
  Globalization
                      Competition         Share of foreign profits
Notes: Table summarizes industry- and firm-level errors-in-variables regression results across all potential explanations. Tick-
marks ( ) identify those variables that are significant and exhibit the `right' coefficient. Crosses ( ) identify variables that are not
significant or exhibit the `wrong' coefficient. Only the regulation index is robust to inclusion of additional variables. See Appendix
for detailed regression results and the text for caveats and discussions of the limitations of our results (e.g., in the case of bank
dependence).




                                     Table 10: Explaining the Level of Entry relative to Q
Table reports panel regression results of changes in the number of firms, entry rate and number of establishments on Q and the
leading explanations. All regressions based on Compustat following NAICS-4 industries. Standard errors in brackets clustered at
industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                                  (1)                          (2)                           (3)
                                         log (#of F irms)j,t,t+3          EntryRatej,t,t+3          log (#of Estabs)j,t,t+3
    M edianQj,t                                     0.030+                       0.035+                       0.016
                                                    (0.017)                      (0.019)                      (0.005)
    log(M V of P atj,t )                            -0.008                       -0.012                       -0.003
                                                    (0.004)                      (0.005)                      (0.002)
    TFP Diff: Lead vs. Lag (t-2)                   -0.072                       -0.071
                                                    (0.023)                      (0.024)
    Industry FE                                        Y                            Y                            Y
    Year FE                                            Y                            Y                            Y
    R2                                                .34                          .41                          .51
    Observations                                     3,604                        3,597                        2,744




                                                                  42
                                       Figure 17: Establishment Start-up Rate vs. Regulatory Stringency


                                                                              525




                              25
                              20

                                                                                                       114
                        Startup rate



                                                                                                                    523
                                                                                               236          517
                              15



                                                                              484          487
                                              492
                                                                                                      213
                                                                                      115   531
                                                                                    486    238                               541
                                                                                     713 515               483
                                                                                       611
                                                                                     454                               488
                                                                                            562               481
                                                                                           524              211
                                                                                                              522
                              10




                                                                     624       493237
                                                  551
                                        314                                          446           424 621     311
                                                              452          337 447                   339
                                                               331                               334       324      221
                                                                                                                   336
                                                        313
                                                              444                    327 335                                   325
                                                                                                     333
                              5




                                                                                    322

                                              4                 6              8                                  10                 12
                                                                 Log-Regulatory stringency

Notes: Average regulatory stringency by industry is the average log-regulation index between 1999 and 2013, by three-digit 2007 NAICS industries.
Startup rate is calculated as 100 * (establishment entry at time t divided by the average of establishments at t and t1). .



E Additional Evidence on Regulation and Entry
E.1        Reconciliation of Prior Results
This section provides a reconciliation of the results of Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018) (GT) and Bailey and Thomas
(2015) (BT). We cannot replicate their results exactly because the versions of RegData used in these papers
are no longer available.23 Nonetheless, we can recover similar results, and use more recent RegData vintages
to emphasize the evolution.
      Figure 17 begins by replicating Figure 7 of Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2018), using RegData 2.2 ­ the
oldest RegData vintage still available. Three items are worth highlighting. First, note that RegData 2.2
(and 3.1) cover much fewer industries than RegData 2.1. This substantially reduces the sample in our
reconciliation effort. Second, the average start-up rates in our sample match those of GT, suggesting that
differences in results are due to changes in Regulation Indices. Last, the measures of regulatory stringency
differ substantially between RegData 2.2 and RegData 2.1. This is consistent with RegData 2.2 incorporating
"significant refinements in the machine-learning algorithm used to classify regulations by industry."
      Table 11 replicates the main results of GT and BT. The first three columns mirror columns 4 to 6 of
GT Table 3. The next three columns mirror column 1 of BT Tables 2, 3 and 4. As shown, GT study
establishment start-up and job creation/destruction rates while BT study log-births, log-deaths and log-
hires. Our results roughly match those of the original papers ­ despite the differences in Regulatory Indices.
We find insignificant and incorrectly signed coefficients when following GT, and (often) significant results

    23
         Recall that BT and GT used RegData versions 2.0 and 2.1, respectively.


                                                                              43
                                           Table 11: Elasticity of log(N ) to Q
Table reports panel regression results of establishment dynamism on the regulation index. See text for details. Robust standard
errors in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                     GT (NAICS-3, RegData 2.2)                      BT (NAICS-4, RegData 2.2)
                              (1)           (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
                            Startup     Job Creation    Job Destruction     Log(births)     Log(deaths)      Log(Dest)
      log(RegIndex)jt        0.097         -0.209            0.532+           -0.157+           -0.104        -0.121
                            (0.563)       (0.415)            (0.293)          (0.080)          (0.068)        (0.053)
      Year FE                  Y             Y                  Y                 Y              Y               Y
      Ind FE                   Y             Y                  Y                 Y              Y               Y
      R2                      .19           .29                .43               .14            .11             .18
      Observations            850           816                809              1,628          1,628           1,512

                                           Table 12: Elasticity of log(N ) to Q
Table reports panel regression results of establishment dynamism on the regulation index. See text for details. Robust standard
errors in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                  GT (NAICS-4, RegData 2.2)                       GT (NAICS-4, RegData 3.1)
                             (1)           (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)               (6)
                           Startup     Job Creation    Job Destruction     Startup      Job Creation     Job Destruction
      log(RegIndex)jt       -0.188       -0.019              0.379          0.684          0.866              -0.069
                           (0.332)       (0.375)            (0.381)        (0.483)        (0.605)            (0.503)
      Year FE                 Y             Y                  Y              Y              Y                 Y
      Ind FE                  Y             Y                  Y              Y              Y                 Y
      R2                     .13           .22                .34            .11            .18               .33
      Observations          1,628         1,512              1,493          2,022          1,870             1,858


when following BT. Table 12 walks through a reconciliation effort for GT. Columns 1-3 move from NAICS-
3 to NAICS-4, while columns 4 to 6 use RegData 3.1. Again, we do not find any significant relationships.
However, as shown in the following section, we find robust relationships when separating the large and small
firms.


E.2     Evidence from Establishments
Tables 13 to 15 replicate results from the main body but considering establishment dynamism. We again
find robust relationships ­ especially when interacting Regulation with Lobbying. Nonetheless, we note that
firm entry and growth ­ not establishment entry and growth ­ are our main objects of interest. Large firms
may benefit and grow as a result of regulation, but this still deters entry and reduces competitive threats from
smaller firms.




                                                              44
                                    Table 13: Impact of Regulation on Establishments
Table reports panel regression results of measures of establishment dynamism on regulatory restriction. Index j measures NAICS-
4 industry groupings. All regressions include industry and year fixed effects. Measures of dynamism from the Census' SUSB.
Regulation indexes from RegData. Standard errors in brackets clustered at industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                                        Employment:                        Establishments:
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)
                                            Creation     Destruction       dPct       Contraction     Expansion
            log(Reg )t                       1.170+         0.040        2.352           -1.950        2.471
                                             (0.666)       (0.618)       (0.670)        (1.262)        (1.233)
            log(RegIndex)t × < 500           -0.466         0.109        -2.038          0.897         -3.336
                                             (0.644)       (0.559)        (0.675)       (0.998)         (0.860)
            Year FE                             Y             Y              Y             Y              Y
            Ind x Size FE                       Y             Y              Y             Y              Y
            RTS Controls                        Y             Y              Y             Y              Y
            R2                                 .72           .63            .33           .64            .61
            Observations                      3,034         3,080          3,882         3,984          3,984




                                     Table 14: Impact of Lobbying on Establishments
Table reports panel regression results of measures of establishment dynamism on industry lobbying expenditures. Index j measures
NAICS-4 industry groupings. All regressions include industry and year fixed effects. Measures of dynamism from the Census'
SUSB. Lobbying expenditures from OpenSecrets.com. Standard errors in brackets clustered at industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05,
** p<.01.
                                                       Employment:                        Establishments:
                                             (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)              (5)
                                           Creation     Destruction       dPct      Contraction      Expansion
              log(Lobby )t-1                -0.316        -0.455         0.385          0.155         0.993
                                            (0.287)       (0.305)       (0.397)        (0.439)        (0.402)
              log(Lobby )t-1 × < 500         0.236        0.946         -0.891          0.197         -1.953
                                            (0.221)       (0.220)        (0.270)       (0.316)         (0.316)
              Year FE                          Y             Y             Y              Y              Y
              Ind x Size FE                    Y             Y             Y              Y              Y
              RTS Controls                     Y             Y             Y              Y              Y
              R2                              .72           .63           .36            .64            .56
              Observations                   6,493         6,570         8,485          8,802          8,802




                                                              45
                   Table 15: Impact of the Interaction of Regulation and Lobbying on Establishments
Table reports panel regression results of measures of establishment dynamism on regulatory restrictions and lobbying expenditures.
Index j measures NAICS-4 industry groupings. All regressions include industry and year fixed effects. Measures of dynamism
from the Census' SUSB. Regulation indexes from RegData. Lobbying expenditures from OpenSecrets.com. Standard errors in
brackets clustered at industry-level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.
                                                           Employment:                         Establishments:
                                                  (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)
                                                Creation    Destruction        dPct       Contraction     Expansion
          log(Reg )t-1                           0.497          0.532         0.140          -1.246          0.646
                                                (0.941)        (0.720)       (1.140)        (0.885)         (0.934)
          log(Lobby )t-2                        2.258+          -1.430       3.451         -4.737           3.714
                                                (1.247)        (1.007)       (1.276)        (1.189)         (1.567)
          log(Reg )t-1 × log(Lobby )t-2         -0.279+        0.259         -0.569         0.610          -0.575
                                                 (0.150)       (0.126)        (0.162)       (0.158)         (0.192)
          Year FE                                  Y              Y             Y              Y               Y
          Ind x Size FE                            Y              Y             Y              Y               Y
          RTS Controls
          R2                                      .72            .67           .34            .77             .75
          Observations                           1,563          1,552         1,687          1,702           1,702


F     US Regulatory Processes
F.1 History
Regulation in the U.S. is enacted at the Federal, State and Local level. At the federal level, new laws are
written only by congress but more than 60 executive agencies are authorized to issue subordinate regulations.
Such executive agencies issue thousands of new regulations each year. Federal Regulations are compiled in
The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), which is the basis for the Mercatus' Regulation indices used in this
paper. As of 2017, the CFR spans nearly 180,000 pages following an eight-fold expansion over the past 56
years (Davis, 2017).
    State and Local government regulation further add to the regulatory burden. It is harder to summarize
the scale or growth of such regulation, but the increase has also been significant. Occupational Licensing
is an area that has received substantial attention. CEA (2016), for example, show that the share of workers
required to obtain a license increased from under 5 percent in the 1950s to over 25 percent in 2008 ­ in large
part because greater prevalence of licensing requirements at the State-level.
    US regulatory processes have long followed political cycles. The last deregulation cycle started in the
1970s and, over the next three decades, covered the Air (1978), Road (1980) and Rail (1981) transportation
industries, Electric Power (1978+), Natural Gas (1978), Banking (1980) and Telecommunications (1996)
(OECD, 1999). The process of deregulation was deemed a success, with estimates of price reductions
ranging from 30-75% across sectors, in addition to improved product quality and choice (OECD, 1999).
Importantly, economic deregulation did not coincide with a reduction of total regulation. Environmental,
health, and safety regulations increased substantially over the same period.



                                                               46
                                         Figure 18: Product Market Regulations, US vs EU

                                               POL




                            3
                                               GRC




                            2.5
                                                             GRC
                                                             POL

                                                                               GRC
                            2                                                  POL


                                                                                               GRC
                                                                                               POL
                            1.5
                            1




                                  1995               2000          2005              2010            2015
                                                                   Year

                                                            EU            US


Note: OECD PMR


F.2 Comparison with Europe
The U.S. was viewed as a leader in regulation during the late 1990's. In 1999, for example, the OECD
noted that the "United States has been a world leader in regulatory reform for a quarter century. Its reforms
and their results helped launch a global reform movement that has brought benefits to many millions of
people". Since then, however, most countries have substantially improved their regulatory environment.
Figure 18 shows the evolution of the OECD's Product Market Regulation indices for the US (line) and
European countries (dots).24 The US was clear leader in PMR in the late 1990s, following the extensive
deregulation of the 1980s and 1990s. It obtained the second highest score across all countries, behind
only Great Britain. Since then, however, the trends have reversed. PMR decreased drastically for all EU
economies, yet remained stable in the US ­ consistent with the heavy focus on product market reforms of
the Lisbon Strategy. As of 2013, only Greece and Poland scored worse than the US ­ and by a small margin.
Not only that, some authors argue that the OECD's PMR indicators are excessively punitive for European
economies because they (i) neglect areas where EU regulation is particularly strong (e.g., Safety, Health,
Environment and Consumer Protection) and (ii) focus on individual countries, without accounting for the
benefits of a single market for regulation and competition (Pelkmans, 2010). Indeed, as shown above, the
EU scores higher than most countries in terms of Competition Policy and the Regulatory Process.
    In addition, European countries have substantially improved their regulatory process while the US has
not. The 'catch up' of Europe is evident across the OECD's regulatory process scores, in line with Figure
18 (OECD, 2009). There is one area, however, where the US appears to lag well-behind most European

    24
       The World Bank and the World Economic Forum also publish measures of Regulatory Barriers to competition. Appendix ??
shows that World Bank measures yield similar conclusions. WEF measures suggest different story, but they are likely less reliable
since they are based on a survey of business executives. Nonetheless, we focus on the OECD's measures because they are more
widely accepted, detailed and specific. For instance, they "are a key tool for the OECD/IMF joint assessment the growth strategies
submitted by G20 countries." See Pelkmans (2010) for a discussion of the alternate measures of regulatory barriers.


                                                                 47
                         Figure 19: OECD 2014 Score on Ex post Evaluation Primary Laws




                                                                      3
                          Ex Post Evaluation Indicator (Primary Laws)
                                    1             0  2

                                                                              C

                                                                          SV L
                                                                               K
                                                                             SA
                                                                               N
                                                                             ZE
                                                                               P
                                                                               A

                                                                          SV T
                                                                          H N
                                                                              N
                                                                               A
                                                                             LD

                                                                          D X
                                                                               K

                                                                          AU L
                                                                               T
                                                                               T
                                                                               E
                                                                          D L
                                                                          G U
                                                                             BR
                                                                            IR




                                                                          PO




                                                                           BE
                                                                          PR




                                                                          ES
                                                                          ES
                                                                          FR




                                                                            IT

                                                                          LU
                                                                             N




                                                                          SW
                                                                            R




                                                                           FI




                                                                            U




                                                                             E
                                                                          C




                                                                          N
                                                                          U
                                                                          G




Note: OECD's 2015 Regulatory Indicator Survey results.


countries: processes for ex post evaluation of existing regulation. As shown in Figure 19 The US obtained
the fifth worst score among OECD countries for ex post evaluation of primary laws ­ well below most EU
countries. This is an ongoing limitation of the US regulatory framework, raised by the OECD as early as
1999 when it stated that "the current system is very weak with respect to systematic review of the vast
body of existing laws and other regulations." (OECD, 1999). Results for subordinate laws are similar. This
suggests that, once implemented, US regulation remains largely unchanged.




                                                                              48
