                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INDIVIDUAL VS. SOCIAL MOTIVES IN IDENTITY CHOICE:
                       THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM CHINA

                                         Ruixue Jia
                                       Torsten Persson

                                     Working Paper 26008
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26008


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




We are grateful to Paola Giuliano, anonymous referees, Roland Benabou, Paul Collier, Gerard
Roland, Jean Tirole, Giorgio Topa, Alessandra Voena, Fabrizio Zilibotti, and participants in
seminars at CIFAR, NBER, UCSD, LSE/UCL, Harvard, Maryland, Michigan, Oxford, Tsinghua,
INSEAD, Tolouse and Yale for helpful comments. We would like to thank CIFAR, the ERC, and
the Torsten and Ragnar Soderberg Foundations for financial support. Finally, we are grateful to
Loren Brandt and Lena Edlund for sharing some data. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ruixue Jia and Torsten Persson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Individual vs. Social Motives in Identity Choice: Theory and Evidence from China
Ruixue Jia and Torsten Persson
NBER Working Paper No. 26008
June 2019
JEL No. D01,D02,H1,J1,J13

                                           ABSTRACT

The same government policy that incentivizes individuals to make a certain choice can have
different effects across groups due to the existence of social norms. In this paper, we study how
Chinese ethnic policies that give material benefits to minorities affect ethnicity choices for
children in ethnically mixed marriages. We document that, on average, such policies increase the
propensity of choosing minority status for the children. Meanwhile, responses to the same
policies differ widely across localities, suggesting that social norms may be important. We
formalize the ethnic identity choice in a simple framework, which highlights the interaction of
material benefits stemming from the ethnic policies, identity costs associated with breaking the
norms of following the father's ethnicity, and social reputations altering the importance of identity
costs. This framework predicts that ethnic policies should increase the propensity of breaking the
norm (i.e., following the mother's ethnicity) in localities where more families follow the norm.
We find support for this prediction in microdata from multiple census waves, and show that a
number of alternative explanations can be ruled out. More broadly, our study serves as evidence
about the interplay of individual and social motivates in shaping policy consequences, as well as
evidence on the determinants of identity choice.


Ruixue Jia
School of Global Policy and Strategy
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0519
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
rxjia@ucsd.edu

Torsten Persson
Torsten and Ragnar Soderberg Chair in Economic Sci
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and NBER
Torsten.Persson@iies.su.se



A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26008
1    Introduction
The same government policy that incentivizes individuals to make a certain choice can have
di¤erent e¤ects across groups because of di¤erential social motives. When would social motives
amplify or mitigate the e¤ects of policy interventions? This question is relevant for understand-
ing the consequences of many policies, ranging from those that ...ght tax evasion to those that
encourage political participation. In this paper, we study the question in the context of ethnic-
ity choices in China. We formalize the interaction of individual and social motives in a simple
model, and confront the model predictions with microdata. While our results are certainly quite
speci...c to ethnic choices in China, they speak to a general question how the interplay between
individual and social motives shapes the consequences of government policies. They also speak
to the determinants of identity choice in other contexts.
    Our empirical question is how material motives entailed in government policies, individual
attitudes, and social motives jointly shape ethnic choices. China is an interesting testing ground
to study such choices. First, it is a multiethnic society with 55 o¢ cially recognized ethnicities
beyond the dominant Han (about 91.5 percent of the population). Second, mixed ethnic couples
are free to choose whichever of their two ethnicities for their children at birth, and we observe
such choices at the individual level in China's microdata. Third, the government has given
policy favors to minorities in the areas of family planning and education that vary by province.
While these policies may not be intended to encourage parents to choose minority status for
their children, they do create material incentives to do so. Finally, the undisputed social norm in
China'
     s patriarchal society is to choose the father's ethnicity for the children. These four features
allow us to study empirically how the interplay between social stigma and honor modi...es the
e¤ects of changing material motives on ethnic choices.
    For convenience, we refer to a mixed couple with a Han man and a minority woman as
Han-minority and one with a minority man and a Han woman as minority-Han. To discipline
our theoretical analysis, we start out from two facts on the ethnicity of children, which stand
out in both aggregate and individual-level data: (1) the propensity of breaking the social norm
of following the father'
                       s ethnicity ­ i.e., the share of children that instead follows the mother'
                                                                                                s
ethnicity ­ is much higher in Han-minority families than in minority-Han families; and (2) the
propensity of breaking the norms is increasing in Han-minority families after 1980, in tune with
policy changes related to minority status. On top of these two facts, the extent of social-norm
breaking amongst Han-minority families di¤ers widely across localities (a closer account for these
facts appears in Section 2).
    Motivated by these facts, our theoretical analysis exploits a framework ...rst suggested by
Benabou and Tirole (2011). A key feature of this framework is that it allows for both com-
plementarity and substitutability in individual decisions. In our setting, mixed couples make
decisions on their children's ethnicity based on three interacting motives: material bene...ts
(from policies favoring minorities), individual intrinsic costs (from picking an ethnicity against


                                                 2
the social norm), and social reputations (depending on choices by other mixed couples in a
peer group). For instance, a Han-minority family that chooses minority status for their child
do obtain ethnic-policy favors, but su¤er the intrinsic cost of breaking the norm. Meanwhile,
the intrinsic cost gets ampli...ed or mitigated by the social-reputation concerns. These concerns
reect a race between social honor (when following the ethnicity norm) and social stigma (when
breaking the ethnicity norm).
   Having discussed how the model relates to the facts mentioned above, we derive new pre-
dictions that can be empirically tested with individual-level census data. The key prediction is
that the propensity to break the social norm ­by giving the child in a Han minority family the
mother'
      s ethnicity ­ should be higher in localities where concerns for social stigma dominate
those for social honor. Empirically, the relative importance of social stigma versus social honor
can be proxied by the shares of mixed couples who follow and break the norms: when a small
share breaks the norms, the stigma e¤ect dominates the honor e¤ect. Moreover, our model
implies a nonlinear rather than a linear empirical speci...cation in the share of mixed couples
who break the norm. As a stricter test of our model, we derive an additional prediction on the
non-linear e¤ect in di¤erent quantiles, which is also confronted with data.
   Consistent with our model predictions, the ethnicity of children in minority-Han families
varies little in the data. Therefore, our empirical focus is on the ethnicity of children chosen
by Han-minority families. To test the key prediction, we exploit the variation across around
300 prefectures (the administrative units one step below the province level) in the share of such
families that break the social norm by giving the mother'
                                                        s identity to their children.
   There are at least three empirical challenges to carry out the empirical tests. One is how
to measure the material bene...t of policies favoring minorities. Since ethnic policies appear in
a bundle of provincial regulations, it is not straightforward to quantify their regional variation
over time. To ensure that our results are robust, we use three alternative measures: rollout
of the one-child policy, additional fertility rates for minorities (relative to Han), and additional
scores for minorities in college-entrance exams. These policies vary by law at the province
level. Of course, this does not rule out variation at more local levels (e.g., across prefectures)
due to di¤erent implementation of the same law. However, our focus is on how ethnic policies
shape people'
            s ex ante choices. For this purpose, it seems reasonable to focus on legislated
provincial-level policies.
   A second challenge is that individual and aggregate ethnic choices in the relevant peer group
may be simultaneous, creating an instance of the reection problem (Manski 1993). To avoid
this problem, we de...ne the share of children that follow their mother's identity by the choices in
cohorts born already in 1970-74 in the same prefecture ­i.e., about a decade before the rollout
of the one-child policy. This leads naturally to a di¤erence-in-di¤erences speci...cation. The
initial share becomes an ex ante classi...er of social concerns, allowing us to compare the impacts
of ethnic policies in prefectures with low vs. high 1970-74 norm-breaking shares. In addition



                                                 3
to using the same prefecture as the peer group, we also employ alternative de...nitions, such as
using county information (when it is available).
       A third challenge is omitted variables. Ethnic policies may be correlated with other variables
that also a¤ect ethnic choices. We check for omitted variables in two ways. We show that pre-
trends are absent: changes in ethnic choices occur only after the implementation of the ethnic
policies. On top of this, we collect a set of regional characteristics, allowing these to have
di¤erent impacts on outcomes before and after the introduction of the ethnic policies ­we then
check if our estimates are stable when these characteristics are or are not considered.
       Using individual census data from 1982, 1990, 2000, and 2005 (which can be linked via
prefecture information), we document that policies that raise the material bene...ts of minority
children do indeed trigger a higher propensity to choose minority children in Han-minority
families. For instance, when measuring material bene...ts via the rollout of the one-child policy,
we ...nd that the minority share of children goes up by 7.8 percentage points (19 percent of the
pre-policy probability). Estimates with the di¤erence-in-di¤erences speci...cation con...rm that
the e¤ect of ethnic policies is larger in prefectures with a share of norm-breakers below a certain
cuto¤. For example, with the one-child measure of material bene...ts, the increase in minority
children is 10.3 (3.1) percentage points for prefectures where the share norm-breakers in the
1970-74 cohort is below (above) 50 percent. We also ...nd support for the additional prediction
of a non-linear e¤ect in di¤erent quantiles.
       The paper discusses in detail several theoretical and empirical alternative explanations for
the results: di¤erent preference speci...cations, di¤erent de...nitions of social reputations or peer
groups, changing bargaining power of women, the minority-population share diluting material
bene...ts or inducing social conict, a kind of censoring, and changes in the number of children.
While we ...nd that some of these alternatives may contribute to the changing ethnicity of children
to mixed couples, none of them alters our main empirical results on the interaction between
individual and social motives.
       Our study contributes to several lines of research. First, it complements a burgeoning litera-
ture on the interaction of individual and social motives, where social-image concerns are critical
(e.g., Bursztyn et al. 2014, Bursztyn and Jensen 2017, Cantoni et al. 2018, Karing 2019).1 Many
of these studies are done in experimental settings, while ours analyzes large-scale observational
data.
       Second, our study provides a novel perspective on identity choice. Sociologists and political
scientists have contributed to the understanding of ethnic identity earlier than economists. While
that literature is too large to survey here, one example is the pioneering research by Bates (1974)
and Vail (1989) on the role of ethnic identity and tribalism in Africa. Existing economic studies
suggest di¤erent determinants of identity. Some of them show how social and intrinsic motives
   1
    There is also evidence from experimental settings that often focuses on either complementarity or substi-
tutability (e.g., Gneezy and Rustichini 2000, Fehr and List 2004, Ariely, Bracha and Meier 2009 among others).
See Gneezy, Meier and Rey-Biel (2011) for an overview.


                                                      4
can support persistent choices (Akerlof and Kranton 2000, Bisin and Verdier 2000, Bisin, Topa
and Verdier 2001, Fernandez and Fogli 2006), while others show how material incentives can
create individual motives for identity change (Botticini and Eckstein 2007, Cassan 2015, Nix
and Qian 2015). More recently, Fouka (2019) and Atkin, Colson-Sihra and Shayo (2019) analyze
how social and economic factors shape identity choice using conceptual frameworks di¤erent
from ours.
    While understanding the complex interaction between di¤erent motives certainly requires
multiple frameworks, we believe our method can be applied to a wide set of individual choices
in the economic, political or social arena, where individual and social motives both play a
substantial role. Subsequent to the ...rst version of this paper, Besley, Jensen and Persson (2018)
use an extension of the Benabou-Tirole model to derive predictions for an empirical study of
the evasion from local property taxes in the UK. But these authors focus on other issues and
use council-level rather than individual data. Joensen and Skyt Nielsen (2015) also use the
Benabou-Tirole model to set up an empirical analysis based on individual data of the choice
of Math and Science majors among girls and boys in Denmark. Chen (2016) exploits a similar
framework to explain the extent to which the death penalty spurred absences in the British
military during World War I.
    The next section of the paper presents several facts and describes the relevant institutional
background to our study. Section 3 formulates our model and spells out its predictions. Section 4
discusses which Chinese data can be used to test them. Section 5 demonstrates empirically that
the main theoretical predictions are consistent with these data. Section 6 discusses alternative
explanations for the patterns in the data and whether these explanations drive our main result.
Section 7 provides a brief conclusion. To save space, we relegate some additional modeling,
tables, and ...gures to an Online Appendix.


2    Background
China has 56 ethnic groups, the dominant Han plus 55 minorities. As of 2000, the combined
population of minority groups stood at about 106 million, 8.5 percent of the total mainland
population. The 55 minority groups vary widely in size. With a population of more than
15 million in 2000 the Zhuang was the largest minority, and the Lhoha with only 2,965 the
smallest. Minority groups also vary greatly in culture, spoken language and religious practice ­
53 minority groups speak languages of their own, 23 have their own written language, 10 groups
are predominantly Muslim, and eight follow Tibetan Buddhism.




                                                5
2.1     Salient facts on ethnic choices
We now point at salient facts on the ethnicity of children in mixed couples, which we will use
to discipline the theoretical analysis.2 The ...rst fact is:

F1 The average share of children with their mother's ethnicity is much higher in Han-minority
        families than in minority-Han families. This indicates a higher propensity of breaking the
        social norm for Han-minority families.

Figure 1 panel (a) plots ethnicity shares over time in the aggregate data ­ by ...ve-year birth
cohorts ­ for the two types of mixed marriages. On average, the probabilities that children
have their mother'
                 s ethnicity in minority-Han and Han-minority families are 6 and 47 percent,
respectively. Naturally, these aggregate patterns can be confounded by regional characteristics
and time trends. However, as discussed in Online Appendix A1, di¤erences of the same mag-
nitude hold also at the individual level, when we control for prefecture ...xed e¤ects, birth-year
...xed e¤ects, and province-speci...c trends (province ...xed e¤ects times birth year).
      The second fact is:

F2 The propensity to break the social norm (i.e., the share of children with their mother's
        ethnicity) is increasing in Han-minority families after 1980.

This pattern is clearly shown in panel (a) of Figure 1. At the aggregate level, the average share
of children in Han-minority families with their mother's (minority) ethnicity is 41 percent in
cohorts born before 1980, but 49 percent cohorts born after 1980, indicating a higher propensity
of breaking the norms. Panel (b) shows that this pattern also holds at the individual level (after
controlling for prefecture ...xed e¤ects and province-speci...c trends). Di¤erently, we observe
little change in the choices by minority-Han families. In those families, the aggregate-level data
suggests a slight increase in the average share of children with their mother'
                                                                             s (Han) ethnicity, but
this change is not signi...cant in the individual-level data once we control for province-speci...c
trends (see the shaded area in panel (b)). If anything, the individual-level trend is weakly
decreasing until the 1990s.
      On top of these basic facts, we also ...nd wide variation across prefectures in the propensity
for Han-minority families to break the social norm. Figure 2 plots the shares of children with
their mother'
            s ethnicity across prefectures in the two types of mixed families with children in
the 1970-74 cohort. These shares have a mean around 0.39 and a standard deviation of 0.33 for
Han-minority families. By contrast, the variation is much smaller for minority-Han families.
  2
    We use the 1982, 1990, 2000 censuses and the 2005 mini-census. Our analysis focuses on the children born
between 1970 and 2005. See Section 4 for more detail on data structure and availability.




                                                     6
2.2   Bene...ts and Costs of Minority Children
Anecdotal evidence Little research exists on ethnic choices for children in China. However,
one ...nds numerous discussions online among parents, which reect the motives for alternative
ethnicity choices for their children.
   One example of a suggestive discussion [in our own translation from Chinese] appears at the
website babytree.com ­see Online Appendix A2 for the original discussions:

         Anonymous asked: "If the father is a Han and the mother is a minority, could
      the child be a minority?"
         Linyibaobeixuan answered: "Generally should follow the father'
                                                                      s. But following
      the mother's has bene...ts of ethnic favors."
         Yuer2011 answered: "The child usually follows the father'
                                                                 s ethnicity. It is also
      ...ne if you insist on following the mother'
                                                 s."
         Sankouzhijiatu answered: "The child should follow the father'
                                                                     s ethnicity. Only
      the children of a live-in husband will follow the mother'
                                                              s."
         Xixi1011 answered: "You can follow the mother'
                                                      s. A minority has the option of
      having a second child."

   This dialogue suggests that material bene...ts due to ethnic policies ­ especially the option
for a minority child of having more than one child as an adult ­ are considered motives to
adopt the mother'
                s ethnicity in Han-minority families. The costs of having a minority child are
primarily social and intrinsic: the social norm is that children adopt the fathers'ethnicity and
the opposite choice imposes costs on a father. For instance, a Han man with a minority child may
be stigmatized ­as the wife usually goes to live in the husband's family, only lower-status men
will consider becoming live-in husbands, known as "uxorilocal marriage"in social anthropology.
   This ...rst example thus illustrates the stigma side of social reputations, in that men with
children of a di¤erent ethnicity can be considered of low social status. Another illustrative
discussion [also in our own translation from Chinese] is found at the website jzb.com (jzb means
parents'helper in Chinese) ­see Online Appendix A2 for the original discussions:

         Zhongermen said: "I went to register the birth of my child a while ago. I am a
      Han man and my wife is a minority. I told the police that I want my child to be a
      Han. The police kindly suggested that I should choose minority for the child. She
      said that one score lower implies an extra playground of competitors in the high-
      school entrance exam and that I should be responsible for my child'
                                                                        s future. But I
      insisted on choosing Han in the end. I hope that my child'
                                                               s future will reply on his
      own ability, not ethnic favors."
         fh2315 remarked: "Choosing minority is not a big deal if the minority does not
      practice religion."


                                                7
         claetitia remarked: "Well, if you despise the ethnic favor for extra scores, minori-
      ties can at least have more children!"
         Magua remarked: "I am a minority and my child follows my ethnicity. The reason
      is simple. Even though I belong to a minority group whose population size is large,
      I am proud of my ethnicity. So I hope that my child is also [proud of my ethnicity].
      This has nothing to do with extra scores."

   Once again, these arguments reect the trade-o¤ between material individual bene...ts and
intrinsic or social motives. But this example illustrates the honor, rather than the stigma, side of
social reputations. For instance, the Han man who starts the discussion feels honorable to assign
his own ethnicity to his child despite the favors toward ethnic minorities. The ...rst commentator
suggest that the cost may be higher to adopt the mother'
                                                       s minority ethnicity when this is
associated with religious practice. As already mentioned, our theoretical framework will allow
for such interaction e¤ects. The last commentator argues that he chooses his own ethnicity for
his child because he is proud of his ethnicity and hopes the child will share this pride. Already
mentioned, our theory will focus on the interplay between social stigma and social honor. Next,
we describe the ethnic policies entailed in these discussions.

The choice of ethnicity       No legal barriers exist for mixed marriages between any two ethnic
groups. At the birth of a child, a mixed couple has to choose one of their own ethnicities for their
children. The ethnic identity appears in almost every context, including the birth certi...cate and
all the forms which have to be ...lled out at school. This information is particularly salient, when
someone gets bene...ts due to his or her ethnicity status. This means that the chosen ethnicity
can be considered public information to peers. As already suggested by the data, an ethnic
choice is more than a label. If it were merely a label, all parents would choose minority status
in view of the preferential policies.
   Minority identity brings both bene...ts and costs for the child, and hence indirectly for the
parents. According to government regulation, couples with the same ethnicity cannot choose
any other ethnicity for their children. As for switches later in life, children from mixed marriages
can apply to change their ethnicity given at birth before the age of 20. However, the applications
have to be made by the parents for those younger than 18. Since these applications are costly and
approval is uncertain, the impact of policy interventions on switches later in life should be much
less important than the ethnicity choices by parents at birth. Unfortunately, no systematic
data is available to shed light on this. As an indirect check, we examine the correlation of
ethnicities by prefecture-birth year across censuses. For instance, the correlation for the 1982
and 1990 samples is around 0.96, suggesting that switching ethnicities do exist but cannot be
very frequent.




                                                 8
Bene...ts of minority children      The bene...t side reects various policies. Since the beginning
of the People'
             s Republic of China (1949-), the government has introduced various bene...ts to
ethnic minorities so as to promote positive Han-minority relationships. Such policies exist in
three areas:
   (i) Family planning. When family-planning policies started in the 1960s, minorities were
more favorably treated than the Han majority. Over time, the treatment of di¤erent minorities
has varied by region. As detailed in Section 4, family-planning policies became much more
stringent in the years around 1980 with the implementation of the one-child policy, rendering
the advantages of minorities more salient.
   In our analysis, we use two measures: one is on the rollout of family-planning policies across
provinces; the other is the completed fertility ratio of minority vs. Han mothers (aged 40 and
above). Section 4 describes this measurement in detail.
   (ii) Entrance to higher education. Since the restoration of entrance exams in 1977, minorities
have enjoyed additional points in the exams deciding upon educational entries, especially to high
school and college. These bene...ts also vary by province. In our analysis, we measure this bene...t
by average extra scores for minorities by province in the National College Entrance Exam. Once
again, Section 4 details data and measurement.
   (iii) Employment. The national ethnic policy states that minorities should have favorable
treatment in employment. However, explicit bene...ts are rare. As minorities can be discriminated
in employment, it is unclear that this policy would make people tend to choose minority identity
for their children. For instance, Hasmath and Ho (2015) ...nd that minorities perceive that
they are disadvantaged in job search, even though estimated Han-minority wage di¤erentials
demonstrate little evidence for this.

Costs of minority children The cost side has two main aspects explained below:
   (i) Discrimination. Minorities may face discrimination in the labor market, even when they
have the same educational background as Han. However, two facts suggest that the material
bene...ts discussed above are likely to dominate the potential discrimination costs in the labor
market. First, in the anecdotal discussions, discrimination is never mentioned when parents
make ethnicity choices for newborns. Second, almost all minority-Han couples choose minority
ethnicity for their children ­one would expect to see more Han children if discrimination was a
dominant concern relative to patriarchal norms. In any case, our model below has a basic level
of net material bene...ts, which can be positive or negative; what matters for our predictions is
the increase in these net bene...ts in connection with family-planning and education policies. Our
framework thus allows for the existence of discrimination.
   (ii) Identity costs. As highlighted by the anecdotal discussions, a main disadvantage of having
a minority child for Han-minority families is an identity cost, especially for Han fathers. In a
patriarchal society such as China, children are expected to follow the ethnicity of the father.
Additionally, the identity costs are likely a¤ected by prevailing social norms and by the choices

                                                 9
of relevant peer groups. Therefore, a Han man will face a trade-o¤ between material bene...ts
(on behalf of the child) and social status. By contrast, the problem for a minority father does
not involve a trade o¤: having a child of his own ethnicity not only brings material bene...ts to
the child, but also conforms to the prevalent social norm.
       Given these considerations, our model in Section 3 incorporates three di¤erent motives:
individual material bene...ts, intrinsic bene...ts or costs, and social reputations. We also build
in the asymmetry for Han and minority men. Before presenting the model, we describe the
patterns of mixed marriages which provide the context of ethnic choices for the children.

2.3      Mixed Marriages and Demographics
Besides ethnic choices, a few other demographic characteristics vary over time with family-
planning policies. First, the population share of minorities is increasing: from 8.7 percent for
those born in 1970-74 to 10.1 percent for those born in 1990-1994. This is a consequence of the
ethnic choices studied here, as well as di¤erent fertilities among Han and minorities. Second,
family-planning policies raise male-to-female sex ratios and consequently a¤ect the marriage
market. For instance, the sex ratio goes up from 1.01 for those born in 1970-74 to 1.15 for those
born in 1990-1994.
       While we do not focus on the marriage-market consequences in this paper, these also respond
to ethnic policies. For instance, the probability to marry a Han man for minority women born
in 1940-44 (married in the 1960s) was 14 percent, whereas it went up to 21 percent for minority
women born in 1970-74 (married in the 1990s). This hike is likely related to policies favoring
minority children ­no speci...c policy favors mixed marriages as such during the period we study,
but the ethnic bene...ts to children do a¤ect the relative value of entering into a Han-minority
marriage vs. a Han-Han marriage.3
       Later in our analysis, we will show that our ...ndings are not a¤ected by marriage patterns.
Nevertheless, it is useful to know the prevalence of mixed marriages. In Online Appendix A3,
we present descriptive patterns of the four possible types of marriages, as well as education
and age di¤erences between husband and wife. Compared with couples of the same ethnicity,
education di¤erences among mixed couples are slightly lower, suggesting a bit more assortative
matching by education. Age di¤erences between husband and wife do not di¤er substantively
across marriage types. Among married couples that appear in our four censuses, 17 percent of
minority men marry Han women, while 18 percent of minority women marry Han men.4
   3
     Huang and Zhou (2016) argue that the one-child policy has raised the probability of mixed marriages in China
due to the material bene...ts.
   4
     This gender-ethnicity di¤erence is much less striking than the corresponding di¤erence in US black-white
marriages, where 6 percent of black men marry white women while 2.9 percent of black women marry white men
around 2000 (Fryer 2007).




                                                       10
3     Theory
We employ the framework in Benabou and Tirole (2011) to model the ethnicity choice for
children as a trade-o¤ involving individual (material and intrinsic), as well as social (norms-
related) payo¤s. The distinctive feature is that prevailing norms imply not only a social stain
(stigma) when the norm is broken but also a social esteem (honor) when the norm is followed.
As illustrated by the anecdotal discussions in Section 2, mixed couples choosing ethnicity for
their children have both stigma and honor in mind. This framework allows us to analyze the
interplay between the two, where individual behaviors can be either complements or substitutes,
depending on the behavior of others.
    As the main role of the model is to derive empirical predictions, we include only the prospec-
tive determinants of ethnicity choices that can be measured ­or proxied ­with some degree of
con...dence (see Section 4). The model is certainly highly stylized. However, it is not only consis-
tent with the facts presented in Section 2, but it also yields additional and testable predictions.
In particular, the model clearly predicts how material bene...ts and social motives interact, our
main issue of interest.

3.1   Setup
Consider a region ­a prefecture, to be concrete ­with a continuum of households (couples) in
a given cohort. There are two ethnicities J 2 fH; M g; where H denotes Han and M minority.
Children yield the same basic bene...t v for every household. Each household has a single binary
decision to make: to break the norms by assigning mother'
                                                        s ethnicity for their child, m = 1; or
not, m = 0. In line with China'
                              s social situation, we assume that (i) the choice primarily reects
the father'
          s preferences (see Section 6 for a model of bargaining and related implications), and
(ii) the socially acceptable choice is to pass on the fathers'
                                                             s ethnicity to the child. We focus on
the decisions by mixed couples (H; M ) or (M; H ); where the ...rst entry is the ethnicity of the
father. (Non-mixed couples are obliged to pick their joint ethnicity for their child.)

Han-minority mixed couples Consider a typical H; M couple. All such couples in the
prefecture belong to the same peer group. They have a preference function

                           uH;M = v + (b     e(H )   ")m + E (" j m) ,                          (1)

where b is the net material individual bene...t of having a minority child. This could di¤er across
regions or time, due to di¤erent policies favoring minority children (recall Section 2). Further
e(H ) + "; is the intrinsic individual cost of a child di¤erent from the father's ethnicity (recall
Section 2). Its ...rst component e(H ) is the average cost perceived by households when their
child has di¤erent ethnicity than the Han father ­this is common and deterministic to all peer-
group members, but could di¤er across groups. The second component " captures the variation


                                                11
in intrinsic cost, the only source of household heterogeneity. We assume that " is distributed
across couples with mean E (") = 0; c.d.f. G("); and continuous, di¤erentiable, and single-peaked
p.d.f. g ("). By these individual motives alone, households with high " would have a child with
the father'
          s Han ethnicity, while those with a low value would have a child with the mother'
                                                                                          s
minority ethnicity.
   The ...nal term in (1) captures the social motive: the household's social reputation (or self
image) ­ how the peer group views the mixed couple (or the couple views itself) ­ given its
ethnicity decision. This assessment varies with the actions and the norms of the mixed couple'
                                                                                             s
peer group, which explains the speci...cation as a conditional expectation. Taken literally, the
model assumes that the choices of m are perfectly observable by everybody in the peer group. In
reality, observability is realistic since the ethnic choice follows the child through life, as discussed
in Section 2. The assumption can easily be relaxed to allow for stochastic observation ­in that
case, one part of parameter      reects the probability that m is observed.
   As high-value " households make the socially accepted choice, we assume that the household'
                                                                                             s
social reputation is increasing in its "expected type" E (" j m), the conditional mean of "
of those in the peer group who make the same choice as the couple does. Parameter                   ; is
the relative weight on this social motive. (In the Online Appendix, we consider alternative
preference structures without social reputations, as well as alternative formulations for the social
reputations.)
   It is useful to de...ne the di¤erence

                                   = E (" j m = 0)      E (" j m = 1) .                             (2)

The value of     is the couple'
                              s gain in social reputation within its peer group when it conforms
to the social norm to give the father'
                                     s (Han) ethnicity to the child. In the language of Benabou
and Tirole (2011), the ...rst term is the social honor of a child with the father'
                                                                                 s ethnicity ­i.e.,
of making the socially accepted choice ­and the second term is the social stigma of a child with
the mother's ethnicity ­i.e., of making the non-socially accepted choice.

An equilibrium cuto¤ rule With this notation, it follows from (1) and (2) that the mixed
couple is indi¤erent about the child's identity when

                                     b     e(H )   "H =     ("H ) :                                 (3)

Since social reputations depend on how other couples in the peer group behave, this equality
implicitly de...nes an equilibrium cuto¤ value "H : For the marginal couple, the net individual
bene...t of a child with the mother'
                                   s ethnicity (the LHS) is equal to the gain in social reputation
of a child with the father'
                          s ethnicity (the RHS). Children to couples with an " below "H get the
mother'
      s ethnicity and those with an " above "H get the father'
                                                             s ethnicity. Consequently, the


                                                   12
share of children with the mother's (minority) ethnicity in the peer group is given by G("H ). By
(3), "H is a function of b; e and : Given the cuto¤ rule, the equilibrium gain in social reputation
becomes
                                 ("H ) = E (" j " > "H )       E (" j " < "H ) > 0 .                            (4)

By de...nition of truncated means (of a mean-zero variable), the ...rst term is always positive and
the second term is always negative. Hence,              ("H ) is always positive. By the results in Jewitt
(2004), the single peak of g implies that            has a unique interior minimum.5

Comparative statics From the cuto¤ condition (3), we can derive how the share of children
with mother'
           s ethnicity changes with material bene...ts of such children b: By the implicit function
theorem, we have

                         @G("H (b; e; ))                                 1
                                         = g ("H (b; e; ))            d ("H (b;e; ))
                                                                                       >0:                      (5)
                              @b                           1+             d"

Higher material bene...ts for minorities raise the share of children with (the mother'
                                                                                     s) minority
ethnicity: the density is positive and so is the "social multiplier" ­ if we follow Benabou and
                                             d ("M (b;e; ))
Tirole (2011) and assume that 1 +                d"           > 0 (which implies that        is not large enough
to create multiple equilibria). The social multiplier reects the interaction between individual
and social motives in the model and the properties of the comparative statics depend on the
                    d ("H )
sign and size of      d" ;    i.e., how the gain in social reputation from a Han child changes with
the behavior of others.
       As "H rises with b; more couples follow the mother'
                                                         s minority ethnicity. Then, both the
honor and the stigma terms in (4) goes up in value. When more children get the mother's
minority ethnicity (i.e., breaking the norm), this makes following the norm more honorable. At
the same time, having a minority child becomes less stigmatizing. What matters for the sign of
d ("H )
  d"      is whether the honor goes up by more or less than the stigma goes down ("goes down"
here and below means that a negative number becomes closer to zero).

The race between honor and stigma                     Panel (a) of Figure 3 illustrates two di¤erent pos-
sibilities. Suppose ...rst that "H =           < 0 in the left tail of the " distribution, so the share of
minority children is small. In this case, the e¤ect on the honor is relatively small, as this is the
truncated mean of " in the whole distribution to the right of                : But the e¤ect on the stigma ­
the truncated mean of " in the (green) tail to the left of               ­is relatively large. As the stigma
of a minority child goes down faster than the honor of a Han child goes up, the gain in social
                                                                      d ("H )
reputation from having a Han child goes down. That is                   d"      < 0; so more people yet have
minority children. In this case, the decisions of di¤erent couples are strategic complements and
   5
     Note that, for the whole peer group, social reputation is like a zero-sum game: under a veil of ignorance about
", the ex ante expected value of E (" j m) is zero (as the unconditional mean of " is zero).



                                                        13
the social multiplier is larger than 1.
       The alternative equilibrium in Figure 3(a) has "H = > 0 in the right tail of the distribution,
where many couples break the social norm and have minority children. In this case, the honor
of a Han child ­the truncated mean in the (red) tail to the right of                  ­goes up faster than the
stigma of a minority child goes down, so the gain in social reputation from having a Han child
                                                                                           d ("H )
rises, which dampens the rise in the share of minority children. That is,                    d"      > 0; decisions
of di¤erent couples are strategic substitutes, and the social multiplier is smaller than 1.
       Panel (b) of Figure 3 illustrates this race between honor and stigma in a numerical example
with a symmetric distribution. It shows that both the honor of respecting the norm goes up
and the stigma of breaking the norm goes down (its negative value comes closer to zero) with
a higher " and that the (positive) honor always exceeds the (negative) stigma. Moreover,
the honor goes up faster when many Han-minority couples have minority children, whereas the
stigma falls faster when few couples have minority children. This di¤erence generates the pattern
in panel (c), where       ("H ) decreases in " when few children among Han-minority families have
the mother's ethnicity but increases in " when many such children have the mother'
                                                                                 s ethnicity.
       Under a relatively mild assumption on the "-distribution, the second derivative of                    ("H ) is
                         d2 ("H )
everywhere positive        d" 2
                                    > 0: Once we make that assumption, the multiplier monotonically
decreases as the initial equilibrium "H (and the share of children following mother'
                                                                                   s ethnicity)
travels from low values to high values.

Minority-Han mixed couples In a M; H mixed couple, the preference function analogous
to (1) can be written:

                           uM;H = v + (1        m)b     m(e(M ) + ") + E (" j m) ,                                (6)

where e(M ) and " now represent the average and idiosyncratic intrinsic cost of having a child
with the mother'
               s ethnicity (Han in this case), as the socially acceptable choice is now to pass
on minority identity to the child. We speci...cally assume that the distribution function G for
" and the weight on social reputation              are the same in the two types of couples in the same
locality.6
       The M; H couple will have a Han child when               (e(M ) + ") + E (" j m = 1) > b + E (" j
m = 0). De...ning the gain in social reputation in an analogous way as before ­ i.e.,                          is the
honor of following the father's minority ethnicity, E (" j m = 0) minus the stigma of following
the mother's Han ethnicity, E (" j m = 1) ­ we can write the indi¤erence condition for a Han
child as
   6
    This is a strong assumption, although one can think of arguments why ; say, could be either higher or
lower among minorities than majorities ­ the former may be more eager to ...t in or more eager to preserve their
identities. We do not pursue this issue further, however. The main argument is measurement: since proxies for
and the distributions of " would be very hard to ...nd in available data, theoretical predictions would be empirically
empty.



                                                         14
                                      b   e(M )     "M =      ("M ) .                                (7)

Thus, minority-Han households with " smaller (larger) than "M will have Han (minority) chil-
dren. Because       is always positive, it follows that "M < 0: The share of children with the
mother'
      s Han ethnicity within this peer group is thus G("M ):
     In the same manner as for H; M couples, we can derive the comparative statics for a change
in b to get:
                     @G("M (b; e; ))                                 1
                                     =     g ("M (b; e; ))        d ("M (b;e; ))
                                                                                   <0:               (8)
                          @b                                 1+       d"


3.2    Consistency with Motivating Facts
In this subsection, we show that the model is consistent with the facts presented in Section 2.

Choices across mixed marriages ­ Fact F1 In terms of the model, F1 requires that (in
the majority of prefectures) G("M ) < G("H ): This follows from (3) and (7) plus the fact that
      d
1+    d"   > 0:
     The intuition is straightforward: on average, minority men experience not only material
bene...ts, but also intrinsic bene...ts and higher social reputation of a child with their own ethnicity.
Compared to Han men, more of them thus choose their own identity for their children. Because
H; M mixed couples trade o¤ material bene...ts against intrinsic and social reputation costs, they
are more likely to cross the paternal ethnic cuto¤.

The e¤ect of material bene...ts ­ Fact F2 Expressions (5) and (8) show how the two
types of couples react to an higher material bene...ts, b. These expressions reveal that higher b
raises the probability of a child with mother'
                                             s ethnicity for Han-minority families, everything
else equal, consistent with F2. By contrast, the model predicts an opposite pattern for minority-
Han families. However, the probability to pick the mother's ethnicity is already very low, which
leaves little variation to explore statistically.
     Our model is thus consistent with facts F1 and F2. We now turn our interest to the new
predictions from the model, which are the ones we will test empirically.

3.3    Main Prediction
Our most important prediction concerns the interaction between individual (material) motives
and social motives. We focus on the e¤ects on Han-minority families and state the model
predictions in two alternative ways.

Comparing high and low initial cutpoints We ...rst derive a testable prediction about the
e¤ects of a change in material bene...ts, depending on the initial equilibrium. Expression (5) says


                                                    15
                                                                                                      1
that material bene...ts are crowded in by social reputation ­ a social multiplier                  d (" (b;e; ))
                                                                                              1+       H
                                                                                                       d"
larger than 1 ­ when few Han-minority couples break the social norm and their choices are
                            d ("H (b;e; ))
strategic complements (          d"        < 0): When many couples break the social norm and choices
                                d ("H (b;e; ))
are strategic     substitutes (      d"        > 0), the bene...ts are instead crowded out ­ a social
multiplier smaller than 1. This di¤erence between crowding in with low shares of norm breakers,
but crowding out with high shares of norm breakers is the essence of our model.
      But the e¤ect in (5) of a change in bene...ts also includes the density g ("H ) at the initial
cutpoint. When considering this channel, we impose the condition that the distribution of "
has (weakly) positive skew.7 Speci...cally, we assume that the median "50 (and the mean) of the
distribution lies (weakly) to the right of the mode. Suppose we compare two prefectures with
cutpoints at percentiles equidistant from ­ and not too far from ­ the median, i.e., "50+n and
"50   n:   Because of the positive skew, we have g ("50     n)     g ("50+n ). The larger e¤ects of material
bene...ts due to the higher social multiplier at "50        n   compared to "50+n is thus reinforced by a
higher density. We can now repeat this comparison for every other twin percentile cutpoints
above and below the median. If the cutpoints in the prefectures we observe in the data are
continuously distributed along the support of ", we can conclude that the average e¤ect of
material bene...ts in regions with cutpoints "H below the median must be higher than the average
e¤ect in regions with cutpoints above the median.
      Of course, we do not observe the cutpoints "H in di¤erent prefectures directly, only the
shares of Ham-minority households who get minority children G("H ): However, in the model the
cutpoints and shares are one-to-one. Based on the argument above, we can therefore state:

P1 For peer groups who face the same increase in bene...ts within a province, we should see a
        larger e¤ ect among Han-minority families in peer groups with a share of children with the
        mother's minority ethnicity below a cuto¤ , close to the median share, compared to peer
        groups above that cuto¤ .

In the data, we will evaluate prediction P1 by di¤erence in di¤erences, comparing prefectures
and cohorts above and below a cuto¤ share, near the median, of children with the mother'
                                                                                       s
ethnicity, before and after the shift in policy.

Comparing initial cutpoints in di¤erent quartiles Prediction P1 relies on a comparison
of the e¤ects triggered by changing bene...ts above and below a cuto¤ share. Our discussion
about the combined e¤ect of a decreasing social multiplier and the density of a single-peaked
distribution suggests that we cannot state P1 as a linear interaction between the initial share
and the change in bene...ts. When the initial share of minority kids is in the left part of the
distribution, an upward shift in " has an ambiguous local e¤ect due to countervailing e¤ects of
  7
      This assumption can be weakened to say that the distribution of " does not have too much negative skew.




                                                       16
a higher density and a lower social multiplier, whereas the e¤ect gets unambiguous for initial
shares on the other side of the median.
    We now illustrate this ambiguity and derive an alternative form of our main prediction. To
do so, we consider the comparative statics at di¤erent segments of the share distribution G(" )
observed in the data, corresponding to di¤erent quartiles of cutpoints " . Let "q ; q = 1; 2; 3; 4
denote cutpoints located at the middle of the quartiles of the " distribution. The (weak) positive
skew of the distribution implies that g ("4 )      g ("1 ) and g ("4 )     g ("3 )   g ("2 ): Moreover, under
                     d2
the assumption that d"  2 >     0; the ...rst derivatives of the social multiplier are monotonically
            d ("1 )   d ("2 )            d ("3 )       d ("4 )
ordered as: d"      < d"        < 0 <     d"       <    d"     :   Using these facts in (5), we obtain an
alternative testable prediction:

P1' Suppose all peer groups in a province experience the same increase in bene...ts, due to
      a provincial policy. Then, the e¤ ect on the probability of Han-minority couples having
      minority children is (i ) larger in the ...rst, second and third quartile than in the fourth
      quartile of the share distribution, (ii ) larger in the second than in the third quartile, (iii )
      ambiguous when we compare the ...rst and second quartiles, or the ...rst and third quartiles.

    The third part of P1'shows why we cannot use a simple interaction between the initial share
and a policy indicator to test the theory. A cuto¤ in the ...rst quartile is associated with a lower
density but a higher social multiplier than a cuto¤ in the second quartile, and a higher social
multiplier but a lower (or higher density) than a cuto¤ the third quartile. Comparing the e¤ects
in the ...rst quartile with those in the second or third quartile thus leads to ambiguous results,
which di¤ers from assuming a (weakly) linear impact. We will come back to this di¤erence when
discussing our empirical ...ndings.

Auxiliary prediction Our paper focuses on the interaction between individual (material)
motives and social motives, as stated in P1 and P1'
                                                  . An additional testable prediction concerns
the interaction e¤ect of material bene...ts and intrinsic costs. Do the (average) intrinsic costs
e(H ) of minority children modify the e¤ect of material bene...ts b for Han-minority couples?
Yes, as long as the share of minority children in the peer group is relatively small, material
bene...ts have a smaller e¤ect on the probability of minority children in Han-minority families
when intrinsic costs are high. This intuitive prediction may not be speci...c to our model; other
models could also deliver a similar prediction. But a test of it does provide a sanity check on
our setup, which we consider in Online Appendix D.


4    Measurement
This section discusses how to measure the variables and parameters in the model. We also pro-
vide more background information for each variable. Outcomes and some controls are measured


                                                    17
at the individual level, whereas the individual and social motives are measured at the prefecture,
residency, education-group, or ethnicity level.

Linking of data and samples             We draw on two sources of data: the 1-percent samples of the
1982, 1990 and 2000 censuses ­and the 2005 population survey, also covering about 1 percent of
the population. As in the model, we gauge the husband-wife-children structure of households.
These can be identi...ed by the head-spouse-child label in the censuses, and by the gender of the
head and spouse. We can directly identify children in the 2000 and 2005 data. The 1982 and
1990 censuses do not distinguish between children and children-in-law. To identify children in
these earlier data sets, we limit ourselves to unmarried children who still live with their parents.
The results we report below are robust to using the 2000 census and the 2005 mini-census only.
Below, we also consider composition e¤ects by separating families with one child and multiple
children.
       Although our data includes three-generation households, we always focus on the head-spouse-
child structure. Speci...cally, if a household head lives with his parents and children, we measure
the ethnicity of his children (rather than his own ethnicity);8 if a head lives with his children
and grandchildren, we measure the ethnicity of his children (rather than his grandchildren).
       After linking di¤erent datasets, our sample of mixed marriages comprises around 235,000
children born between 1970 and 2005. Some 125,000 of these come from Han-minority families
and 110,000 from minority-Han families. We start from 1970 because few (13 percent) of the
children in the linked data were born before 1970, and we need a representative cohort in the
                                                                          s ethnicity.9
initial period to de...ne the initial shares of children with their mother'
       We use administrative units de...ned by four-digit census codes and always call these prefec-
tures. While all four waves provide information on prefectures, we can only access county-level
(six-digit census code) information for 2000. Thus, we focus on prefecture-level norms in our
baseline analysis and use county-level information (for 2000) in our supplementary analysis.

Ethnicity outcomes (m in the model)                    Censuses always report gender, birth year and
ethnicity for each individual, which provides our measure of ethnicity outcomes. However, the
data do not report household names, or locations at a ...ner level than prefectures (or counties).
As shown by the summary statistics in Table 1, 47 percent of children in Han-minority families
have their mother's ethnicity, whereas only 6 percent do in minority-Han families. This is fact
F1 in the introduction. The low shares with mother'
                                                  s ethnicity in minority-Han families is
associated with little variation across time, as well as across space. This is consistent with our
model predictions discussed in Section 3.2. As a result, we concentrate on children in Han-
   8
     We make this choice for two reasons. First, the head-spouse-child structure is the most common in the data.
Second, we cannot tell parents from parents-in-law, which makes it di¢ cult to examine the ethnicity of household
heads.
   9
     Including those born before 1970 does not alter the main results.



                                                       18
minority families.
       In our analysis to follow, we treat mixed marriages as given. It is possible that some regions
are more open to mixed marriages, as well as to minority ethnicities for children. To take this into
consideration, we always control for prefecture ...xed e¤ects and non-parametric provincial trends
(province-by-year ...xed e¤ects) in our econometric speci...cations. In Section 6, we also discuss
whether endogenous mixed marriages could explain our main results, and present empirical
estimates suggesting they cannot.

Material bene...ts (b in the model)               Since ethnic material bene...ts for minority children
arise from a bundle of provincial regulations (recall Section 2), it is not straightforward to
quantify the regional variation over time. To check that our results are robust, we therefore use
three di¤erent measures. As mentioned above, these ethnic policies vary at the province level
by law, which does not rule out variation at more local levels (e.g., across prefectures) due to
di¤erent implementation of the same law. However, since we ask how ex ante ethnic policies
shape people'
            s choices, it is reasonable to use legislated provincial-level policies.
       1. Rollout of the one-child policy. Family-planning policies favored minorities already
in the 1960s. But these policies became more generous and more salient in the 1980s, with
the switch to a stricter one-child policy. However, minorities enjoy family-planning exibility.
By giving them minority status, parents can thus create an option for their children to have a
second child.
       To measure its rollout, we employ the timing for 27 provinces used in Edlund et al. (2013).10
As explained in that paper and earlier work on family planning (e.g., Peng 1996), the one-child
policy is an umbrella for a raft of policies. Edlund et al. (2013) consider three programs:
(i) family-planning science and technology-research institutes, (ii) family-planning education
centers, and (iii) family-planning associations. Since all these programs make the one-child
policy salient, we treat the ...rst year any of them was present in a province by law as the ...rst
year of one-child policy. These starting dates range from 1976 (in Jiangsu) to 1984 (in Guangxi).
       This measure has the advantage of being staggered across provinces, but the disadvantage
of a binary classi...cation that cannot distinguish potentially di¤erent material bene...ts across
provinces.11
       Nothing suggests that the rollout of family-planning institutions is related to ethnic choices of
children in mixed marriages. In the data, the p-value is 0.759 for the correlation between the year
of adopting the instructions and the 1970-74 cohort share of minority children in Han-minority
families. We also check empirically for pre-trends.
       2. Extra Fertility of Minorities. To capture the intensity of the family-planning policy
and its variation over provinces and time, we calculate a second measure, namely the extra
  10
    Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Chongqing are not included. We thank Lena Edlund for providing this data.
  11
    A related measure of the one-child policy is the ...nes for extra children used in Ebenstein (2010). Because
policy rollout is the major driver, our results are robust to using these ...nes as an alternative measure.



                                                      19
fertility for minorities (relative to Han) after the policy rollout. This measure is allowed to di¤er
by province and by 5-year mother-birth cohort. Speci...cally, we gauge (close to) completed
fertility based on the number of children to Han and minority women aged 40 and above. After
the policy, on average, minority mothers have 0.11 more children than Han mothers.
       Moreover, the extra fertility measure varies widely across provinces. Panel (a) in Online
Appendix B1 presents a map of the ratio of the completed fertilities for minority and Han
mothers born in 1955-59 (as of 1995-99). As shown, this ratio is higher in the western provinces.
       When matching this measure with the ethnicity-choice data, we use the extra fertility in the
previous 5-year cohort of mothers, which is less likely to su¤er from endogeneity.
       3. Extra Exam Scores of Minorities. To proxy the variation in education bene...ts for
minorities across provinces, we use the extra scores for minorities in the 2000 National College
Entrance Exam.12 We normalize these extra scores by the cuto¤ score for four-year universities
in a province.13 Di¤erent from the time-varying measures on fertility, this measure ­ which
ranges from 0 to 6 percent ­is only available for the cross section of provinces. In the relevant
period, a three-percent extra score is associated with a 2.3 percentage points increase in college
admission probability. When matching this measure with the ethnic-choice data, we assume it
to be 0 before the introduction of the National College Entrance Exam in 1977, and use the
cross-sectional measure for the entire period afterwards.
       Panel (b) in Online Appendix B1 presents a map of the extra scores by province. Unlike
the extra-fertility scores, the extra-exam scores matter more for southwestern provinces. At
the cross-sectional level, the correlation between Measures 2 and 3 is low, with an insigni...cant
correlational coe¢ cient of 0.06. Thus, the two measures can be considered as two independent
policy experiments to examine the responses of mixed-marriage couples. Therefore, we examine
the two separately rather than aggregating them into an index.
       In sum, the one-child policy has a staggered introduction across provinces, but assumes that
(once introduced) the material bene...ts to minorities are the same across provinces. The extra-
college scores instead has cross-sectional variation after its (simultaneous) introduction, while
the extra-fertility score has cross-sectional as well as time-series variation. We use all three
measures of material bene...ts in our analysis. The number of observations varies slightly due to
data availability.

                                                            d
Peer groups for social motives (related to                  d"   in the model) Following the discussion
                                                                          d
about crowding in or crowding out in Section 3 (the sign of               d"   ), we measure social motives
by the shares of children with mother'
                                     s ethnicity in mixed marriages. To avoid the reection
  12
     We cannot access the data for a long period, but at least during 1999-2003, we ...nd the extra scores for
minorities very stable.
  13
     There are separate cuto¤s for ...rst-tier and second-tier universities in a province. We normalize the extra
scores by the second-tier cuto¤. The results are robust to using the ...rst-tier cuto¤ (since the two cuto¤s are
highly correlated).




                                                       20
problem discovered and discussed by Manski (1993), we want to treat the social motives for a
particular cohort as predetermined by previous choices in the peer group.
    Because we cannot observe the relevant peer group directly and our data reect a population
sample, we de...ne the peer group relevant for the social motives in di¤erent ways in the hope
of avoiding biased estimates. In line with the model, where people are inuenced by others
who make the same decisions, we use a choice-based de...nition of peer groups. In particular,
we associate each Han-minority couple with a set of couples in a certain location who have the
opportunity to choose the same ethnicities for their children.14 In addition, we also allow for a
wider peer group by considering all families who can choose to follow the mother'
                                                                                s ethnicity or
not.
    1. The 1970-74 cohort from Han-minority families in the same prefecture. We
exploit the variation across prefectures in the 1970-74 birth cohort ­ i.e., in the initial cohort
unambiguously before the start of the dramatic changes in ethnic policies. This treats the social
motives as predetermined over the period of changing policies (and also allows us to examine
the dynamic impacts of social motives over time).
    2. The 1970-74 cohort in the same prefecture from Han-minority families, sub-
divided by residence, education, or wife's ethnicity. The measure in 1. only uses the
husband's ethnicity, the wife'
                             s minority status, and prefecture to de...ne the peer group. But
we also consider a number of ...ner peer groups. A. The ...rst group conditions also on urban
or rural residence and de...nes the peer group at the prefecture-ethnicity-cohort-residency level.
Speci...cally, we distinguish between urban and rural based on the husband'
                                                                          s Hukou (legal resi-
dence). De...nition 2.A implies smaller groups in each cell than de...nition 1., by disaggregation
and by the fact that we rely on rural/urban information in the 2000 and 2005 censuses.15 B.
One may argue that peer groups are plausibly formed by people with similar levels of education.
Our second re...nement thus conditions on father'
                                                s education. Speci...cally, we distinguish those
who have completed high-school or above. This way, we de...ne the peer group at the prefecture-
ethnicity-cohort-education level. Since material bene...ts (especially education bene...ts) can di¤er
by education groups, this de...nition also helps us check the heterogeneity by education levels.
C. Yet another possibility is that the relevant peer group for a Han man and minority woman
is limited to other couples, where the wife has the same minority ethnicity. We consider this
possibility as well, by de...ning the peer group at the prefecture-cohort-(female)ethnicity level.
    3. The 1970-74 cohort from Han-minority families in the same county. Instead of
prefectures, we also use a narrower de...nition. But we can only access the county information
  14
     The prospective econometric problems of estimating the in uence of unobserved peer groups in a sample from
the population appear related to the biases due to measurement error when estimating peer e¤ects for members
of partially sampled networks (Chandrasekhar and Ellis, 2011).
  15
     Rural/urban information was asked in the 1990 but not in the 1982 census, which makes it absent from the
merged 1982-90 data by IPUMS. It is possible to identify it based on separate information for 1990. We choose
not to do so to keep consistency with the IPUMS merged data. This also serves as a check on whether our ...ndings
hold with the 2000 and 2005 censuses only.



                                                       21
for 2000.
   4. All mixed couples in the 1970-74 cohort in the same prefecture able to make
an ethnic choice All peer group de...nitions under 2. are re...nements of de...nition 1. To check
for robustness, we also consider a broader peer group, namely the share of children with mother'
                                                                                               s
ethnicity, among all couples that can make such a choice (Han-minority couples, minority-Han
couples and minority-minority couples with di¤erent ethnicities).

Pre-policy variation in share of children with mother's ethnicity (G(" ) in the model)
As mentioned in Section 2, Figure 2 shows a great deal of variation across prefectures for Han-
minority mixed families. In terms of the model, this dispersion reects the joint distribution of
parameters b, e(H ),    leading to di¤erent cuto¤s " and the mapping from these cuto¤s into
shares via distribution G: In contrast, for minority-Han mixed families, most prefectures are
concentrated at the left end, leaving little variation across prefectures. As stated before, we
therefore focus on the social motives for Han-minority families. In addition, the pattern for
the Han-minority families in Figure 2 suggests that the likelihood for sons to get their mother'
                                                                                               s
ethnicity is lower than that for daughters, which is consistent with the interpretation that the
intrinsic identity costs for parents are higher for sons in this patriarchal society.
   Figure 4 maps the spatial distribution across China of ethnicity choices by Han-minority
couples (in the 1970-74 cohort). It suggests that the social motives vary considerably across pre-
fectures, and that this variation is not strongly geographically clustered. For instance, province
...xed e¤ects only explain about a third of the variation across prefectures.
                                                                                     d
   For Han-minority families, our model predicts a strategic complementarity         d"   < 0 for low
                                                                                    d
values of cuto¤ " (low norm-breaking shares) and a strategic substitutability       d"    > 0 for high
values of " (high norm-breaking shares). If the distribution of " were symmetric, the sign would
ip at a critical cuto¤ of "50 = 0; corresponding to a share of minority kids at 0:5: But we would
like to allow for a non-symmetric distribution.
   Empirically, we do this in two ways. First, we check how the estimates behave as we vary
the assumption about the critical cuto¤ in the neighborhood of 0.5, when testing Prediction P1.
Second, we look at the estimates in di¤erent quartiles, when testing Prediction P1'.

Other prefecture and individual characteristics We control for a set of prefecture and
individual variables. At the prefecture level, we include characteristics that might a¤ect ethnic
choices: whether a prefecture is a borderland, its minority population share in the 1982 census,
its population share with high-school education or higher in the 1982 census, as well as the
number of children for minority women (aged 40 and above) in the 1982 census. The direct
level e¤ect of these characteristics are absorbed by prefecture ...xed e¤ects. To rule out that
the identifying variation in the (pre-policy) share of children with their mother'
                                                                                 s ethnicity is
systematically related to the change in ethnic policies, we allow the prefecture controls to have



                                                  22
di¤erent impacts before and after the introduction of the ethnic policies (interacting them with
our measures of ethnic bene...ts).
    We present correlations between these characteristics and our baseline measure of social
motives (pre-policy share of minority children in Han-minority families) in Online Appendix
B2. It is worthwhile pointing out that correlation between our measure of social motives and
the share of minority population is weakly positive. This correlation rejects a "scarcity" e¤ect,
whereby children are less likely to be minority in regions with a higher minority population share
because a more or less ...xed set of material bene...ts gets diluted by many takers.
    At the individual level, we include education-level ...xed e¤ects and 5-year birth-cohort ...xed
e¤ects for both father and mother. We unify the categorical education levels across censuses into
four groups: 1=less than completed primary school, 2=completed primary school, 3=completed
secondary (high) school, and 4=some college education or more. As Table 1 shows, the average
husband has more education than the average wife. To rule out that our estimated e¤ects are
driven by omitted individual variables, we allow the impacts of these individual characteristics
on ethnic choices to di¤er before and after any policy shifts.

Migration The variation across prefectures and provinces discussed in this section is based
on residency at census time. However, migration may make residency di¤erent than birth place.
Only the 2000 census includes information on whether an individual's birth place and current
residency coincide (the 1982 and 1990 censuses spell out if people lived in the same county ...ve
years ago, while the 2005 mini-census only has that information one year ago). Based on the 2000
census, over 85 percent of individuals were born in the same county as their current residence,
while 94 percent were born in the same province. Given that prefecture is the administrative
level in between county and province, these facts suggest that migration is unlikely to make a
major di¤erence for our main results. Moreover, Frijters, Gregory and Meng (2013) document
that rural-urban migration did not take o¤ until 1997. Nevertheless, we conduct robustness
checks by omitting the (most recent) 2005 census from the sample, and by excluding individuals
whose birth and residence counties are di¤erent. This should minimize the potential impact of
migration. In addition, we show that the interaction of material bene...ts and social motives (our
main e¤ect) has no impact on migration outcomes in the 2000 census.


5    Empirical Evidence
The most important new prediction(s) from our model is P1 (and P1') on the interactions
between individual and social motives. To the best of our knowledge, no similar prediction has
been studied in the existing literature. This section confronts that prediction with data.




                                                23
5.1       Testing P1 and P1'
Our model of the interactions between individual and social motives predicts a larger e¤ect of
higher material bene...ts in peer groups where the initial share of children breaking the social
norm (with the mother'
                     s ethnicity) is smaller. This is because individual motives driven by ma-
terial bene...ts are crowded in rather than crowded out by prevailing social motives. Empirically,
Prediction P1 relies on a comparison of the e¤ects above and below a cuto¤ share.

Main speci...cation To test Prediction P1, we ask whether               b   is positive in the di¤erence-in-
di¤erences speci...cation:

               CME i;p;t =     bI (   V )p   br;t + br;t + birthyeart + pref p
                                                    0
                              +ethng + Xi;p +           Xi;p   br;t + provr    yeart + "i;p;t ,         (9)

where the dependent variable CME i;p;t is a binary indicator for child i ­ with Han father and
minority mother of ethnic group g , in prefecture p (belonging to province r); and birth year t ­
having the mother'
                 s ethnicity.
     The material bene...ts from ethnic policy br;t are measured in the three ways discussed in
Section 4. Thus br;t (Post Policy) is a dummy for whether province r has implemented the
one-child policy, br;t (Extra Fertility) is the extra fertility for minorities in the province post the
one-child policy, and br;t (Extra Scores) is the extra score for minorities in the provincial national
college-entrance exam.
     I(    V )p is an indicator for whether the peer group ­ by De...nition 1 in Section 4, i.e.,
Han-minority couples with children in the 1970-74 birth cohort in the same prefecture has a
minority-children share below some critical value V between 0 and 1. This value corresponds to
the theoretical borderline between crowding in and crowding out. Thus, the parameter of interest
 b   measures the interaction between material bene...ts and social reputations: the di¤erence in
the e¤ect of material bene...ts in prefectures below and above the cuto¤.
     To allow time-invariant, or slowly changing, prefecture characteristics ­ like attitudes to
mixed marriages ­ to inuence ethnicity choices, we include prefecture ...xed e¤ects (pref p ).
To hold constant factors that a¤ect China-wide ethnicity choices by di¤erent cohorts (like the
average e¤ects of post-policy material bene...ts), we include birth-year ...xed e¤ects (birthyeart ).
To control for time-invariant or slowly changing ethnicity-speci...c factors, we include (a set of 55)
ethnicity ...xed e¤ects (ethng ). For example, some minority groups may have stronger preference
that the child maintains the father'
                                   s ethnicity. As we focus on the children of Han-minority
couples, these ...xed e¤ects refer to the wife'
                                              s particular minority ethnicity.
     Xi;p is the set of individual and prefecture characteristics presented in Section 4 and we
include Xi;p    br;t to allow their impacts on individual behavior to change with material bene...ts.
     Finally, we include province-by-calendar-year non-parametric trends (provr              yeart ) to con-


                                                   24
trol for di¤erent evolutions across provinces, such as the direct e¤ects of di¤erent provincial
policies, or di¤erent evolutions of discrimination against minorities. We cluster the standard
errors at the prefecture level and present those clustered at the province level as a robustness
check.

Baseline results We start with a cuto¤ share V = 0:5 and br;t (Post Policy) as the material
bene...ts in Table 2A. Columns (1)-(2) of the table only include prefecture ...xed e¤ects. Column
(1) shows that the average e¤ect of br;t (Post Policy) is around 0.078 ­ i.e., an additional 7.8
percentage points of Han-Minority couples choose to have a minority child after the introduction
of the one-child policy, which is around 19% of the pre-policy mean (41 percentage points).
Column (2) presents the interaction e¤ect of interest, on I (                  0:5)p   br;t (Post Policy), which
shows that e¤ect of material incentives is indeed signi...cantly larger when the share of children
following mother'
                s ethnicity is smaller than 0.5. The estimated interaction e¤ect is quantitatively
large, at least on the order of the average e¤ect in column (1). This is consistent with Prediction
P1 that bene...ts have a larger e¤ect in peer groups where few mixed households break the social
norm by giving their children the mother'
                                        s ethnicity, as this leads to a strategic complementarity
(and a social multiplier above 1) rather than a strategic substitutability (and a social multiplier
below 1). For example, given the estimates in column (2), the average e¤ect of the introduction
of the one-child policy is around 10 percentage points below the 0.5 cuto¤ and 3 percentage
points above the cuto¤.16
       Column (3) adds wife-ethnicity ...xed e¤ects. Column (4) further includes birth-year ...xed
e¤ects ­ as 82% of the variation in the policy measure is absorbed by these birth-year ...xed
e¤ects, the coe¢ cient on br;t (Post Policy) is omitted from the results (but still appears in the
regression). These columns both display an estimate of             b   similar to that in column (2). Column
(5) shows that the column (2) results are little a¤ected by including prefecture and individual
characteristics and their interactions with br;t (Post Policy). Column (6) further shows that the
pattern is robust to non-parametric provincial trends (province-by-calendar-year ...xed e¤ects).
       The standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the prefecture level and those in brackets
are clustered at the province level. The estimate of                   b   is signi...cantly di¤erent from zero,
regardless of the levels of clustering. As this is also true for all results to follow, we only show
the results for prefecture-level clustering in subsequent tables.

Alternative policy measures In Table 2B, we employ two additional measures of material
bene...ts, br;t (Extra Fertility) and br;t (Extra Scores). We limit ourselves to three speci...cations
for each policy measure, namely those in columns (2), (4) and (6) of Table 2A. To facilitate the
comparison, we present the impacts of a one-standard-deviation (1 ) increase of the measures.
  16
    Instead of examining an interaction e¤ect, one can also evaluate the e¤ect of P ostr;t in separate samples with
prefectures below and above the cuto¤ (the di¤erence between the speci...cations is from which samples the ...xed
e¤ects are estimated). The results are very similar.



                                                        25
As shown in column (1), a 1 extra fertility is associated with a 3.4 percentage point increase in
the probability of having a child with mother'
                                             s ethnicity. By columns (2)-(3), the di¤erence in
impact below and above the cuto¤ is on the order of the average e¤ect. Columns (5)-(6) present
the results for br;t (Extra Scores), which exhibit a similar pattern as extra fertility. Column (7)
presents a speci...cation which includes both these policy measures, and shows that their impacts
are comparable. As mentioned in Section 4, the variation in the two measures are only weakly
correlated, so they can be considered as largely independent interventions.

Alternative cuto¤s We further examine the impacts of b for di¤erent cuto¤s. For the same
speci...cation as column (6) of Table 2A, we visualize the corresponding interaction estimates and
their 95 percent con...dence intervals for all cuto¤s V between 0.1 and 0.9 (see Online Appendix
C1). Each estimate represents the di¤erent e¤ects of br;t on individuals in prefectures below and
above cuto¤ V . For br;t (Post Policy) and br;t (Extra Fertility), the positive impact is signi...cant
for all cuto¤ values from 0.3 and upwards; for br;t (Extra Scores), it is signi...cant for all cuto¤
values from 0.4 and upwards. As discussed next, a lower point estimate at the lowest cuto¤s is
consistent with the model.

Quartile results (P1') In Section 3, Prediction P1'stated the predicted e¤ects of interacting
individual and social motives in di¤erent quartiles. To consider this prediction, we replace I (
0:5)p in (9) with three indicators for the early 1970s cohort share of minority children being in
the quartiles: I (0-0.25)p , I (0.25-0.50)p , and I (0.50-0.75)p . We thus leave the fourth quartile as
the reference group.
   Prediction P1' is con...rmed by the results in Table 3, again for the peer group of all Han-
Minority couples in the same prefecture with children in the 1970-74 cohort. Columns (1)-(3)
present the estimates when the three quartile indicators are interacted with br;t (Post Policy):
column (1) includes only prefecture ...xed e¤ects; column (2) adds ethnic ...xed e¤ects (for the
minority wife) and birth-year ...xed e¤ects; column (3) further adds the interaction e¤ects of
prefecture and individual characteristics and province-by-calendar-year ...xed e¤ects. Columns
(4)-(9) present analogous results using br;t (Extra Fertility) and br;t (Extra Scores) to measure
material bene...ts. Consistent with Prediction P1'
                                                 , the e¤ect of material bene...ts is signi...cantly
larger in the ...rst, second and third quartile compared to the fourth quartile. Also consistent
with the prediction, the point estimates for the second quartile are indeed signi...cantly higher
than that for the third quartile (a p-value smaller than 0.05 in all speci...cations).
   As in the test of Prediction P1, these e¤ects are large: the di¤erence in e¤ects of higher
material bene...ts, say, in the ...rst vs. the fourth quartile is on the order of the average e¤ect
estimated in Table 2. This corresponds to the theoretical prediction of a social multiplier above
1 in the ...rst quartile ­due to crowding in ­and a social multiplier below 1 in the fourth quartile
­ due to crowding out. Another indication of a substantial variation in the social multiplier is
that the empirically estimated e¤ect in the ...rst quartile is everywhere larger than that in the

                                                  26
third quartile. As stated in Prediction P1'
                                          , this relative e¤ect is theoretically ambiguous, as
the social multiplier is higher but the density is lower when we compare the ...rst with the third
quartile.17 Empirically, we ...nd a smaller di¤erence between the ...rst and third quartiles than
between the second and third quartiles, which further supports the theoretical prediction of a
non-linear e¤ect.18

5.2    Robustness
This subsection checks if our baseline results are robust to potential mis-measurement due to
migration, pre-trends before the policy shift, and endogenous mixed marriages.

Migration To deal with mis-measurement due to migration, we re-estimate the baseline re-
sults, dropping all post 2000 data as well as individuals whose birth and residency counties are
di¤erent in the 2000 census. The results, presented in columns (1)-(6) in the table of Online
Appendix C2, entail estimates similar to those in Table 2. Columns (7)-(9) of the same table
show that I ( 0.5)p       br;t has no signi...cant impact on being a migrant in the 2000 census. These
results suggest that our main ...nding is unlikely to be driven by migration per se.

Dynamic impacts and pre-trends Our baseline speci...cation highlights the average e¤ect
of material bene...ts. A more exible way of examining the impact of br;t (Post Policy) is to allow
the e¤ect to vary by birth cohort:

                         =+3
                         X                                             =+3
                                                                       X
      CME i;p;t =               b;   Cohortr;         I(     0:5)p +         Cohortr; + birthyeart + pref p
                          = 3                                          = 3
                                                  0
                        +ethng + Xi;p +               Xi;p    P ostr;t + provr     yeart +"i;p;t .                (10)

Here, the birth cohort 1-3 years before the family-planning policy (i.e.,                   =    1) is the reference
group and      2 f 3; 2; 0; 1; 2; 3g refers to 7 or more years before the policy, 4-6 years before the
policy, 0-2 years after the policy, 3-5 years after the policy, and 6 or more years after the policy.
    If the estimates of      b; 3    and   b; 2   are di¤erent from zero, prefectures with di¤erent social
motives were di¤erent already before the introduction of ethnic policies. In e¤ect,                  b; 3   and   b; 2
are weakly negative and insigni...cant, indicating that pre-trends are not critical. The estimation
results are presented in Online Appendix C3 and visualized in Figure 5 (where the bars indicate
95% con...dence intervals when standard errors are clustered at the prefecture level).
    The interaction between individual and social motives becomes signi...cantly positive after
the policy shift. Moreover, the size of this interaction e¤ect is increasing over time. These
  17
     Also, Figure 2 suggests that the empirical density of the equilibrium prefectural cuto¤s is skewed with a
relatively high density in the ...rst quartile,
  18
     This ...nding rejects an alternative hypothesis: the e¤ect is (weakly) decreasing in the share measure. Because
the e¤ect is larger in the second quartile than that in the third quartile, the alternative hypothesis would predict
an even larger di¤erence between the ...rst and the third quartiles.


                                                             27
results are consistent with a dynamic extension of the model presented in Online Appendix C4.
Speci...cally, if the social motives of each cohort are tied to the behavior of the previous cohort,
equation (3) still de...nes a steady state value for "H . However, the equilibrium adjusts towards
the new steady state according to the non-linear di¤erence equation:

                                  b   e(H )   "H;t =    ("H;t   1 ):                           (11)

In this dynamic setting, the dynamic adjustment ­ impulse response ­ to the same b shock
predicts that the di¤erence between peer groups with low and high initial shares should go up
over time, as it does in the data.

Outliers While our results exploit within-province and within-ethnicity variation, one may
still wonder if they are driven by outlier provinces or ethnicities. All the baseline results (as
well as all other results to follow) are robust to outliers, in that they hold up to dropping one
province, or one ethnic group, at a time.

Endogenous mixed marriages            An important concern about our analysis is that Han-
minority marriages may be simultaneous with the ethnic choice of children. If unobserved
factors drive the incidence of mixed marriages as well as the ethnicity choices in such marriages,
our ...ndings in Tables 2 may just proxy for those omitted drivers rather than capture an interac-
tion between individual and social motives. An increase in Han-minority mixed couples can only
explain a higher share of children with their mother's ethnicity, however, if the additional mixed
couples are more likely to break the social norm. Our analysis provides a speci...c answer as to
why couples married after the ethnic policies do so. But in a broader context, mixed marriages
are certainly endogenous. In fact, we are currently doing additional research on the incidence
of mixed marriages. While we leave the question about the drivers of mixed marriages for an
accompanying paper, it is important to examine whether these marriages can explain our main
...ndings.
    The sharpest way to deal with this issue would be to examine choices within the same family,
before and after the implementation of ethnic policies. At the aggregate level, the share of mixed
couples (with more than one child) with children of di¤erent ethnicities goes up from 3.6% to
4.5% after the implementation of the one-child policy. To conduct an individual-level within-
family analysis, however, we must limit the sample to Han-minority families with some children
born before and some children born after the policy. Since this restriction preserves only 9% of
the mixed couples in our sample, we do not have enough power for a within-family analysis at
the prefecture level ­family ...xed e¤ects explain over 97% of the variation in children'
                                                                                        s ethnicity.
    A less satisfactory approach which still provides a useful check, is to consider the subsample
of couples who were married before the introduction of ethnic policies as the marriage decision of
these couples is very unlikely a¤ected by the ethnic policies. The restriction to early marriages,


                                                28
plus the fact that marriage-year information is available only in the 2000 and 2005 censuses,
considerably cuts the sample from that in our baseline estimates.
    Estimation results for this smaller sample are presented in columns (1)-(6) of Table 4, for
our three measures of material bene...ts. Since we exclude all couples married after the policy,
most children in the sample were born before 1985. The resulting post-policy period is thus very
short, which explains why the average e¤ects of higher material bene...ts in columns (1), (3) and
(5) are smaller than in the full sample ­ recall the dynamic pattern in Figure 5. However, the
interaction e¤ects with the social motive in columns (2), (4) and (6) are positive and similar in
magnitude to the average e¤ect, precisely as our baseline estimates in Table 2A. The magnitude
of br;t (Post Policy) is also similar to the results in Online Appendix C3 for the interaction e¤ect
1-3 years after the policy.
    Another way to deal with the concern of endogenous mixed marriages is to re-estimate our
baseline speci...cation in Table 2, but add the mixed-marriage share and its interaction with the
share indicator I (   0:5)p in the same prefecture. Columns (7)-(9) of Table 4 show that this only
very marginally alters the estimates of the central interaction e¤ects in Table 2.
    The bottom line is thus that our baseline pattern on the interactions between individual and
social motives appears to hold up in the wake of endogenous mixed marriages.

5.3    Alternative Peer Groups
Peer groups play a key role in our model. The empirical estimates we have shown so far rely on
the assumption that an earlier cohort of Han-minority couples in the same prefecture makes up
the relevant peer group for ethnicity decisions. As peer groups are not observable, it is important
to consider alternatives. In particular, our de...nition may be too wide if a certain Han-minority
couple is more inuenced by other such couples who live under similar conditions, have the same
education, or a wife from exactly the same minority ethnicity. Below, we consider these three
possibilities.
    One may also argue that our de...nition is too narrow. Would Han-minority couples be also
inuenced by minority-Han and minority-minority couples who can choose to break the norm?
We also consider this possibility.

Narrower peer groups Panel (a) of Table 5 presents separate results for rural-resident and
urban-resident members of the same ethnicity-prefecture-cohort (peer-group de...nition 2A in
Section 4). Although based on a considerably smaller sample, the estimates of the interaction
between individual and social motives deliver a similar message as the prefecture-cohort-level
results in Table 2. The e¤ects are generally larger for urban residents, consistent with the fact
that family-planning policies are more strictly enforced in cities. These results also show that our
main ...nding in Table 2 is unlikely to be driven by di¤erent perceived values of ethnic bene...ts
(b in the model). Another possibility is that rural and urban residents put di¤erent weight


                                                29
people on social reputations ( in the model). We do not attempt to empirically disentangle the
impacts of    and b:
   Another narrower peer-group de...nition subdivides each mixed-couples cohort by educational
background. In particular, we split the sample (according to de...nition 2B) into those with less
than a high-school education, and those with high-school or more. The results are presented in
panel (b) of Table 5. On average, families with more education are more likely to break the norm
and choose minority for their children. Multiple channels can account for this di¤erence: the
better educated may have better information, perceived higher bene...ts of education, or attach
less importance to tradition. Our focus, however, is still on the interplay between material
motives and social motives. As shown, the estimated interaction e¤ect between individual
material motives and social motives appears comparable for these two groups.
   The estimates presented so far assume that all mixed couples with a Han man and a minority
wife ­ no matter which minority ­ belong to the relevant peer group. What if we restrict the
peer group to each speci...c minority group of the wife (de...nition 2C)? To check this, we allow
each cohort in a prefecture to make up 55 di¤erent peer groups. In practice, the average number
is much smaller due to the regional dispersion of minorities. The central estimates, presented in
panel (c) of Table 5, are slightly larger than the baseline estimates in Table 2.
   In addition, we use the county information (available in census 2000) to de...ne peers. Once
again, we ...nd a similar pattern (presented in panel (d)). If anything, the coe¢ cients are larger
than in our baseline. Altogether, the results in panels (a)-(d) show that our results are robust
to narrower peer groups.

A wider peer group Opposite to the re...nement in panels (a)-(d) of Table 5, panel (e)
presents results for a wider peer group: all Han-minority, minority-Han, and minority-minority
couples that can choose whether to break the norm. Using the same speci...cation as in panels
(a)-(c), panel (d) shows a similar pattern for this wider peer group. The ...ndings in Table 5
show that our main result is unlikely to be driven by the speci...c peer-group de...nition in our
baseline speci...cation.

   In summary, the results reported in Section 5.1-5.3 constitute solid and robust evidence that
peer-group dependent social motives help shape the e¤ect of individual material bene...ts on
individual ethnicity choices. As in the theory, stronger material motives are either crowded in
or crowded out social motives, depending on the initial equilibrium in the peer group. The
interaction between individual and social motives appears to be not only statistically signi...cant
but also quantitatively signi...cant.
   As mentioned in Section 3, our model also predicts that when intrinsic costs are high, material
bene...ts have a smaller e¤ect on the probability of minority children in Han-minority families.
In Online Appendix D, we present supportive evidence for this sanity check, when intrinsic costs
are proxied by male gender of the child and religiosity of the wife's ethnicity.


                                                30
6    Alternative Explanations
Our model is consistent with motivating facts F1-F2 in Chinese micro data. Its central pre-
dictions P1 and P1'are also borne out by the data. Our model is thus a plausible framework
to understand the interaction of individual and social motives for identity choice. But could
our ...ndings be explained by other theoretical and empirical mechanisms? In this section, we
discuss two alternative ways of specifying the model and four alternative ways of interpreting
the empirical ...ndings. The bottom line of this discussion will be that even though some of the
alternative explanations may indeed help us think about the data, they are unlikely to drive
our main results on individual-social interactions. Other alternatives can be ruled out a priori,
on either theoretical or empirical grounds. We summarize the key conceptual issues for each
explanation and present the detailed modeling and estimations in Online Appendix E.

Nonlinear utility In our version of the Benabou-Tirole model, couples have preferences,
which are linear in material bene...ts b and intrinsic costs e + ", but nonlinear in social reputations
 E (" j m): What if we got rid of the social-reputation term, but made preferences concave in
individual bene...ts and context in intrinsic costs. Could this reproduce the prediction that
higher bene...ts would have a larger e¤ect on the share of children breaking the social norm (by
adopting the mother's ethnicity) when the share is smaller? As we show in Online Appendix
E1, the answer is no. Intuitively, due to the convexity of the cost function, the e¤ect of b is
smaller at lower values of " (lower norm-breaking shares), which contradicts Prediction P1.

Social interactions How particular are our theoretical predictions and empirical results to the
assumed form of social interactions? The latter has two dimensions: how the social motive enters
the household'
             s preferences, and which social peer group is the relevant one for the household.
We have examined alternative peer groups in Section 5. In this subsection, we discuss the
speci...c functional-form assumption and show that the most natural alternatives cannot explain
our ...ndings.
    As we have stressed, our version of the Benabou-Tirole model produces either crowding in or
crowding out, because people take into account not only the stigma of breaking the social norm
but also the honor of obeying it, given how others in their peer group behave. Many papers
in the literature consider only the stigma of breaking the norm, and assuming that it becomes
smaller if more people do so. But this is equivalent to assuming strategic complementarity, and
hence crowding in a priori.
    How important is the model'
                              s form for social reputation, namely that people choose identity
for their children to signal their expected type, given how everybody else in the peer group
behaves? One could think of other ways of modelling social reputation. The most natural
alternative is to assume that the honor of a child with father's ethnicity and the stigma of
a child with mother'
                   s ethnicity are given by the shares of norm-followers and norm-breakers


                                                  31
in the peer group. As derived in Online Appendix E2, such an assumption would typically
lead to strategic complements only. The attractiveness of our social-reputation model de...ned
over expected types is that it delivers non-trivial and testable predictions about the interaction
between individual and social motives without overly strong functional-form assumptions.

Bargaining power        Bargaining between husbands and wives, with conicting preferences, is
an alternative mechanism behind some of the patterns in the data. Consider facts F1 and F2
in Figure 1. Assume that women'
                              s bargaining power have gone up over time so that a higher
number of Han-minority couples chose the mother's minority ethnicity for their children. One
may further argue that this mechanism may have become more powerful post ethnic policies,
due to social and economic factors, like unbalanced and increasing sex ratios ­ more men per
woman ­among the Han. However, a bargaining mechanism cannot explain our main ...nding on
Prediction P1, neither in the theory nor in the data. In Online Appendix E3, we ...rst sketch a
bargaining model. Intuitively, to explain P1, one has to make the very speci...c assumption that
bargaining power has risen over time and more so in peer groups with lower shares of minority
children.
   Empirically, we can proxy bargaining power by three measures: education di¤erences, or age
di¤erences, between husband and wife, as well as sex ratios of children. In all cases, we ...nd no
evidence that bargaining power rises more in peer groups with lower shares of minority children.
Moreover, our main results are robust to considering these measures and their interactions with
the cuto¤ indicator in Tables 2A-2B. These estimation results are presented and discussed in
Online Appendix E3.

Minority population share Our ...ndings on Prediction P1 cannot really be explained by
variation in the share of minorities in the prefecture population. First, this prediction is about
the share of minority children in Han-minority families rather than the share of minorities
itself. As discussed in the prefecture-level correlations, however, these two measures are weakly
positively correlated. This suggests that our ...ndings are unlikely to be driven by a "scarcity"
e¤ect, whereby children are less likely to be minority in some regions because a more or less
...xed set of material bene...ts get diluted by a larger minority population. Such scarcity is also
unlikely a priori, as ethnic policies are not set by ...xed quotas.
   One may also argue that a higher minority population share works in the same direction as
the share of minority children in Han-minority families. In particular, if the minority population
share in a prefecture is small, ethnic conict is less likely to be a social problem and parents may
feel safer to break the norm and choose minority for their children. Tables 2A-2B already show
that our ...ndings hold conditional on the minority-population share and its interaction with
the ethnic policies br;t . Moreover, the coe¢ cients on this interaction term are not signi...cant in
those speci...cations (with a p-value of 0.46 in column (6) of Table 2A). Thus, our ...ndings are
not a¤ected by the share of minority population and there is no empirical evidence for a scarcity

                                                 32
or conict e¤ect.

Censoring Another possible concern is that our main result could be mechanically explained
by a kind of upward censoring. Speci...cally, our ...nding of a larger policy e¤ect in prefectures
with a small minority-children share could reect that there is little room to respond when this
share is large and approaching one. To check for this, we restrict the estimation sample to
prefecture-cohorts with a minority-children share between 0.3 and 0.7. In this interval, there
should be enough room for Han-minority couples in every prefecture-cohort to respond without
hitting a constraint. As shown in Online Appendix E4, the estimates from the restricted sample
are similar to the baseline estimates from the full sample in Table 2A. Upward censoring thus
does not drive our main ...ndings. Moreover, the evidence supporting P1'(the e¤ects by quartiles)
also suggests that censoring is unlikely to be the main driver. In fact, we ...nd that the e¤ect for
the second quartile is typically larger than that for the ...rst quartile.

Composition e¤ects Finally, the results could conceivably capture another mechanical e¤ect.
Speci...cally, some Han-minority couples may always have children with the father's Han ethnicity
and others may always have children with the mother'
                                                   s minority ethnicity. Suppose now that
after the one-child policy, couples who choose the mother'
                                                         s minority ethnicity have a larger
number of children than those who choose the father'
                                                   s Han ethnicity. Such composition e¤ects
could explain our results without any change in behavior (other than regarding the number of
children).
    To check this, in Online Appendix E5 we present separate results for families with a single
child (in columns (1)-(3)) and for those with multiple children (in columns (4)-(6)). As these
estimates show, the results for both types of households are similar to the baseline ...ndings in
Table 2A. If anything, the pattern is slightly stronger for single-child families. Our baseline
results on Prediction P1 are thus not driven by composition e¤ects.


7    Conclusion
Characterizing the interplay between individual and social motives is relevant in many contexts.
In this paper, we provide theoretical and empirical analyses of ethnicity choices for the children
in China'
        s interethnic marriages. Drawing on earlier work by Benabou and Tirole (2011), we
present a model which is consistent with motivating facts in the data. The model also delivers
additional predictions, which are supported by empirical tests on Chinese census data. Most
importantly, changes in individual material motives triggered by policy interventions are crowded
in (out) by social motives when social-stigma concerns dominate (are dominated by) social-honor
concern, precisely in the way that theory predicts.
    Our methodology for using micro data to investigate how social reputations modify the e¤ect
of individual incentives complements recent studies in experimental settings. One can apply a

                                                  33
similar approach on observational data to a set of di¤erent issues ­ where both individual and
social motives are likely to be important ­ e.g., in tax evasion, political participation, fertility,
or environment-friendly investments.
   Our study also adds to the e¤ort of understanding the determinants of identity choice. While
scholars have realized that both individual and social motives drive identity decisions, few have
formalized the interplay among individual material incentives, individual intrinsic motives, and
social reputations. Our study may open avenues for future research on identity choice in other
settings.
   Finally, we hope that our study makes a contribution speci...c to China, where the economics
and politics of ethnicity have been important issues, yet rarely studied with economic methods.
In future work, we hope to extend our empirical analysis to predictions from a model of directed
marriage search, asking which individuals end up in mixed couples in the ...rst place. Then,
the ethnic choices for children analyzed in this paper would help determine the continuation
value from the marriage stage. In addition, the recent abolition of the one-child policy provides
another testing ground for our design, which we have to leave for the future work.



References
 [1] Akerlof, George and Rachel Kranton (2000), "Economics and Identity", Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 115, 715-753.

 [2] Atkin, David, Eve Colson-Sihra, and Moses Shayo (2019), "How Do We Choose Our Iden-
     tity? A Revealed Preference Approach Using Food Consumption", NBER working paper
     25693.

 [3] Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha, and Stephan Meier (2009), "Doing Good or Doing Well? Image
     Motivation and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially", American Economic Review
     99, 544-55.

 [4] Bates, Robert (1974), "Ethnic Competition and Modernization in Contemporary Africa",
     Comparative Political Studies 6, 457-484.

 [5] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2011), "Laws and Norms", NBER Working Paper, No
     17579.

 [6] Besley, Timothy, Anders Jensen, and Torsten Persson (2018), "Norms, Enforcement and
     Tax Evasion", mimeo, IIES and LSE.

 [7] Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2000), "Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmis-
     sion, Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits", Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 115, 955-988.

                                                 34
 [8] Bisin, Alberto, Giorgo Topa, and Thierry Verdier (2001), "Religious Intermarriage and
    Socialization in the United States", Journal of Political Economy 112, 615-664.

 [9] Botticini, Maristella and Zvi Eckstein (2007), "From Farmers to Merchants, Conversions,
    and Diaspora: Human Capital and Jewish History", Journal of the European Economic
    Association 5, 885-926.

[10] Bursztyn, Leonardo, and Robert Jensen (2017), "Social Image and Economic Behavior in
    the Field: Identifying, Understanding, and Shaping Social Pressure", Annual Review of
    Economics 9, 131-153.

[11] Bursztyn, Leonardo, Michael Callen, Bruno Ferman, Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasanain, and Noam
    Yuchtman (2014), "Identifying Ideology: Experimental Evidence on Anti-Americanism in
    Pakistan", NBER working paper 20153.

[12] Cantoni, Davide, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y. Jane Zhang (2018), "Protests
    as Strategic Games: Experimental Evidence from Hong Kong'
                                                            s Anti-Authoritarian Move-
    ment", Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

[13] Chandrasekhar, Arun and Randall Lewis (2011), "Econometrics of Sampled Networks",
    mimeo, MIT.

[14] Cassan, Guilhem (2015), "Identity-Based Policies and Identity Manipulation: Evidence
    from Colonial Punjab", American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7, 103-131.

[15] Chen, Daniel (2016), "The Deterrent E¤ect of the Death Penalty? Evidence from British
    Commutations During World War I", mimeo, TSE.

[16] Edlund, Lena, Hongbin Li, Junjian Yi, and Junsen Zhang (2013), "Sex Ratios and Crime:
    Evidence from China", Review of Economics and Statistics 95, 1520-1534.

[17] Ebenstein Avraham (2010), "The `
                                    Missing Girls' of China and the Unintended Conse-
    quences of the One-Child Policy", Journal of Human Resources 45, 87-115.

[18] Fehr, Ernst and John List (2004), "The Hidden Costs and Returns of Incentives ­Trust and
    Trustworthiness among CEOs", Journal of the European Economic Association 2, 743-71.

[19] Fernandez, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli (2006), "Fertility: The Role of Culture and Family
    Experience", Journal of the European Economic Association 4, 552-561.

[20] Fouka, Vasiliki (2019), "Backlash: the Unintended E¤ects of Language Prohibition in US
    Schools after World War I", Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

[21] Frijters, Paul, Robert Gregory, and Xin Meng (2013), "The Role of Rural Migrants in
    the Chinese Urban Economy", in Dustmann, Christian (ed.), Migration­Economic Change,
    Social Challenge, Oxford University Press.

                                             35
[22] Fryer, Roland (2007), "Guess Who's Been Coming to Dinner? Trends in Interracial Mar-
    riage over the 20th Century", Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, 71-90.

[23] Gneezy, Uri and Also Rustichini (2000), "A Fine is a Price", Journal of Legal Studies 29,
    1-17.

[24] Gneezy, Uri, Stehpen Meier, and Pedro Rey-Biel (2011), "When and Why Incentives (Don't)
    Work to Modify Behavior", Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, 1-21.

[25] Hasmath, Reza and Benjamin Ho (2015), "Job Acquisition, Retention, and Outcomes for
    Ethnic Minorities in Urban China", Eurasian Geography and Economics 56, 24-43.

[26] Horowitz, Donald (2000), Ethnic Groups in Conict, University of California Press.

[27] Huang, Wei and Yi Zhou (2016), "Impact of One-Child Policy on Interethnic Marriage in
    China", mimeo, Harvard University.

[28] Jewitt, Ian (2004), "Notes on the Shape of Distributions", mimeo, Oxford University.

[29] Joensen, Juanna and Helena Skyt Nielsen (2015), "Spillover E¤ects in Educational Choice",
    Mimeo, IZA.

[30] Karing, Anne (2019), "Social Signaling and Childhood Immunization: A Field Experiment
    in Sierra Leone", Mimeo.

[31] Li, Xiaoxia (2008), "Xinjiang zujitonghun zinv minzurentong de diaochayufenxi"
    (Ethnic   Identity   of   Children   in   Mixed   Marriages    in   Xinjiang),   available    at
    http://www.sociologyol.org/yanjiubankuai/fenleisuoyin/fenzhishehuixue/shehuirenleixue/2008-
    12-04/6702.html

[32] Manski, Charles (1993), "Identi...cation of Endogenous Social E¤ects: The Reection Prob-
    lem", Review of Economic Studies 60, 531-542.

[33] Nix, Emily and Nancy Qian (2015), "The Fluidity of Race: `
                                                              Passing'in the United States,
    1880-1940", NBER working paper.

[34] Peng, Peiyun (ed.) (1996), Zhong Guo Ji Hua Sheng Yu Quan Shu (Encyclopedia of China's
    Family Planning Program ), China Population Press.

[35] Vail, Leroy (1989), The Creation of Tribalism in Southern Africa, University of California
    Press.




                                               36
    Figure 1 Share of Children that Break the Norm (i.e., with Mother's Ethnicity)
                    by Type of Mixed Marriage and Birth Cohort

                  (a) Aggregate Data: Share of Children that Break the Norm




                     (b) Individual Data: Probability of Breaking the Norm




Notes: This figure shows two facts using aggregate and individual data: As in F1, children
are more likely to have their mother's ethnicity in Han-Minority families; as in F2, an
increasing share of children with their mother's ethnicity in Han-Minority families after
1980. Figure (b) visualizes the results in columns (3) and (6) of Appendix Table A.2. It
shows the probability of having a minority child in two types of mixed marriages over time,
using those born during 1970-74 as the comparison group. The bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals.


                                            37
Figure 2 Distribution of the Share of Children with their Mother's Ethnicity in Mixed
    Marriages across Marriage Type and Prefectures (for those born in 1970-74)
       (a) Share of Children with Mother's (Minority) Ethnicity in Han-Minority Marriages




         (b) Share of Children with Mother's (Han) Ethnicity in Minority-Han Marriages




Notes: Panel (a) shows that the share of children with their mother's ethnicity varies a great
deal across regions for Han-minority marriages. Panel (b) shows that the children of
minority-Han couples in most prefectures rarely have their mother's ethnicity. Our
empirical analysis focuses on Han-minority families.




                                             38
               Figure 3 The Race between Honor and Stigma
                             (a) An illustration




                            (b) A numerical example
                                  Stigma and Honor




                             (c)  (= Honor-Stigma)




Notes: Panel (a) illustrates the social stigma (the green area) and the social honor
(the non-green area) for a low equilibrium cutoff, and the stigma (non-red area) and
the honor (the red area) for a high cutoff. Panel (c) illustrates how the gain in social
reputation (Honor minus Stigma) has a minimum and changes with the equilibrium
share of children breaking the norm (i.e. following the mother's ethnicity). The
numerical example in panels (b) and (c) relies on the specific assumption that  has
a (0,1) normal distribution.


                                      39
  Figure 4 Spatial Variation in the Share of Children with Mother's Ethnicity in Han-
                    minority Marriages (for those born in 1970-74)




Notes: This figure maps the average probability of children with their mother's ethnicity
born during 1970-74 in Han-minority families across prefectures. A set of province fixed
effects explains about 36% of the variation across prefectures. Our empirical analysis
exploits only within-province variation. We also control for province-by-year fixed effects to
allow for flexible (non-parametric) time trends across provinces.




                                             40
     Figure 5: The Dynamic Effects of Material Benefits (b) * Social Motives on the
         Probability of Mixed-Marriage Children with their Mother's Ethnicity




Notes: These figures plot the dynamic impacts of material benefits (measured by the
rollout of family-planning policy) interacting with social motives (measured by the
1970-74 share of children with mother's ethnicity falling below a 0.5 cutoff). The
reference period is 1-3 years before the introduction of the policy . The dimonds
indicate the estimates in column (2) in Online Appendix C3 and the bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals. The figure shows that (1) there are no similar positive effects
before the policy, and (2) the effect is increasing over time, which is consistent with
the dynamic extension of the model in Online Appendix C4.




                                             41
                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                              Mean             s.d.     #Obs.
                       Minority Husband -- Han Wife (little variation)

    Child with Mother's Ethnicity                                 0.063      0.242     110,020

                         Han Husband -- Minority Wife (our focus)
    a) Individual Characteristics
    Child with Mother's Ethnicity: All                      0.465            0.499     124,940
    Child with Mother's Ethnicity: Born before 1980         0.411            0.492      42,140
    Child with Mother's Ethnicity: Born after 1980          0.492            0.500      82,800
    Husband's education (1-4)                               2.094            0.616     124,940
    Wife's education (1-4)                                  1.878            0.654     124,940
    Urban husband                                           0.261            0.439      59,278
    Urban wife                                              0.261            0.422      59,278

    b) Ethnic Benefits Measures (b)
    Post policy (rollout of family-planning)                      0.581      0.493     121,908
    Lagged extra Minority fertility (for women aged 40+)          0.059      0.129      97,217
    Extra exam scores (relative to cutoff score for colleges)     0.014      0.015     124,938

    c) Proxy for Intrinsic Costs (e)
    Son                                                           0.531      0.499     124,940
    Religious wife                                                0.185      0.388     124,940

 d) Prefecture Characteristics
 Minority prob. of those born in 1970-74                       0.388     0.310     319
 Borderland                                                    0.273     0.446     319
 Minority pop. share in 1982                                  13.295 1 23.405      272
 Share of pop. vith high school or above in 1982               7.890     4.655     272
 #children for a minority in 1982 (women aged 40+)             5.255     1.279     261
Notes: This table reports the summary statistics for the key variables in our analysis. The
table shows that there is little variation in the ethnic choices in minority-Han marriages.
Our analysis in the paper focuses on Han-minority marriages.




1
 Note that the mean of prefecture-level shares is slightly different from the total minority population
share (around 9%).

                                                  42
 Table 2A Baseline Results for P1: The Impact of Material Benefits (b) and Social Motives on the Probability of Mixed-marriage
           Children with Mother's Ethnicity (Results using pre-post family planning policy to proxy material benefits b)

                                   Dependent Variable: Child with Mother's Ethnicity=0/1 (mean: 0.47)

                                              (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)

 I(0.5)*b(Post Policy)                                      0.072***         0.069***         0.071***          0.074***         0.070***
                                                            (0.019)          (0.019)          (0.020)           (0.022)          (0.014)
                                                             [0.030]          [0.031]          [0.031]           [0.027]          [0.024]
 b(Post Policy)                           0.078***          0.031**          0.035**
                                          (0.011)           (0.014)          (0.013)
                                           [0.019]           [0.014]          [0.013]


 Prefecture FE                                 Y                Y                Y                 Y                Y               Y
 Wife Ethnicity FE                                                               Y                 Y                Y               Y
 Birth Year FE                                                                                     Y                Y               Y
 Controls*b                                                                                                         Y               Y
 Province FE*Year FE                                                                                                                Y
 Observations                              121,908          121,908          121,908           121,908          108,914          108,914
 R-squared                                  0.276            0.277            0.290             0.292            0.299            0.334
Notes: This table shows the results using the provincial roll-out of family-planning polices to measure material benefits. The cutoff
(0.5) is defined by the share of minority children in Han-minority families in the 1970-74 birth cohort. Controls include couples'
charateristics (education-level fixed effects and 5-year birth-cohort fixed effects, for both husband and wife) and prefecture
characteristics (listed in panel (d) of Table 1). The data come from three censuses and a mini census from 1982-2005. Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered at the prefecture level, while those in brackets are clustered at the province level. Significance:
***, 1%, **, 5%, *, 10%.




                                                                       43
 Table 2B Baseline Results for P1: The Impact of Material Benefits (b) and Social Motives on the Probability of Mixed-marriage
  Children with Mother's Ethnicity (with additional fertlity and additional exam scores for minorities proxying material benefits b)
                                    Dependent Variable: Child with Mother's Ethnicity=0/1 (mean: 0.47)

                                          (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)

 I(0.5)* b (Extra Fertility)                         0.027***       0.027***                                                        0.022**
                                                     (0.009)        (0.009)                                                         (0.009)
 b (Extra Fertility)                   0.034***
                                       (0.005)
 I(0.5)* b (Extra Scores)                                                                          0.052***       0.034***         0.022***
                                                                                                   (0.009)        (0.009)          (0.008)
 b (Extra Scores)                                                                    0.044***
                                                                                     (0.007)

 Prefecture FE                              Y              Y             Y                 Y             Y            Y                 Y
 Wife Ethnicity FE                                         Y             Y                               Y            Y                 Y
 Birth Year FE                                             Y             Y                               Y            Y                 Y
 Controls*b                                                              Y                                            Y                 Y
 Province FE*Year FE                                                     Y                                            Y                 Y
 Observations                           107,903        107,903        96,874           124,938       124,938       111,944           96,873
 R-squared                               0.277          0.295          0.341             0.269         0.287        0.329             0.342
Notes: This table reports the results using two proxies for individual material incentives: extra fertility for minority in the previous birth
cohort and extra scores for minority (relative to the provincial college acceptance cutoffs) in the college entrance exam. Both proxies are
standardized. The cutoff is defined by the share of minority children in Han-minority families in the cohort of 1970-74 births. Controls
include couples' charateristics (education level fixed effects and 5-year birth-cohort fixed effects, for both husband and wife) and
prefecture characteristics (listed in panel (d) of Table 1). The data come from three censuses and a mini census from 1982-2005.
Standard errors are clustered at the prefecture level. Significance: ***, 1%, **, 5%, *, 10%.




                                                                      44
                           Table 3 Results for P1': The Interaction Effects by Quartiles on the Probability of
                                          Mixed-marriage Children with Mother's Ethnicity
                                    Dependent Variable: Child with Mother's Ethnicity=0/1 (mean: 0.47)

                                   (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)
                                   Rollout of Family Planning           Extra Fertility for Minority       Extra Exam Scores for Minority
 Proxy for material benefits b          Post Policy = 0/1                    (lagged cohort)                    (share of cutoff score)

 I(0-0.25)*b                     0.097*** 0.099*** 0.094***           0.030** 0.036*** 0.032***            0.052***    0.058***   0.040**
                                 (0.024)  (0.023)  (0.029)            (0.014)  (0.013) (0.011)             (0.016)     (0.017)    (0.016)
 I(0.25-0.5)*b                   0.145*** 0.144*** 0.119***           0.044** 0.041*** 0.032***            0.077***    0.088***   0.063***
                                 (0.027)  (0.026)  (0.027)            (0.017)  (0.013) (0.009)             (0.015)     (0.016)    (0.014)
 I(0.5-0.75)*b                   0.079*** 0.080*** 0.052*             0.032*** 0.025**  0.009               0.030      0.034**     0.029*
                                 (0.025)  (0.024)  (0.027)            (0.009)  (0.011) (0.011)             (0.018)     (0.017)    (0.016)

 Prefecture FE                       Y           Y           Y              Y         Y           Y            Y           Y           Y
 Wife Ethnicity FE                               Y           Y                        Y           Y                        Y           Y
 Birth Year FE                                   Y           Y                        Y           Y                        Y           Y
 Controls*b                                                  Y                                    Y                                    Y
 Province FE * Year FE                                       Y                                    Y                                    Y
 -value (2nd vs. 3rd)              0.014       0.019      0.000          0.514      0.219       0.048        0.003       0.000      0.0003
 Observations                    121,908 121,908 108,914               107,903 107,903 96,874               124,938 124,938 111,944
 R-squared                         0.278       0.293      0.334          0.277      0.296       0.341        0.270       0.288       0.329
Notes: According to Prediction P1', the interaction effects of material benefits and social motives estimated for the first three quartiles
should be larger than that for the fourth quartile. Further, the effect for the second quartile should be larger than that for the third
quartile. Controls include couples' charateristics (education-level fixed effects and 5-year birth-cohort fixed effects, for both husband and
wife) and prefecture characteristics (listed in panel (d) of Table 1). Standard errors are clustered at the prefecture evel. Significance: ***,
1%, **, 5%, *, 10%.




                                                                      45
                                       Table 4 Considering the Effects of Endogenous Marriages
                                           (Dependent Variable: Child with Mother's Ethnicity=0/1)

                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)           (7)          (8)         (9)
                                                          Marriage Before the Policy                                      All

 I(0.5)*b(Post Policy)                          0.034*                                                    0.065***
                                                (0.020)                                                   (0.015)
 b(Post Policy)                   0.030***
                                  (0.008)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Fertility)                                              0.009                                          0.016***
                                                                       (0.013)                                         (0.006)
 b(Extra Fertility)                                         0.013***
                                                            (0.005)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Scores)                                                                      0.022*                                0.023**
                                                                                             (0.012)                               (0.009)
 b(Extra Scores)                                                                  0.013***
                                                                                  (0.005)
 I(0.5)*HM Marriage Share                                                                                   0.003       0.002       0.004
                                                                                                           (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)

 Prefecture FE                         Y            Y          Y           Y           Y         Y             Y            Y           Y
 Wife Ethnicity FE                                  Y                      Y                     Y             Y            Y           Y
 Birth Year FE                                      Y                      Y                     Y             Y            Y           Y
 Controls*b                                         Y                      Y                     Y             Y            Y           Y
 Prov. FE * Year FE                                 Y                      Y                     Y             Y            Y           Y
 Observations                       18,814       15,584     18,583      15,397      21,206    17,976        108,914      96,874      111,944
 R-squared                           0.293        0.319     0.294        0.320      0.274      0.300         0.334        0.341       0.329
Notes: Columns (1)-(6) present estimation results in a subsample of only those couples married before the policy. The results show that
the baseline pattern is robust to the concern of endogenous marriages. Controls include couples' charateristics (education level fixed
effects and 5-year birth-cohort fixed effects, for both husband and wife) and prefecture characteristics (listed in panel (d) of Table 1).
Standard errors are clustered at the prefecture level. Significance: ***, 1%, **, 5%, *, 10%.



                                                                       46
                         Table 5 Results Using Alternative Peer Groups
                     Dependent Variable: Child with Mother's Ethnicity=0/1

                             (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)

  (a)                           Rural (mean: 0.49)                  Urban (mean: 0.66)
 I(0.5)*b(Post Policy)     0.043*                            0.121***
                           (0.023)                           (0.025)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Fert.)              0.032***                            0.036***
                                     (0.009)                             (0.009)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Score)                           0.014                               0.064***
                                                (0.011)                              (0.020)

 (b)                      Below High School (mean: 0.44)         High School + (mean: 0.60)
 I(0.5)*b(Post Policy)    0.058***                           0.071***
                           (0.014)                           (0.027)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Fert.)              0.024***                               0.021
                                     (0.009)                              (0.015)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Score)                         0.027***                                 0.037
                                                (0.009)                                (0.023)

  (c)                     By Precise Ethnicity of the Wife      (a) By County (also county FEs)
 I(0.5)*b(Post Policy)    0.106***                           0.150***
                          (0.015)                            (0.019)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Fert.)               0.045***                             0.099*
                                      (0.008)                            (0.013)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Score)                            0.046***                            0.098***
                                                   (0.007)                            (0.019)

 (e)                         Using HM-MH-MM families
 I(0.5)*b(Post Policy)    0.080***
                          (0.025)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Ferti)              0.012*
                                    (0.007)
 I(0.5)*b(Extra Score)                      0.039***
                                             (0.012)
 Pref FE, Birth YearFE       Y         Y        Y               Y            Y           Y
 Wife Ethnicity FE           Y         Y        Y               Y            Y           Y
 Controls*b                  Y         Y        Y               Y            Y           Y
 Prov. FE * Year FE          Y         Y        Y               Y            Y           Y
Notes: This table shows that the baseline results hold up under alternative definitions of
peer groups. Panel (a) separates rural/urban couples based on the 2000 and 2005
censuses; panels (b) and (c) define peer groups relevant for social reputation by education
and minority groups; panel (d) define peer groups by county; and panel (e) defines these
peer groups as all families that can choose to give their children the mother's ethnicity, a
choice which cannot be made by same-ethnicity couples. Controls include couples'
charateristics (education level fixed effects and 5-year birth-cohort fixed effects, for both
husband and wife) and prefecture characteristics (listed in panel (d) of Table 1).



                                                  47
