                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                CEO-BOARD DYNAMICS

                                      John R. Graham
                                       Hyunseob Kim
                                       Mark T. Leary

                                    Working Paper 26004
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w26004


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019


We appreciate comments from Ofer Eldar, Yaniv Grinstein (Drexel discussant), Byoung-Hyoun
Hwang, Dirk Jenter (AFA discussant), Andrew Karolyi, Stephen Karolyi, Peter Limbach, Roni
Michaely, Felipe Varas, Neng Wang, Toni Whited, and seminar and conference participants at
the AFA Annual Meetings, Binghamton University, Columbia University, Cornell University,
Drexel Corporate Governance Conference, Duke University, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
(Charlotte), IDC Summer Finance Conference, Stanford University, Tuck, Purdue University,
Rome Junior Finance Conference (EIEF), the SEC, SMU, University of Iowa, University of
Kentucky, University of Notre Dame, University of Rochester, USC, University of Utah,
Vanderbilt University, Washington University in St. Louis, the WSJ CEO Forum, and Yale Law
School, excellent research assistance from Penghao Chen, Hyungjin Choi, David Hong, Dawoon
Kim, Jason Lee, Boyao Li, Song Ma, Pradeep Muthukrishnan, Youngjun Song, Curtis Wang,
Daniel Woo, Hyun Gu Yeo, Gang Zhang, and data support from the librarians at Cornell, Duke,
Harvard, and MIT. We thank William Goetzmann for sharing data on historical stock prices and
Charlie Hadlock, Jesus Salas, and Timothy Quigley for sharing data on CEO deaths. This paper
was previously titled "CEO Power and Board Dynamics". The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John R. Graham, Hyunseob Kim, and Mark T. Leary. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
CEO-Board Dynamics
John R. Graham, Hyunseob Kim, and Mark T. Leary
NBER Working Paper No. 26004
June 2019
JEL No. B26,G3,J3,M12

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine CEO-board dynamics using a new panel dataset that spans 1920 to 2011. The long
sample allows us to perform within-firm and within-CEO tests over a long horizon, many for the
first time in the governance literature. Consistent with theories of bargaining or dynamic
contracting, we find board independence increases at CEO turnover and falls with CEO tenure,
with the decline stronger following superior performance. CEOs are also more likely to be
appointed board chair as tenure increases, and we find evidence consistent with a substitution
between board independence and chair duality. Other results suggest that these classes of models
fail to capture important elements of board dynamics. First, the magnitude of the CEO tenure
effect is economically small, much smaller for example than the strong persistence in board
structure that we document. Second, when external CEOs are hired, board independence falls and
subsequently increases. Third, event studies document a positive market reaction when powerful
CEOs die in office, consistent with powerful CEOs becoming entrenched.

John R. Graham                                 Mark T. Leary
Duke University                                Olin Business School
Fuqua School of Business                       Washington University in St. Louis
100 Fuqua Drive                                Campus Box 1133, One Brookings Drive
Durham, NC 27708-0120                          St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER                                       and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu                           leary@wustl.edu

Hyunseob Kim
Cornell University
Johnson Graduate School of Management
321 Sage Hall
114 East Avenue
Ithaca, NY 14853
hk722@cornell.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26004
1. Introduction

In recent years, regulators and investors have shown increasing interest in the composition of

corporate boards of directors.1 Academic research suggests there is no universally optimal board

composition. While prior empirical research has focused largely on how board structure varies in

the cross-section with characteristics of the firm or CEO, theory suggests that boards may also

optimally change dynamically within the tenure of a CEO. For example, while a key role of the

board is overseeing and monitoring managers, excessive monitoring may impose costs on the firm,

or over-constrain management. These tradeoffs are likely to evolve through time as more is known

about the ability of the CEO and the scope for agency conflicts changes. As a result, a firm might

optimally shift to a board structure that supports more or less intensive monitoring over time. In

this paper, we use a unique longitudinal dataset to study within-firm dynamics of corporate boards

and how they relate to the tenure, turnover and performance of the CEO.

              We organize our paper around the rich set of predictions emanating from bargaining and

dynamic agency models. In bargaining models, CEOs negotiate with the board over compensation

and private benefits of control (e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998; HW). Successful CEOs gain

bargaining power as their perceived ability (or match quality) and tenure increase. Among other

things, successful CEOs negotiate for less monitoring, which is also optimal from the board's

perspective. A similar outcome can occur in dynamic contracting models (e.g., DeMarzo and

Fishman, 2007a, b).2 As a CEO performs well over time, both compensation and continuation

value (i.e., the CEO's "stake" in the firm) increase, which reduces agency problems and the need



                                                            
1
  For example, in the early 2000s the NYSE and NASDAQ implemented listing requirements that boards be majority
independent; more recently, activist investors often focus on board structure and composition.
2
  A partial list of dynamic contracting models includes Zwiebel (1996), DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006, 2017), Bolton
et al. (2011), DeMarzo et al. (2012) and Piskorski and Westerfield (2016). Below we also interpret some results in the
context of the agency rent extraction arguments of Bebchuk et al. (2002) and Bebchuk and Fried (2003).

                                                               1
 
for monitoring. Note that less intense monitoring could occur via lower board independence or by

appointing the CEO board chair. In addition to less monitoring, successful CEOs are expected to

be paid more and experience turnover that is less sensitive to performance. All of this occurs in a

setting of endogenous, optimal governance in which the CEO's perceived ability or agency

problems evolve dynamically. (The theory is described in more detail in Section 4.)

       We note that some of these predictions are not unique to optimal contracting or bargaining

models. For example, if CEOs have excess power over the board selection process, they may be

able to implement an inefficiently weaker board over time (Bebchuk and Fried, 2004), which could

result in a negative relation between CEO tenure and board independence. Thus, our objective is

not to test predictions of specific models per se, but rather to document the within-firm (and often

within-CEO) dynamics of board structures and discuss the extent to which these are consistent (or

not) with different classes of models. We hope this both speaks to the empirical relevance of

existing models and provides guidance for further development of governance theory.

       It is important to highlight that these theories make dynamic predictions about board

structure, which by nature occur within the tenure of a CEO at a given firm. Yet due to data

limitations, prior empirical tests have largely been conducted using repeated cross-sections. Thus,

Adams, Hermalin, and Weisbach (2010, p. 69) emphasize the need for studies that "shed more

direct empirical light on the dynamic nature of the CEO-board relationship within-firms"

(emphasis added). Moreover, we note that some theoretical predictions are within-CEO. To

conduct these dynamic tests, and especially to isolate within-CEO and within-firm effects from

other dynamic outcomes, one needs a long time-series of data that includes multiple CEOs per

firm. To achieve this, we construct a new officer and director database with about 87,000 firm-




                                                 2
 
year observations from 1920 to 2011, allowing us to study board dynamics over many regulatory

and economic environments, and within the careers of over 15,000 CEOs.

              We begin our exploration of CEO-board dynamics by documenting that, on average, one-

third of the board is replaced when a new CEO is appointed. Interestingly, even with this amount

of director turnover, board composition is persistent in that exiting dependent (independent)

directors are replaced with a very similar proportion of dependent (independent) directors. Using

our long panel, we conduct rigorous tests of board persistence. We document that initial board

independence is by far the strongest predictor of board independence decades later: firms that

initially have independent (or dependent) boards on average still have relatively independent

(dependent) director-dominated boards 30 years later. These findings contrast somewhat with the

conclusions of Cicero et al. (2013, p.109), who argue that "firms frequently changed their board

structures during the pre-SOX period." They show that during 1991­2003, firms frequently

adjusted the fraction of outside directors in a way that moved the independence ratio toward a

predicted level (that changed with firm characteristics), although large changes were less

common.3 While their evidence suggests firms act to adjust board structure in response to changing

characteristics, we show that board independence is nonetheless quite persistent over long

horizons.

              While board structure is sticky, it is not fixed. Our near-century of data provides power to

test whether the changes that do occur are consistent (or not) with theories of board structure and

dynamic agency. To benchmark to the existing literature, we first perform regressions over the last

16 years of our sample using repeated cross-sections without firm fixed effects and find a negative


                                                            
3
  Denis and Sarin (1999, p.189) also conclude, "substantial changes in ownership structure and board composition are
not uncommon and are not transitory." Their conclusion is likely affected by their findings on board size and insider
ownership, which they show change much more frequently than board independence. They report that independence
ratios change by more than 0.2 in only 4% of firm-years, more in line with the persistence we document.

                                                               3
 
relation between CEO tenure and board independence;4 however, we show that there is no within-

firm relation during this era when we include firm fixed effects. When we examine the full sample

starting in 1920, though, we do find a within-firm negative relation between CEO tenure and board

independence. Similarly, we also find a positive within-firm relation between CEO tenure and both

the CEO being appointed board chair and compensation. Thus, ours is the first paper to document

a negative relation between executive tenure and board monitoring intensity using within-firm

tests.5

              The timing of the non-relation in modern data is notable because the NYSE and NASDAQ

implemented regulations requiring listed firms to have majority independent boards after 2002,

altering CEO-board dynamics. In our tests, we confirm that the negative within-firm relation

between board independence and CEO tenure dissipates following the 2002 listing regulations.

While the regulations increased board independence as intended, HW (p. 111) argue that "As long

as the bargaining process [between the CEO and board] itself is unaffected by reforms, the

equilibrium will be little affected." Building on this logic, we argue that if regulation constrains

boards to be more independent without changing the incentives of CEOs and directors, firms will

reduce monitoring via other channels. Specifically, we explore whether regulations that increase

board independence are associated with an increase in CEOs being appointed dual board chair,

again within-firm. We find evidence consistent with this prediction: the within-firm relation

between CEO tenure and the likelihood of the CEO being appointed board chair became more

pronounced after the 2002 board independence regulations were implemented. Other tests show



                                                            
4
 See, for example, Baker and Gompers (2003), Boone et al. (2007), and Dikolli et al. (2014).
5
 Using a sample of 142 firms from 1971-1983, Hermalin and Weisbach (1988) employ specifications both with and
without firm fixed effects to examine the relation between CEO tenure and additions/departures of insider and outsider
directors. However, their results with fixed effects are generally weaker than or inconsistent with those without fixed
effects, which the authors attribute to limited within-firm variation in their sample. 

                                                               4
 
that the propensity to be appointed dual chair increases early in the typical CEO's career, while

the decline in board independence happens later. This apparent substitution to dual chair is new to

the literature and seems to be a fruitful area for future research.

              The negative relation between CEO tenure and board independence holds both at the time

of CEO turnover and within-CEO. That is, there are two sources of the negative CEO tenure-board

independence relation. First, there is a jump in board independence at the time a new CEO is

appointed. This makes sense because both uncertainty about the CEO's ability (and thus the need

for stricter monitoring) and the change in CEO tenure (reduction in CEO bargaining power) are

greatest at this moment.6 Second, board independence gradually declines over a CEO's tenure. We

document heterogeneity in this dynamic relation that is directionally consistent with bargaining

and dynamic agency theories. In particular, the decline in independence is stronger following

strong corporate performance, which would increase the CEO's perceived ability and bargaining

power.

              In summary so far, we find that directionally (i.e., signs of estimated coefficients) the

dynamics of board structure are consistent with dynamic bargaining and contracting theory: As

their tenure increases, successful CEOs are more likely to serve as dual board chair, and interact

with boards that grow less independent; and these relations vary conditional on performance.

Consistent with these dynamics, we also find that CEOs' pay increases with tenure and powerful

CEOs are less likely to be replaced upon poor corporate performance.

              However, we present five sets of results that are difficult to reconcile with extant bargaining

and contracting models. First, the empirical magnitude of the negative relation between CEO

tenure and board independence is small in absolute terms: Board independence on average


                                                            
6
    Tenure drops from an average of six years for departing CEOs to one for incoming CEOs.

                                                               5
 
decreases by 0.15% per year of CEO tenure. To put this magnitude in context, the average board

in our sample has about 10 members. Thus, a shift of one independent director to dependent (a

10% change in independence ratio) is associated with about 70 years of additional tenure. Even at

CEO turnover, the independence ratio increases by only 0.6% on average, consistent with roughly

one in seventeen firms replacing one dependent director with an independent director. The CEO

tenure-board independence relation is also small in relative magnitude, compared to other forces

such as those generating the strong persistence we document.7 Further, the within-firm relation

does not hold once we remove year fixed effects. This latter finding suggests that on average the

tenure-independence relation is also small relative to secular time trends in board structure.

              Second, opposite in direction to our main finding, board independence decreases when

outside CEOs are appointed and subsequently increases over time. We argue below that this may

be because outside appointees benefit from the advice of internal directors ­ but this suggests that,

at least for this subset of firms, bargaining or contracting mechanisms are dominated by concerns

over the advisory role of the board. Third, as mentioned above, we do not find a negative

independence-tenure relation after 2002. While we do find evidence consistent with a post-2002

substitution towards dual board chairs, this trade-off is not explicitly modeled in existing theory.

Fourth, we present evidence below that succession planning may play a role in the jump in board

independence at the time of CEO turnover. Succession tournaments have been explored in

previous research (e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach, 1988) and at least partially crowd out bargaining

and dynamic contracting explanations.

              Fifth, we explore how the market reacts when powerful CEOs depart their firms. Because

of endogeneity concerns, we examine this issue on a sample of turnover events tied to the CEO's

                                                            
7
 HW argue that optimal bargaining in their framework can generate persistence in board structures, but they do not
model formally nor explore magnitudes. 

                                                               6
 
(sudden) death.8 We find that the announcement of the departure of a powerful CEO (relatively

long job tenure, dual board chair, or founder of the firm) is associated with about a 3% higher

abnormal return, relative to departures of less powerful CEOs. This finding is somewhat surprising

because in bargaining models, CEO power emanates from perceived superior ability (or match

quality) relative to a replacement. Instead, our results seem more consistent with ex-post

entrenchment resulting from a weaker board, or of a weak board resulting from an entrenched

CEO's control over the governance process (Bebchuk and Fried, 2004).

              We thus conclude that learning and contracting between the board and CEO are relevant,

but are not empirically dominant forces behind the evolution of corporate boards. Other factors,

including the advisory role of the board, persistence, and the CEO's excess power over the

nominating process, are likely to be important and should be a focus of future theoretical and

empirical work.

              While earlier studies have explored elements of board dynamics and the interaction

between CEOs and board structure, ours is the first to study these dynamics strictly within-firm

and within-CEO, using a comprehensive panel of data covering thousands of firms and over 90

years. This has several important advantages. First, while prior empirical studies of board

dynamics and CEO-board bargaining rely primarily on small samples or short time horizons, our

long panel covering multiple CEOs per firm provides sufficient power to estimate within-firm and

within-CEO dynamics. Second, reliably detecting the degree of persistence in board structure

requires studying a long database like the one we use. Third, our long time series enables us to

document long-term trends in board structure and CEO turnover.9 Fourth, we are able to examine


                                                            
8
  See also Fee, Hadlock, and Pierce (2013), Quigley, Crossland, and Campbell (2017) and Jenter, Matveyev, and Roth
(2019).
9
  Lehn et al. (2009) also study average board structure over a long horizon, but use a survivorship sample including
only 82 of the largest firms. We find substantially different trends using our more comprehensive sample.

                                                               7
 
numerous board structure relationships on a consistent set of firms, versus the extant empirical

evidence based on a collection of studies, each of which typically focuses on a subset of issues,

and studies different time periods and samples of firms. We also examine how these relations have

changed over time, for example, before and after the governance reforms of the early 2000s.



2. Sample construction and long-term trends

2.1. Data on corporate boards of directors and officers

              We construct a comprehensive database of corporate officers and directors, such as the

Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Financial Officer (CFO), 10 various corporate vice

presidents, and others, at public U.S. companies from 1920 to 2011. We combine information from

a number of sources. First, we hand-collect names of corporate officers and directors, as well as

financial data on their firms, from Moody's Industrial Manuals (`Moody's') from 1920 to 1992,

and also the year 1998. 11 Second, we collect names of corporate directors and officers from

Compact Disclosure during 1985-2005. Compact Disclosure derives information from firms'

public disclosure such as 10-Ks, 10-Qs, and Proxy Statements. Third, we supplement these two

primary board and officer databases using Mergent (which took over the Industrial Manual from

Moody's; 2002-2009) and Board Analyst (2005-2011) for more recent years.12 We gather stock

price and return data from CRSP and financial statement data from Compustat or Moody's




                                                            
10
   The `CEO' includes corporate officers with various titles depending on the era, including `President' and `Chief
Executive Officer'. The `CFO' is the finance chief and includes corporate officers in various titles depending on the
era, including `Treasurer' and `Chief Financial Officer'.
11
   See Graham, Leary, and Roberts (2015) for a description of coverage and available financial statement information
in Moody's. Papers that analyze smaller samples of Moody's financial and board information include Lehn et al.
(2009), Frydman, Hilt, and Zhou (2015) and Avedian, Cronqvist, and Weidenmier (2015).
12
   We drop 795 observations from Board Analyst because they have information only for the CEO but not the other
officers. However, if we include these observations the results are very similar to those in the paper. In addition, if we
drop all Board Analyst data in the sample, the results also remain similar.

                                                               8
 
Industrial Manuals (for firm-years not covered by Compustat). 13 Like most corporate finance

research, we do not include firms in the financial (SIC 6000-6999), transportation (4000-4599),

and utility (4900-4999) sectors.

              To maintain comparability across the various databases and years, we focus on U.S. firms

listed on the NYSE or AMEX.14 Our main results are similar if we include ADRs and NASDAQ

firms, or if we use NYSE firms only (see Appendix Table 1, Panel D). We have CEO and board

information for nearly 80% of the NYSE/AMEX firms in the CRSP database over the 1920-2011

period.15 All total, our database contains 86,946 firm-year observations and more than 8,500 CEO

turnover events.

2.2. Descriptive statistics

              Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on firm-year observations in the full database and by

decade. CEO turnover averages 11.9% per year for the full sample, increasing from the first to the

second half of the sample. The average CEO, CFO, and board chair tenures are 6.3, 5.1, and 5.9

years, respectively. The CEO holds the title of board chair (`CEO-Chair duality') for 41.6% of

observations, with substantial time-series variation over the century. The average board in our

sample has about 10 directors (including the chair) and boards have gotten somewhat smaller over

the past century. The ratio of the number of outside directors (i.e., directors who are not current

officers of the firm) to the total number of directors is 0.64, and the proportion of independent

directors (i.e., directors who are (i) neither current nor previous officers of the firm, nor (ii) family




                                                            
13
   We obtain stock price data from 1920 to 1925 from William Goetzmann.
14
   We identify and delete non-U.S. firms (i.e., ADRs) using the approach in Marosi and Massoud (2008).
15
   See Appendix C (and Appendix Table 4) for descriptions of the characteristics of the firms in the "missing 20%" of
the sample.

                                                               9
 
members of the CEO, proxied by having the same last name) is 0.58.16 Both ratios were stable

until the 1980s, then increased in recent decades.

              Panel B presents descriptive statistics on firm-level financial data (exclusively from

Moody's before 1951; mostly from Compustat starting in 1951, though we fix the Compustat

backfill problem during 1951-1962). The average firm has $2.29 billion of real book assets in 2000

constant dollars (CPI-adjusted) and has been in the sample about 21 years ("firm age"). Other

characteristics are generally similar to those in modern Compustat analysis. Notably, some of these

firm characteristics (such as tangibility, ROA, and Tobin's q) changed over the century.

2.3. Long-term trends in CEO turnover, CEO appointment, and board structure

              Fig. 1 presents the long-term evolution of various U.S. CEO and board trends. The figure

also presents (in red dashed lines) trends in residuals of these variables after controlling for firm

characteristics (which are listed in the caption to Fig. 1). Panel A shows that three-year moving

average CEO turnover rates for NYSE and AMEX firms were relatively low from 1922 to 1950

before increasing in the middle portion of the sample (1950-1970), then decreasing starting around

1970. The rate of CEO turnover for the later period is comparable with those documented in

Kaplan and Minton (2012), who find an average 15.8% turnover rate from 1992 to 2007. In

addition, we find a negative (-34.0%, t-stat = -3.39) time-series correlation between average CEO

turnover rates and ROA, suggesting that CEO turnover is counter-cyclical.

              Panel B shows three-year moving averages of the fraction of "outside CEO" (i.e., neither

a current nor previous officer of the firm) appointments from 1933 to 2011. We exclude years prior

to 1933 to allow a start-up period to accumulate information on previous corporate officers. The

frequency of outside CEO appointments declined from the 1930s to the 1940s, then stabilized until

                                                            
16
 We do not consider whether a director has business relations with the firm (e.g., lawyers and bankers), given that
Moody's and Compact Disclosure do not provide such information on directors.

                                                               10
 
the 1970s. Beginning in the late 1980s, outside CEOs became increasingly common, reaching

around 44% by the late-1990s. This upward trend from the 1970s to the 1990s is consistent with

evidence in Huson, Parrino, and Starks (2001) and Murphy and Zabojnik (2007); the latter argue

that the trend reflects a shift in the importance of managerial skills for CEOs from firm-specific

knowledge to general (or portable) managerial ability, such as MBA education. Our evidence from

the long time-series highlights this recent trend by placing it in the context of a much longer

horizon and highlights that external hires were also common in the 1930s and 1960s. Graphs

adjusted for firm characteristics show similar trends for the CEO turnover rate and the fraction of

outside CEO appointments.

              Panel C presents the ratio of the number of independent directors to the total number of

directors from 1933 to 2011. Board independence was stable at about 50% for four decades starting

in the 1930s; the cross-sectional standard deviation (not in graph) was also very steady at about

19% over these four decades. From the late-1970s to mid-1990s, average board independence

increased to around 60%. Following imposition of the 2003 NYSE and NASDAQ amendments
                                                                                      17
that require majority independent boards (and 2002's Sarbanes-Oxley),                      average board

independence increased to 74% by 2011 (and the post-2003 standard deviation declined below

13%). The red dashed line shows a similarly increasing trend post-1970s, although the magnitude

of the increase is somewhat muted when firm characteristics are controlled. We later examine

whether this mandated increase in board independence affects other dynamic outcomes between

the CEO and board.

              Panel D presents the proportion of firms that have CEOs who are also board chairs from

1920 to 2011. The titles of the CEO and chair were largely separate before the 1960s, at which

                                                            
17
  SOX was signed into law in July 2002 and the SEC approved the NYSE and NASDAQ's new corporate governance
requirements in November 2003. See Chhaochharia and Grinstein (2007) for a detailed timeline.

                                                               11
 
time the frequency of the dual title increased to a peak of 73% in the mid-1980s. 18 Shortly

thereafter, duality began to decrease (which is also apparent when firm characteristics are

controlled for in the red dashed line), possibly due to "governance activists" such as the National

Association of Corporate Directors (NACD) which supported separating the two roles (see, e.g.,

Wangler, 1994; NACD, 1996). The downward trend is also consistent with Dahya, McConnell,

and Travlos (2002) who show that the duality of the titles began to disappear in the U.K. in 1992

when the Cadbury Committee recommended separation of chair and CEO titles.



3. Persistence of board structure

              Fig. 1, Panel C suggests that board independence is slow-moving at the aggregate level. In

this section, we examine the extent to which this is true at the firm level and if so, whether it occurs

because directors rarely change or whether director rotation occurs in ways that keep board

structure stable. We first document changes in board members in the years of and following CEO

turnover. In Table 2, we sort observations in event time, where year 0 is the year of a change in

CEO, and report the average additions and departures of independent and dependent directors in

each year. Panels A and B show these turnovers for internal and external CEOs, respectively. In

both panels, addition and departure rates increase in the year of CEO turnover, then revert to

relatively stable rates. When a new internal CEO is appointed (Panel A), on average 0.98 new

independent directors join the board and 0.95 leave, a bit higher than the average addition

(departure) rate of 0.86 (0.79) in non-CEO-turnover years. The increase in board turnover is more



                                                            
18
   The dual chair analysis does not include the one-fifth of the observations for which the chair title is not clearly
denoted in data sources (such as Moody's). If we include these observations under the assumption that the CEO is
always chair, the hump-shaped trend is similar to that in Panel D from 1950 onward, also peaking in the mid-1980s.
Also, the conclusions we draw below based on our dual chair regression analyses are unchanged whether or not we
exclude the ambiguous observations.

                                                               12
 
pronounced for dependent directors. On average, 2.6 dependent directors leave the board in the

year of CEO change and 2.46 dependent directors are added. While in most cases one of the 2.6

(2.46) is the outgoing (incoming) CEO, this still represents a meaningful level of board turnover

relative to the average board size of about 10 members.

       Even though roughly 35% of the board turns over in the year of CEO turnover (see also

Cicero et al., 2013), because the addition rates are similar to the departure rates, the independence

ratio changes little, leading to slow-moving board structure. The movement we do see in year 0 in

Panel A, though, is toward more independence. In the years following CEO turnover, the addition

and departure rates are similar to each other within a given type of director, with the rates generally

declining slightly over the CEO's tenure.

       Panel B shows that for external CEO appointments the addition and departure rates are also

similar to each other within each of the independent and dependent director categories, and

decrease over the CEO's tenure, again suggesting slow-moving board structure. One difference,

though, is that in year 0 when an external CEO is appointed, more independent directors leave and

dependent directors are added on net. This is consistent with the importance of an advisory role

for internal directors when an external CEO is appointed (see Section 4.6 for additional analysis

of board dynamics for external CEOs).

       We now more formally explore board persistence after netting the effects of director

rotation. Though they do not formally model persistence, Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) argue

that in their framework one might expect hysteresis in board structure: "Strong, independent

boards will beget stronger, more independent boards than will weak boards" (p.107). Alternatively,

even if there are few frictions in the adjustment of board structure, we would expect these

structures to be stable over time if their determinants change slowly.



                                                  13
 
        First, in each calendar year, we sort all firms into four equal-sized groups based on their

board independence ratios, and compute the groups' average independence ratios for the next 30

years. We repeat this process for all calendar years from 1920 to 1992 and then average across the

calendar years. Fig. 2 shows that while there is some convergence, differences in board

independence ratios on average persist over 30 years. For comparison, we note that the patterns

we document here for board independence are similar to those documented for corporate leverage

by Lemmon, Roberts, and Zender (2008), both in terms of the dispersion of initial ratios and the

degree of convergence over the subsequent 20 years.

        Second, we follow Lemmon et al.'s (2008) capital structure analysis and test whether initial

board independence is a significant determinant of future independence by estimating the

following equation:

                                                                                    ,          (1)

where Independenceit is defined as the ratio of the number of independent directors to total

directors; t represents year fixed effects; Independencei0 is the first observed board independence

ratio for firm i; CEO tenureit is the number of years for which the CEO has been chief executive

in firm i as of year t; and Xit represents a vector of firm-level control variables including firm age,

log board size, log book assets, Tobin's q, two-digit SIC industry-adjusted return on assets (ROA),

and asset tangibility; and it represents random errors clustered at the firm level. Our choice of

firm-level controls is motivated by prior studies that show board structure is correlated with

characteristics proxying for the scope and complexity of operations, information asymmetry, or

potential for agency conflicts (e.g., Boone et al., 2007; Coles, Daniel, and Naveen 2008; Lehn et

al., 2009).




                                                  14
 
       Table 3, Panels A and B use, respectively, the full sample (excluding the first year for each

firm) and subsamples consisting of the cross-section of firms that survive five, 10, and 20 years.

Panel C repeats the analysis from Panel B in regressions that include initial board independence

as the only independent variable. To facilitate comparisons across variables, in this table only we

scale each independent variable by its standard deviation. Thus, each coefficient estimate

represents the change in board independence (in percentage points) corresponding to a one-

standard deviation (SD) change in an independent variable. In all three panels, the coefficient on

initial independence is positive and highly significant (at better than a 1% level). In fact, its

statistical and economic significance is substantially higher than that of any of the other variables

included in Panel A. In terms of economic magnitude, column 3 of Panel A, which controls for

firm-level characteristics, shows that a one-SD increase in the initial independence (19.6

percentage points) is associated with an 8.1 percentage point increase in board independence. In

addition, the R2's in Panel C show that initial board independence explains 32.1% (15.9%) of the

variation in board independence 10 (20) years later.

       Persistence is also evident in Table 3, Panel D, which shows the probability of transition

from one quartile of board independence to another. In each year, we sort firms into quartiles based

on board independence and follow them for ten years. Board independence is most persistent in

the two extreme quartiles. For example, 82.5% of firms in the lowest quartile in year 0 are still in

the quartile the following year; and the probability of remaining in this same quartile is 58.3% ten

years after the initial sorting. Similarly, 77.7% (45.8%) of firms in the highest quartile in year 0

remain in the same quartile one year (10 years) later. We note that these transition probabilities

are similar to those documented by DeAngelo and Roll (2015) for leverage. For example, after 10

years, we find that the probabilities of being in the initial quartile of board independence are 58.3%,



                                                  15
 
33.5%, 33.0%, and 45.8%, respectively, for quartiles 1 through 4. The same probabilities reported

by DeAngelo and Roll (2015) are 52.9%, 33.2%, 34.4%, and 50.7%.

       While persistence is evident, it is not complete. Panel E shows results from regressing

board independence on firm and year fixed effects. Firm effects that are constant for the entire

time a firm exists in our sample explain 57% of the variation in independence over the century-

long panel. Allowing firm effects to change every three decades (e.g., two FEs for a firm that exists

between 31 and 60 years in our sample), or including firm-decade FEs, increases the R2 to 71%

and 82%, respectively. Thus, over a long enough horizon, there are significant changes in board

structure within the life of a given firm.

       Overall, our descriptive evidence on changes in board composition reveals four main

findings. First, there is substantial turnover of board members, especially when there is a change

in CEO. Second, changes in board structure, as measured by the independence ratio, are modest

relative to the changes in individual board members. Third, as a result, board structure is fairly

persistent, of a degree comparable to that of corporate leverage. The causes of board persistence

are not well understood, nor has persistence been the focus of economic theory. Fourth, despite

the documented persistence, over longer horizons there are significant within-firm changes in

board structure. In the next section, we explore the economic underpinnings of these changes.



4. Dynamics of CEO tenure, board structure and pay

4.1. Conceptual links between performance, CEO tenure, and board structure

       Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) argue that board structure is an endogenous outcome of a

bargaining process between the board and the CEO, conditional on estimated CEO ability (based

on prior firm performance). While CEOs are assumed to prefer less monitoring, when the CEO's



                                                 16
 
perceived ability is low or there is uncertainty about her ability, monitoring is valuable to the board.

However, performance observations partially resolve this uncertainty and strong performance

increases the board's perception of the CEO's ability, reducing the value of further monitoring.

Therefore, when a firm performs well, the CEO is retained and is better able to bargain for reduced

monitoring in addition to higher compensation. HW model reduced monitoring via fewer

independent directors, and we add to that the CEO becoming board chair.

              Dynamic agency theory produces similar predictions. 19 In this class of models, the

principal (board in our context) controls agency problems by tying the agent's (CEO in our

context) current and future payoffs to performance and by maintaining a threat of monitoring or

termination. In particular, following good performance, the CEO receives a higher continuation

value (higher expected future payoff) in the firm. Since this higher future share of firm value helps

align incentives, the termination threat is optimally eased, for example via less intense monitoring

by the board. After a history of success, further incentive alignment becomes less important and

thus, the strength of board monitoring decreases and cash compensation increases.

              Likewise, continuation value falls after poor performance and if it hits a lower bound, the

CEO is terminated. DeMarzo and Fishman (2007b) note that termination can also be interpreted

as the introduction of a monitoring technology. Piskorski and Westerfield (2016) generate a similar

prediction by directly incorporating a monitoring mechanism into the optimal contract: if bad

behavior is detected, the CEO is fired and loses her continuation value. Because this penalty is

more severe the larger the CEO's stake in the firm, the intensity of monitoring required to maintain

incentives (and hence board independence) declines following a history of strong performance.



                                                            
19
  E.g., Zwiebel (1996), DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006, 2017), DeMarzo and Fishman (2007a, 2007b), Bolton et al.
(2011), DeMarzo et al. (2012) and Piskorski and Westerfield (2016).

                                                               17
 
              Thus, both bargaining and dynamic agency theories predict that (1) the board's monitoring

intensity strengthens at the time of CEO turnover, then declines over a CEO's tenure within a given

firm.20 We examine two measures of monitoring intensity: the fraction of independent directors

and whether the CEO is appointed board chair. These models also predict that (2) the reduction in

board independence over the CEO's tenure is more pronounced among CEOs who perform well.

HW also predict that when the CEO has a stronger history of performance (and thus is more

`powerful') (3) CEO turnover is less sensitive to performance and (4) CEO compensation

increases; and that (5) regulation that does not directly alter the contracting or bargaining

environment may little affect overall board-CEO dynamics.

              Note that many of these are dynamic, within-firm (or within-CEO) predictions, although in

the past they have almost exclusively been tested in repeated cross-sections [a point emphasized

in the Adams, Hermalin, and Weisbach (2010) review]. Thanks to our long panel of data, we are

able to conduct powerful within-firm (and within-CEO) tests.

4.2. Empirical analysis of CEO tenure, board structure and pay

              In Fig. 3, we explore the first prediction in a univariate fashion by showing average board

independence as a function of CEO tenure at a given firm: Panel A shows that board independence

decreases almost monotonically in CEO tenure, by 0.3 percentage points per year. In particular,

the independence ratio is about 58% for new CEOs and 51% for those with 25 or more years of

tenure. Panel B shows that CEOs with longer tenure are more likely to be board chairs as well. In

particular, a one-year increase in tenure is associated with a 1.8 percentage-point increase in the

probability that the CEO is a board chair.




                                                            
20
     See HW, Proposition 4.

                                                               18
 
              While the univariate results are directionally consistent with Prediction (1) discussed

above, they are based both on cross-sectional and within-firm variation. Thus, it is not clear

whether the univariate results truly reflect within-firm (or within-CEO) changes in board structure

or whether the types of CEOs that tend to have longer tenures are matched with firms that tend to

have less independent boards. We test for a dynamic within-firm relation by estimating the

following equation:

                                                                               ,                             (2)

where Board outcomeit is either board independence, defined as the ratio of the number of

independent directors to total directors, CEO-chair duality, or compensation (defined below); i

and t represent firm and year fixed effects; the other variables are defined in Eq. (1).21

              To benchmark to the prior literature, in column 1 of Table 4, Panel A we estimate Eq. (2)

excluding firm fixed effects and focusing on the most recent 16 years of our sample period (1996­

2011).22 The negative coefficient on CEO tenure (-0.306; t-stat = -7.04) is consistent with prior

findings (see Baker and Gompers, 2003; Boone et al., 2007; Dikolli et al., 2014 for evidence in

repeated cross-sections of firms, without firm fixed effects) and has been interpreted as providing

support for models such as HW. However, when we add firm fixed effects in column 2, the relation

between CEO tenure and board independence is insignificant within firms. 23 This contrast

demonstrates the importance of controlling for firm effects to isolate the within-firm relation and

suggests little dynamic relation between tenure and board independence in modern data.

              In columns 3­6 of Table 4, Panel A, we extend the estimation to our full sample horizon

of 1920­2011. Column 3 shows the basic relation between CEO tenure and board independence

                                                            
21
   Our empirical results are robust to including two-digit SIC industry × year fixed effects (unreported).
22
   We use the 1996-2011 sample period to mimic a typical sample period for the IRRC board data, one of the most
commonly used board datasets. 
23
   When we include firm fixed effects, firm age drops out because it is collinear with year fixed effects within firms.

                                                                     19
 
within firms, including firm and year fixed effects but without firm-level controls. We find that

board independence decreases by 0.15 percentage points per additional year of CEO tenure. The

effect is statistically significant at the 1% level, and is the first evidence of a within-firm, dynamic

relation between CEO tenure and board independence as opposed to across-firm relations. The

economic magnitude indicates that ten years of CEO tenure would lead to a 1.5 percentage-point

(= 0.15 × 10) decrease in the independence ratio. While this represents 11.5% of a within-firm

standard deviation of board independence (12.7 percentage points), given that the average board

in our sample has about 10 directors, it suggests an average change of only 0.15 directors from

independent to dependent over a decade. Thus, the effects of CEO tenure on board independence

are modest in magnitude, consistent with the substantial persistence in board structure that we

document in Section 3. We also note that if we do not control for year fixed effects, the within-

firm coefficient on CEO tenure becomes substantially smaller and statistically insignificant

(unreported). This suggests the magnitude of the tenure effect is comparable to the long-term time

trend in board structure (which year fixed effects control for) shown in Fig. 1, Panel C.

         Column 4 controls for board size as well as additional firm characteristics including log

assets, Tobin's q, industry-adjusted ROA, and asset tangibility. These controls have little effect on

the coefficient on CEO tenure and its significance level. The positive coefficient on board size is

consistent with the cross-sectional findings in Boone et al. (2007) that board independence is

positively associated with board size. Importantly, the negative coefficient on industry-adjusted

ROA suggests that CEOs who perform well (relative to industry peers) face a less independent

board.

         Though firm fixed effects control for time-invariant firm-level omitted variables, the

negative coefficient on CEO tenure could reflect a correlation between average tenure and board



                                                  20
 
independence across CEOs within a firm, rather than a decline in board independence through the

tenure of a given CEO. It is not feasible to estimate Eq. (2) with firm-CEO fixed effects, however,

because tenure and year effects are perfectly collinear within each firm-CEO pair. As an

alternative, in column 5, we use variation in tenure within a firm-CEO pair as an instrument,

following Altonji and Shakotko (1987). Specifically, define        and           as the average and

maximum tenure for a given firm-CEO pair (indexed by i and c, respectively). We then use

           /          as an instrument for tenure. Intuitively, this transformation removes any

differences in average tenure across firm-CEO pairs and measures the proportion of a given CEO's

ultimate tenure that has been realized at each point in time. In this sense, this is a within-CEO

measure.

       Not surprisingly, the first stage (unreported) finds a very strong relation between the

instrument and CEO tenure. The second stage results (shown in column 5) are similar to those in

column 4. The coefficient on instrumented CEO tenure is significantly negative and slightly larger

in magnitude and statistical significance than the previous estimates. This suggests our previous

results reflect within-CEO dynamics and are not simply driven by a cross-CEO relation between

average tenure and board independence.

       Column 6 estimates Eq. (2) without firm-fixed effects over the full sample period, which

gives an idea of potential bias in such estimates. Compared to the coefficients in the other columns,

the coefficient in column 6 (-0.247) suggests that not isolating within-firm variation may lead to

an estimate that is inflated by two-thirds. This significant difference in economic magnitude

illustrates another important reason to measure this relation within firms.

       Our data allow us to identify the within-firm relation between board independence and

CEO tenure separately from that of a time trend because the data span the careers of multiple CEOs



                                                 21
 
per firm. However, the importance of CEO turnovers for our identifying variation raises the

question of whether our estimated tenure-independence relation may reflect a CEO turnover effect

on board independence that is unrelated to the change in CEO tenure. To control for any turnover-

specific effects, in Appendix Table 2 we include the cumulative number of CEO turnovers per

firm as an additional independent variable. The magnitude of the estimated coefficient on CEO

tenure is smaller, but still highly statistically significant in this specification.

4.3. Dynamics of board independence and variation in the CEO tenure effect

        Section 3 shows that board structure is persistent, while the previous subsection provides

within-firm evidence that board independence declines through a CEO's career, though only

modestly on average. In this subsection, we explore how this relation varies through the CEO's

tenure and whether it is stronger conditional on past performance or other measures of CEO

bargaining power. We begin by examining board structure year-by-year as a CEO's tenure

increases.

        In HW's bargaining model, the board is more likely to agree to a weaker monitoring

structure when the marginal benefit of monitoring the CEO is lower. Monitoring becomes less

valuable as the board's assessment of the CEO's ability increases or uncertainty about that ability

decreases. HW Proposition 6 thus predicts that board independence is more likely to decline

following strong performance. Likewise, in dynamic agency models, monitoring is less valuable

when the agent has performed well and as a result accumulated large promised pay, which

mitigates agency problems. More generally, the CEO's ability to decrease the monitoring intensity

of the board should be a function of her bargaining power, which is likely to be lowest at the time

of turnover and increase through her tenure, especially following strong performance.




                                                    22
 
              We therefore examine how board independence changes upon CEO turnover and how it

evolves thereafter. Because the level of the CEO's perceived ability and promised pay should

depend on the history of performance, we also study how the dynamics of board independence

vary with firm performance. We explore these issues by estimating the following equation:

                                                                                        .                           (3)

              The key independent variables in Eq. (3) are a set of indicator variables, d[0],..., d[12],

corresponding to the firm-year observations from the year of CEO turnover to 12 years after the

turnover. "Year -1" observations are also included in this analysis, serving as the baseline level.

As before, this specification includes firm fixed effects, and thus examines within-firm dynamics

following CEO turnover. We exclude CEO changes after 2002 from this analysis because it

requires a post-turnover period. We also require that the previous CEO had at least two years of

tenure and that the new CEO stays for at least two years.

4.3.1. Board dynamics for internal CEO hires. In this subsection, we explore how the dynamics

of board independence vary with proxies for perceived CEO ability, using a sample of 3,761

turnovers from 1920 to 2002 for which the new CEO is a corporate insider.24 We initially focus

on new insider CEOs because appointment of outsiders could affect board structure for reasons

different than those related to the board's monitoring, which is our primary focus. In Section 4.6,

we separately examine the effect of CEO turnover on board independence when the new CEO is

an outsider.

              Fig. 4 presents estimated                           coefficients from Eq. (3), which can be interpreted as the

percentage of board members who are independent by year of CEO tenure, relative to the firm's t-

1 level and after controlling for year fixed effects and firm characteristics. The y-intercept in Panel


                                                            
24
     There are about twice as many insider- than outsider-appointed CEOs in our sample over the 1920-2011 period.

                                                                           23
 
A indicates that among firms appointing an insider CEO following the departure of the previous

chief executive, board independence jumps in the year of turnover by about 0.60 percentage points

(red dashed line). The increase is statistically significant at the 1% level and is about four times

the average annual change estimated in Table 4 (Panel A).25 This finding is directionally consistent

with bargaining models, since uncertainty about CEO ability is likely to jump at the time of

turnover and the new CEO's bargaining power is likely to be lower than the incumbent's. In the

context of dynamic agency models, it is also consistent with smaller continuation value for the

new CEO and with the optimal contract being re-set for a new CEO. The graphs in Panel A thus

indicate that the negative relation between board independence and CEO tenure comes from two

sources: a jump at the time of CEO turnover, plus a gradual reduction in independence as tenure

increases.

              For the full sample, the plot indicates little change in board independence for the first eight

years of a CEO's tenure. This is surprising from the standpoint of learning models like HW, as we

would expect the most learning about CEO ability to occur in the first few years of tenure (see

e.g., Pan, Wang, and Weisbach (2015) for related evidence). On the other hand, the level of

uncertainty is also likely to be highest early in the CEO's tenure. In HW's model, this raises the

value of monitoring to the board, making them less willing to reduce board independence.26

              The blue solid line in Panel A represents the subset of new internal CEOs who are

ultimately employed by their firms for at least 13 years. Hence, this analysis avoids possible

changes in sample composition and focuses on CEOs who are successful enough to achieve long

tenure. For these CEOs, board independence increases in the year of turnover (insignificant) and


                                                            
25
   Dikolli, Mayew, and Nanda (2014) document an increase in board independence following CEO turnover among
ExecuComp firms during 1996-2005. Denis and Sarin (1999) document that changes in board structure are stronger
around executive turnover.
26
   See Proposition 1 and Corollary 1 in HW.

                                                               24
 
begins to decrease soon afterward. The decreases from year t to years t+10 and t+12 are -2.18 (t-

stat = -2.40) and -3.03 (t-stat = -2.89) percentage points. The decline in board independence is

more pronounced than for the full sample, which may be because these CEOs survive longer as a

reflection of superior job performance in their careers (hence less monitoring is needed). We

examine this superior performance conjecture in Panel B. This also suggests that the lack of decline

over the first eight years for the full sample is driven largely by CEOs who were less successful

early in their tenures.

        In Panel B, we compare less successful CEOs (those with below-median industry-adjusted

ROA averaged over the first three years in office) in the red dashed line to more successful CEOs

(above median) in the blue solid line. We find that board independence decreases faster for CEOs

with better operating performance (ROA) in the early years of tenure. Similarly, Panel C shows

that CEOs whose initial performance measured by industry-adjusted stock returns are above the

median (blue solid line) exhibit decreasing board independence over their tenure, while those with

below-median initial stock returns exhibit largely flat (even increasing somewhat initially) board

independence ratios. The data in Panels B and C show that tenure-related reductions in board

independence are evident among firms with superior performance but not among other firms.

        In Table 4, Panel B, we more directly test the impact of performance on changes in board

independence by estimating the following equation:

                                                                     ,                      (4)

where Independenceit is the first-difference in board independence; i×c represents firm-by-CEO

fixed effects; Performanceit is a trailing three-year average (including year t) of either industry-

adjusted ROA or stock returns; Xit represents a vector of first-differenced firm-level control

variables as in Eq. (1) (excluding Tobin's q and ROA) for firm i in year t. To study the effect of



                                                25
 
firm performance on changes in board structure within a given CEO's career in the firm, we

exclude observations when there is a CEO turnover. Further, including firm-by-CEO fixed effects

in Eq. (4) controls for any remaining heterogeneity across CEO-firm pairs, so the coefficient is

estimated off within-CEO variation.

       Columns 1 through 3 show that the firm's industry-adjusted ROA over the recent three

years is significantly negatively associated with changes in board independence. For example, the

estimates in column 2 suggest that a one-SD increase in ROA (0.080) is associated with a 0.24

percentage point greater decrease in the board independence ratio (= -3.045 × 0.080). Similarly, in

columns 4 through 6, the coefficients on the firm's industry-adjusted stock returns over the recent

three years are negative (though not statistically significant in column 6). The estimates in column

5 suggest that a one-SD increase in stock returns (0.024) is associated with a 0.13 percentage point

greater decrease in the board independence ratio (= -5.504 × 0.024). These findings are consistent

with a larger decline in monitoring intensity following good industry-adjusted performance over

the CEO's tenure within a given firm.

       In the context of executive compensation, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) show that

CEOs are rewarded for industry performance, which they interpret as "pay for luck." However, in

an unreported analysis, we do not find a significant reduction in board independence following

strong industry performance. The contrast in board dynamics following industry-adjusted vs.

industry performance is consistent with CEOs gaining bargaining power through the perception of

greater ability, rather than inefficient capture of the board (Bebchuk and Fried, 2004).

4.3.2. Succession tournaments. The CEO succession process (e.g., Vancil, 1987; Hermalin and

Weisbach, 1988) is potentially an alternative explanation for the documented changes in board

independence. In particular, toward the end of a CEO's tenure the board may add directors who



                                                26
 
are candidates to become the next CEO. If these succession candidates are primarily insiders, this

would push down board independence pre-turnover; and if the losing candidates leave the board

right after the CEO change, this would increase board independence following CEO turnover.

              We empirically examine whether such a CEO succession process accounts for the board

dynamics we find by re-estimating Eq. (3) after excluding potential CEO candidates from our

calculation of the board independence measure. We are not aware of any clear theoretical or

empirical guidance on whether these CEO candidates should be concentrated in independent vs.

dependent directors. Therefore, we first exclude any director who was added to the board within

two years before a CEO turnover (i.e., years t-2 and t-1) and subsequently departs at turnover

(Hermalin and Weisbach, 1988).27 Unreported results are very similar to those in Panel A of Fig.

4. Alternatively, we exclude only dependent directors who join just prior to CEO turnover and

leave in the year of turnover. In this second case, we find little increase in board independence in

the year of turnover, but a similar decline in independence through the CEO's tenure. Thus,

depending on the specification, departure of losing CEO candidates may account for some of the

jump in board independence at turnover; however, in our tests succession planning does not

account for the decline in board independence after turnover.

4.3.3. Death- and health-related CEO turnover and board dynamics. Assigning a causal

interpretation to the change in board structure at CEO turnover is difficult, because unobserved

changes at the firm (e.g., variation in investment opportunities or strategy) may drive both CEO

turnover and changes in board independence (e.g., Casamatta and Guembel, 2010). To address this

challenge, we study a subsample of CEOs for whom turnover occurs for plausibly exogenous



                                                            
27
  We find qualitatively similar results when we exclude directors who join the board within three years before CEO
turnover then depart.

                                                               27
 
reasons due to death of the previous CEO.28 This analysis also highlights how the CEO tenure

effect on board independence varies with perceived CEO ability and related uncertainty. First,

CEOs appointed in death transitions are likely to have less power than their predecessors, relative

to new CEOs in the typical insider transition depicted in Panel A of Fig. 4. (Consistent with this

conjecture, we find that the CEOs who died in office had longer tenure, and were much more likely

to have been board chair, relative to typical CEOs who leave office.) Additionally, succession

planning seems unlikely to explain results on this subsample as these firms will have had less

opportunity for grooming the new CEO, increasing uncertainty about her ability in the job.

              We estimate Eq. (3) using the 79 death-driven CEO turnover events that we are able to

match to our CEO and board database in which the new CEO is an insider. The results (unreported)

show that these CEO turnovers lead to an immediate increase in board independence of 1.9

percentage points in the year of turnover (significant at the 10% level), consistent with the results

for the full sample. We also re-estimate Eq. (3) using these CEO death events as an instrument for

CEO tenure. Thus, we exploit the death-driven departure of the prior CEO as the source of

variation in CEO tenure in this analysis. The results (untabulated) from the first stage indicate that

an exogenous CEO turnover is associated with an average reduction in CEO tenure of about nine

years. The second stage shows an additional year of tenure is associated with a reduction in board

independence of 0.22 percentage points (significant at the 10% level), which though still small, is

slightly larger than the baseline Table 4 estimates.

4.4. Dual chairs and CEO compensation

              Another dimension of board structure that may affect the monitoring of the CEO is whether

the CEO is also board chair. Therefore, in the first two columns of Table 5 we examine whether


                                                            
28
     See Appendix B for details about how we form this sample.

                                                               28
 
CEO tenure is related to CEO-chair duality. Column 1 shows results from estimating Eq. (2) where

the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the CEO also holds the title of board chair,

and zero otherwise,29 using OLS with firm fixed effects. The positive coefficient estimate for CEO

tenure is the first within-firm evidence consistent with CEOs with longer tenure receiving the dual

chair role. [Linck et al. (2008) and Dikolli et al. (2014) find a similar relation in the cross-section.]

In terms of economic magnitude, an additional year of tenure in the same firm is associated with

an increase of 2.2 percentage points (significant at the 1% level) in the probability that the CEO is

board chair. Column 2, which uses the Altonji and Shakotko (1987) IV to capture within-CEO

effects, shows similar magnitude and significance of the relation between tenure and CEO-chair

duality.

              Dynamic bargaining and agency models predict that CEO compensation will increase

following a history of strong performance, proxied by increasing tenure. Columns 3 and 4 of Table

5 show results from estimating Eq. (2) with a dependent variable of the log of the CEO's total

current compensation (salary and bonus). The sample consists of 3,323 firm-years from the

combined database of corporate officers and directors merged with CEO compensation data drawn

from Frydman and Saks (2010) from 1936 to 1991 and ExecuComp from 1992 to 2011.30 The

significantly positive coefficients on CEO tenure in both columns indicate that CEOs are rewarded

with higher compensation as their tenures increase. In terms of economic magnitude, each

additional year of CEO tenure is associated with 2.4% to 2.5% higher pay (significant at the 1%

level), beyond that associated with firm and year fixed effects and other included controls. In an



                                                            
29
   To match the order of magnitude between estimates for board independence and CEO-chair duality, we multiply
the indicator variable by 100 in the regression.
30
   We thank Carola Frydman for making the dataset of executive compensation from 1936 to 1991 available. For
consistency across the sample, columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 only analyze 1992-2011 data for firms that appear in the
Frydman and Saks database at least once.

                                                               29
 
unreported analysis, we confirm a significantly positive within-firm effect of CEO tenure on pay

(a 1.2% increase per additional year of tenure) using the full sample of firm-years matched to

ExecuComp from 1992 to 2009 (N = 11,715). Thus, consistent with HW (1998) and dynamic

agency models (e.g., DeMarzo and Fishman, 2007a), compensation is path-dependent, increasing

after a history of strong performance, proxied by an increase in CEO tenure.

4.5. CEO tenure and governance outcomes following 2002-2003 regulations, and substitution

between board independence and chair duality

       During 2002-2003, new regulations (e.g., imposed by SOX, NYSE, and NASDAQ) began

to require that the majority of directors be independent (Chhaochharia and Grinstein, 2007; Linck

et al., 2008; Duchin et al., 2010). These regulations therefore might attenuate the relation between

CEO tenure and board independence. To evaluate this conjecture, Table 6 examines the association

between CEO tenure and board independence, chair duality, and CEO compensation for years

before and after 2002 by re-estimating Eq. (2), adding an interaction between CEO tenure and an

indicator for years after 2002. In this specification, we also interact the firm fixed effects with the

post-2002 indicator in order to control for any within-firm shifts in the average level of board

independence, chair duality, and compensation following the regulation changes. In column 1,

where the dependent variable is board independence, the coefficient on CEO tenure × Post 2002

is 0.140, suggesting that after 2002, CEO tenure has no significant impact on board independence

(-0.155+ 0.140 = -0.015; t-stat = -0.37). This may explain the lack of a relation between CEO

tenure and board structure in Coles et al. (2014), given their 1996 ­ 2010 sample period (and in

our finding of insignificance over a similar horizon in column 2 of Table 4, Panel A).

       While the regulations increased board independence as intended, Hermalin and Weisbach

(1998, p. 111) argue that "As long as the bargaining process [between the CEO and board] itself



                                                  30
 
is unaffected by reforms, the equilibrium will be little affected." Thus, we might expect that

successful CEOs receive greater rewards in other dimensions. Consistent with this implication, the

coefficient on CEO tenure × Post 2002 is 1.309 (t-stat = 5.33) in column 2, where the dependent

variable is an indicator for CEO-chair duality (×100).31 This increased chair duality for long-

tenured CEOs after 2002 is consistent with a substitution towards a dual chair role (and thus less

monitoring) due to higher board independence (and thus more monitoring) following the

implementation of Sarbanes-Oxley and related regulations. More generally, in Appendix Table 1,

Panels A and B, we find evidence consistent with a substitution between board independence and

chair duality over the past century. Specifically, across the century, in sub-periods when the within-

firm relation between CEO tenure and board independence is weaker, the within-firm relation

between tenure and the CEO being appointed board chair is stronger. Finally, column 3 in Table

6 explores whether the regulations affected compensation. The coefficient on CEO tenure × Post

2002 is -0.008 and insignificant, suggesting no change in the tenure-compensation relation post-

2002.

              In Panel D of Fig. 4, we examine another potential aspect of the substitution between board

independence and dual chair titles: relative timing within CEO tenure.32 The panel shows that

CEOs are appointed as dual chairs in the early years of tenure, with the dual chair effect leveling

off just as board independence begins to decline more steeply as shown in Panel A.

4.6. External CEO appointments

              We now examine board dynamics when an external CEO is appointed (i.e., not a previous

officer of the firm). Given that a new outsider CEO likely has less experience or expertise with the


                                                            
31
   Linck et al. (2008) find that the cross-sectional relation between CEO tenure and chair duality also increases post
SOX.
32
   We thank the referee for suggesting this test.

                                                               31
 
firm than does an insider, hiring an outsider may increase the benefit of having inside directors on

the board, due to their ability to provide firm-specific knowledge and advice.33 In Panel E of Fig.

4, the patterns for external CEOs differ from those in the earlier panels. Board independence

decreases by 3.1 percentage points in the turnover year when the new CEO is an external hire, in

stark contrast to results for new internal CEOs. The decrease is significant at the 1% level. Board

independence increases rapidly in the first few years of an outsider CEO's tenure, offsetting most

of the initial decline by year t+6. The increase from years t to t+6 is significant at the 1% level.

This pattern is consistent with the new external CEO gaining more experience within the firm,

reducing the need for internal advisor-directors on the board. Board independence eventually

shows the familiar decrease only after year t+9.

              These differing results for outside CEOs are new to the literature. For this subset of firms,

other factors, such as the value of firm-specific knowledge on the board, appear to outweigh any

effects related to learning and contracting between the board and CEO. More theoretical and

empirical research is needed to investigate these issues.



5. Effect of CEO power on CEO turnover-performance sensitivity

              The analysis in Section 4 provides some evidence consistent with CEOs being monitored

less intensely and gaining power over their tenures, especially conditional on strong performance.

Does this imply that the jobs of successful CEOs are relatively protected, and if so, do long-tenure

CEOs eventually become entrenched and adversely affect firm value? To investigate these




                                                            
33
   Mace (1971) argues that expertise of outside directors facilitates the advisory role of the board. Adams and Ferreira
(2007) argue that a management friendly (less independent) board can facilitate the information sharing that supports
the advisory role. Our finding is consistent with Adams and Ferreira's argument but the difference is that we focus on
external CEOs while they do not differentiate between internal and external CEOs. 

                                                               32
 
questions, we start by examining CEO replacement conditional on performance. 34 Bargaining

models like HW, in which the board learns CEO ability from realized performance, predict that

previously successful CEOs would be optimally fired less often conditional on poor current

performance. Likewise, in dynamic contracting models, a history of good performance results in

continuation values well above the termination threshold, making termination less sensitive to

current performance.

              We begin by estimating a linear probability model with firm fixed effects to predict CEO

turnover from 1926 to 2011, conditional on firm performance and CEO power (for analysis on

modern data, see Weisbach, 1988; Warner, Watts, and Wruck, 1988; Jenter and Lewellen, 2014).

We start the estimation in 1926 to align with the availability of CRSP data. Specifically, we

estimate the following equation using OLS:35

                                      

                                                                                                             , (5)

where CEO turnoverit is an indicator variable equal to one if the current CEO is different from the

previous year's CEO, and zero otherwise; Performanceit is either of ROAit, the change in return

on assets or Excess returnit, the stock return minus value-weighted market return from CRSP;

Powerit is one of four proxies that measure bargaining power or superior past performance: Board

independence, CEO-chair duality, ROA or stock returns over the first three years of the CEO's

tenure, and CEO tenure (Adams, Almeida, and Ferreira, 2006; Morse, Nanda, and Seru, 2011);36

Xit is a vector of firm-level controls including CEO tenure, log book assets, and Tobin's q for firm

                                                            
34
   We proxy for the decision to fire the CEO using a CEO turnover indicator equal to one if the current CEO is different
from the previous year's CEO, and equal to zero otherwise (see, e.g., Jenter and Lewellen, 2014).
35
   We find qualitatively similar results using logit models with firm fixed effects (i.e., conditional logit).
36
   In the presented analysis, we use an indicator variable for the top (ROA, stock return, and tenure) or bottom quartile
(independence) of the full sample to define powerful CEOs (except for the dual chair indicator). Our results are robust
to alternative specifications that use other percentiles of distributions (e.g., the median) or continuous variables to
measure CEO power.

                                                               33
 
i in year t; and standard errors are clustered at the firm level.37 Eq. (5) enhances the specification

in Weisbach (1988) and Warner et al. (1988) by including firm fixed effects to account for firm-

level heterogeneity in the propensity to replace the CEO and extending their analysis across the

century. Given the high correlation between the two performance measures, we separately estimate

Eq. (5) by employing the change in ROA (Panel A) or excess stock returns (Panel B).

              We first benchmark that CEO turnover is significantly negatively associated with

performance, as measured either by the change in ROA or excess stock returns, consistent with

prior research (see Appendix Table 3). 38 Our focus is on the effects of CEO power on CEO

turnover-performance sensitivity. We start with the classic proxy for monitoring intensity of the

board: the board independence ratio. Column 1 of Table 7 shows that less independent boards are

associated with significantly lower performance sensitivity of CEO turnover, consistent with

Weisbach's (1988) cross-sectional finding. Column 2 uses an indicator variable for CEO-chair

dual title as a proxy for CEO power and shows that dual chair-CEOs face a significantly lower

sensitivity of turnover to contemporaneous performance measured by either changes in ROA or

excess stock returns (see Goyal and Park, 2002 for cross-sectional evidence).39

              Column 3 (4) defines power based on firms in the top quartile of ROA (stock returns) in

the first three years of the CEO's tenure. In these columns, we include only observations for CEOs

with at least four years of tenure, to ensure that average performance during the CEO's first three

years is well measured. We find that current performance has little effect on turnover propensity

for CEOs who performed well over the first three years of their careers at their current firms.40

                                                            
37
   CEO age is not available in Moody's or Mergent; thus, we do not include it as a control variable.
38
   See, for example, Warner, Watts, and Wruck (1988), Weisbach (1988), Murphy and Zimmerman (1993) and Jenter
and Lewellen (2014).
39
   This column uses data starting in 1960, to coincide with the timing of when there is less ambiguity in whether the
CEO is dual board chair.
40
   In some cases in columns 3 and 4, the sum of the coefficients on Performance and Performance × Power are even
slightly positive.

                                                               34
 
Overall, these results are consistent with powerful and previously successful CEOs being

somewhat shielded from board monitoring and, in particular, the risk of being fired due to poor

firm performance. The one exception is in column 5, where we measure CEO power with a "long

tenure" indicator equal to one if CEO tenure is larger than its third quartile (nine years). In this

case, only one of the four coefficients on the interactions between performance and CEO power is

significantly positive. Thus, while by most measures more powerful CEOs face lower

performance-turnover sensitivity, this greater power may not be achieved through longer tenure

alone. This is consistent with our results in Section 4.3 that show that the negative CEO-tenure

relation holds primarily for high-performing CEOs.41



6. Market reaction to sudden departures of CEOs
              The results in the previous sections provide some evidence that bargaining or dynamic

contracting affects board structure and chief executive retention decisions. This begs an important

question: Do CEOs who have gained power through a history of superior performance in a given

firm continue to add value to the firm (consistent with them having "high ability" or a larger stake

in the firm), or do they become entrenched and potentially reduce value ex post? To address this

question, we examine market reactions to CEO turnover, conditional on the power or past success

of the departing CEO. To examine plausibly exogenous CEO turnover, we use events of death and

health-related CEO turnover from 1950 to 2011 (see, e.g., Bennedsen, Perez-Gonzalez, and

Wolfenzon, 2010; Jäger, 2016).42 We first calculate market-adjusted excess daily stock returns as

                               , where Rit is the rate of stock return for firm i on day t, and Rmt is the rate of return


                                                            
41
   Dikolli et al. (2014) show that performance-related CEO turnover declines in CEO tenure for Execucomp firms. As
mentioned above, our analysis includes firm fixed effects and hence tests the within-firm theoretical prediction.
42
   Previous research finds generally weak average announcement returns around CEO turnover due to death of the
CEO (see, e.g., Johnson et al., 1985; Jenter et al., 2019).

                                                                 35
 
for the market portfolio ("vwretd" from CRSP). We then compute cumulative excess returns

during the [-2, +2] window around the announcement of CEO turnover by compounding the daily

excess returns.43

              See Appendix B for details on how we gather data on CEO death and health events. To

increase sample size, in this section we include NASDAQ firms in addition to NYSE/AMEX

firms. This sample selection process results in 336 events with matched information on directors

and officers. The average cumulative abnormal return for death and health events is 0.84%, which

is similar to the 0.66% average buy-and-hold-abnormal return during the month of death

announcement documented by Jenter, Matveyev, and Roth (2019).

              Table 8 shows the results of regressing cumulative excess return in response to plausibly

exogenous CEO turnover on various proxies for CEO power: (1) An indicator for CEO tenure

above the third quartile, (2) an indicator for whether the CEO is board chair, and (3) an indicator

for whether the CEO is the founder of the firm. Across the columns of Panel A, death and health-

related CEO turnover is associated with 2.7% to 3.1% higher announcement returns when the

departing CEO was more powerful, and the differences are significant at the 1% to 5% levels. In

contrast, departures of CEOs who had relatively little power before leaving office entail

insignificant announcement returns ranging from -1.3% to 0.6%, as captured by the intercepts.44

To mitigate concerns that some health-related departures may be partially anticipated by the

market, in Panels B and C, we restrict the sample to only death-related and sudden death-related

departures, respectively. Panel B shows that announcement returns for death-driven CEO turnover

                                                            
43
  The results are robust to alternative event windows such as [-3, +3], [-2, +3], and [-1, +2].
44
  Salas (2010) finds that market reactions to deaths of older, longer tenured, and founder CEOs are significantly
positive only when their firms performed poorly in the years prior to the death. Johnson et al. (1985) find positive
reactions to the deaths of founder CEOs. In a contemporaneous paper, Jenter et al. (2019) find an insignificant positive
reaction to sudden founder deaths when controlling for CEO age and tenure. Our analysis in this section complements
these findings by using comprehensive data on CEO death-driven turnovers from 1950 to 2011 and documenting how
the market reacts to the death of a CEO conditional on several measures of CEO power.

                                                               36
 
are 3.1% to 3.9% higher when the CEO is more successful. Panel C provides similar evidence for

sudden deaths (N = 149), although for one of the three measures of CEO power (chair duality) the

market reaction to sudden deaths is insignificant (though still positive at 2.0%; t-stat = 1.33). These

findings are consistent with the argument that powerful CEOs can become entrenched or extract

excess pay, and thus removing these CEOs (which presumably would have been costly without a

death occurrence) would increase shareholder value. Note that the economic magnitudes of our

estimates in Table 8 are similar to those in Taylor (2010), who uses a structural model to estimate

that shareholder value would increase by 3% if the perceived cost of removing (entrenched) CEOs

was eliminated.

       Does entrenchment fit with the bargaining and contracting models we rely on as a

framework? On the one hand, in dynamic learning models such as HW, CEOs who achieve long

tenures and gain power over the board are those perceived to be of high skill. Under this

interpretation, we would not expect the market to react positively to unexpected departures of these

highly skilled CEOs. In that sense, the positive reactions we document appear more consistent

with the view that over time CEOs inefficiently gain excess power over the board (e.g., Bebchuk

and Fried, 2004).

       We note, however, that our evidence is not necessarily inconsistent with optimal learning

and/or contracting models. For example, as HW discuss in a verbal extension to their formal model,

if insiders prefer to retain the incumbent CEO and the board becomes less independent over time,

such a framework could lead to entrenchment ex-post. The positive market reaction can also be

interpreted as consistent with dynamic contracting in that ex-post entrenchment (as a non-

pecuniary benefit) may provide the agent incentives ex ante. The market reaction is also consistent

with promised future rents to the CEO reverting back to the firm upon the CEO's death. Thus, we



                                                  37
 
might think of these positive market reactions as an ex-post measure of the cost of agency conflicts,

even if firms are ex ante optimizing board structure conditional on these frictions.



7. Conclusion

       We analyze about 87,000 firm-year observations over 92 years to explore dynamic

interactions between the CEO and board of directors. Our long panel of data allows us to

investigate potentially slow-moving governance and contracting processes. We find that board

structure is persistent: board independence lagged 10 or 20 years is by far the strongest predictor

of current period board independence, suggesting that a board once weakened (or strengthened)

may remain so far into the future. Future research should attempt to uncover the frictions or other

forces behind this persistence. Despite persistent board structure, our long sample enables us to

examine whether the board changes that do occur are consistent with theories of board dynamics.

We find some results that are consistent with theoretical predictions from bargaining and dynamic

agency models but others that are less so.

       In particular, consistent with successful CEOs gaining power or higher continuation value

at their firms, we find that board independence decreases as a given CEO's tenure increases. The

within-firm CEO tenure-board independence relation is stronger when board incentives to monitor

weaken, such as following strong corporate performance. And board independence jumps at CEO

turnover, when uncertainty about the CEO's ability spikes and CEO power is low. We also find

that CEOs are more likely to become board chair and earn higher compensation over their tenures.

Further, powerful CEOs and those with a history of strong performance are less likely to be

replaced conditional on poor current performance.




                                                 38
 
       However, we document several new findings that do not fit as neatly within standard

interpretations of dynamic bargaining and contracting governance theory:

               The negative board independence-CEO tenure relation is small in economic
               magnitude and small relative to other forces in the data. Related, despite a
               statistically significant relation with CEO tenure, board structures are quite
               persistent.
               Board independence declines when an external CEO is appointed, opposite the
               monitoring prediction (though perhaps consistent with external CEOs benefiting
               more from the advice of insider directors than from monitoring).
               We find no market reaction to the typical CEO death, but a positive reaction when
               powerful (long-tenure, dual board chair, founder) CEOs die in office. Among other
               interpretations, this result is consistent with powerful CEOs becoming entrenched
               in the sense that an unexpected departure would increase firm value.

More theoretical and empirical research is needed to reconcile these results with extant (or new)

governance theory.

       We also document new results related to CEOs being appointed dual board chair.

Consistent with appointing the CEO as dual board chair being a substitute to reduced board

independence, we find that 1) being appointed dual chair is concentrated in the early years of a

CEO's tenure while the reduction in board independence on average occurs later; and 2) successful

CEOs were more likely to be appointed board chair following 2002 regulations that increased

board independence. Further research is needed to model the monitoring implications of CEO-

chair duality and the substitution between dual chairs and board independence.

       Overall, our evidence is consistent with the life-cycle of powerful CEOs being that they

are successful early in their careers and hence gain power within their firms, which leads to job

security, dual chair roles and greater pay, and eventually leads to powerful CEOs becoming

entrenched (on average). Given that these results are likely to be equilibrium outcomes of a

dynamic bargaining or contracting process, our tests do not always allow us to prove causality of

these results, but they do suggest interesting avenues for future research.


                                                 39
 
References
Adams, R., Almeida, H., and Ferreira, D., 2006. Powerful CEOs and their impact on corporate performance.
    Review of Financial Studies 18, 1430-1432.
Adams, R., Ferreira D., 2007. A theory of friendly boards. Journal of Finance 62, 217-250.
Adams, R., Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M., 2010. The role of boards of directors in corporate governance: a
    conceptual framework and survey. Journal of Economic Literature 48, 58-107.
Altonji, J., Shakotko, R., 1987. Do wages rise with job seniority? Review of Economic Studies 54, 437-459.
Avedian, A., Cronqvist, H., Weidenmier, M., 2015. Corporate governance and the creation of the SEC.
    Unpublished working paper. Harvard University, University of Miami, and Claremont Colleges.
Baker, M. and Gompers, P., 2003. The determinants of board structure at the initial public offering. Journal of
        Law and Economics 42, 569-598.
Bebchuk, L. A., Fried, J. M., Walker, D. I., 2002. Managerial power and rent extraction in the design of executive
        compensation, University of Chicago Law Review 63, 751-846.
Bebchuk, L. A., Fried, J. M., 2003. Executive compensation as an agency problem, Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 17, 71-92.
Bebchuk, L. A., Fried, J. M., 2004. Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive
        Compensation, Harvard University Press, Boston.
Bennedsen, M., Perez-Gonzalez, F., Wolfenzon, D., 2010. Do CEOs matter? Unpublished working paper.
        INSEAD, Stanford University, and Columbia University.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2001. Are CEOs rewarded for luck? The ones without principals are, Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 116, 901-932.
Bolton, P., Chen, H., Wang, N., 2011. A unified theory of Tobin's q, corporate investment, financing, and risk
        management. Journal of Finance 66, 1545-1578.
Boone, A., Field, L., Karpoff, J., Raheja, C., 2007. The determinants of corporate board size and composition:
        an empirical analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 85, 66­101.
Casamatta, C., Guembel, A., 2010. Managerial legacies, entrenchment, and strategic inertia. Journal of Finance
        65, 2403-2436.
Chhaochharia, V., Grinstein, Y., 2007. Corporate governance and firm value: The impact of the 2002 governance
    rules. Journal of Finance 62, 1789-1825.
Cicero, D., Wintoki, M., Yang, T., 2013. How do public companies adjust their board structures? Journal of
    Corporate Finance 23, 108­127.
Coles, J., Daniel, N., Naveen, L., 2008. Boards: Does one size fit all?. Journal of Financial Economics 87, 329-
    356.
Coles, J., Daniel, N., Naveen, L., 2014. Co-opted boards. Review of Financial Studies 27, 1751-1796.




                                                       40
 
Dahya, J., McConnell, J., Travlos, N., 2002. The Cadbury committee, corporate performance, and top
    management turnover. Journal of Finance 57, 461-483.
DeAngelo, H., Roll, R., 2015. How stable are corporate capital structures? Journal of Finance 70, 373-418.
DeMarzo, P., Sannikov, Y., 2006. Optimal security design and dynamic capital structure in a continuous-time
    agency model. Journal of Finance 61, 2681-2724.

DeMarzo, P., Fishman, M., 2007a. Agency and optimal investment dynamics. Review of Financial Studies 20,
      151-188.

DeMarzo, P., Fishman, M., 2007b. Optimal long-term financial contracting. Review of Financial Studies 20,
      2079-2128.

DeMarzo, P., Fishman, M., He, Z., Wang, N., 2012. Dynamic agency and the q theory of investment. Journal of
      Finance 67, 2295-2340.

DeMarzo, P., Sannikov, Y., 2017. Learning, termination, and payout policy in dynamic incentive contracts.
      Review of Economic Studies 84, 182­236.

Denis, D., Sarin, A., 1999. Ownership and board structures in publicly traded corporations. Journal of Financial
    Economics 52, 187-223.
Dikolli, S., Mayew, J., Nanda, D., 2014. CEO tenure and the performance-turnover relation. Review of
    Accounting Studies 19, 281­327.
Duchin, R., Matsusaka, J., Ozbas, O., 2010. When are outside directors effective? Journal of Financial
    Economics 96, 195-214.
Fee, C., Hadlock, C., Pierce, J., 2013. Managers with and without style: evidence using exogenous variation.
    Review of Financial Studies 26, 567-601.
Frydman, C., Saks, R., 2010. Executive compensation: A new view from a long-term perspective, 1936­2005.
    Review of Financial Studies 23, 2099­2138.
Frydman, C., Hilt, E., Zhou, L., 2015. Economic effects of early `shadow banks': Trust companies and the panic
    of 1907. Journal of Political Economy 123, 902-940.
Goyal, V., Park, C., 2002. Board leadership structure and CEO turnover. Journal of Corporate Finance 8, 49­
    66.
Graham, J., Leary, M., Roberts, M., 2015. A century of capital structure: The leveraging of corporate America.
    Journal of Financial Economics 118, 658-683.
Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M., 1988. The determinants of board composition. RAND Journal of Economics 19,
    589-606.
Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M., 1998. Endogenously chosen boards of directors and their monitoring of the CEO.
    American Economic Review 88, 96-118.
Huson, M., Parrino, R., Starks, L., 2001. Internal monitoring mechanisms and CEO turnover: A long-term
    perspective. Journal of Finance 56, 2265-2296.

                                                      41
 
Jäger, S., 2016. How substitutable are workers? Evidence from worker deaths. Unpublished working paper.
    Harvard University.
Jenter, D., Lewellen, K., 2014. Performance-induced CEO turnover. Unpublished working paper. Stanford
    University and Dartmouth College.
Jenter, D., Matveyev, E., Roth, L., 2019. Good and bad CEOs. Unpublished working paper. London School of
    Economics and University of Alberta.
Johnson, W., Magee, R., Nagarajan, N., Newman, H., 1985. An analysis of the stock price reaction to sudden
    executive deaths: Implications for the managerial labor market. Journal of Accounting and Economics 7,
    151-174.
Kaplan, S., Minton, B., 2012. How has CEO turnover changed? International Review of Finance 12, 57-87.
Lehn, K., Patro, S., Zhao, M., 2009. Determinants of the size and composition of US corporate boards. Financial
    Management 38, 747-780.
Lemmon, M., Roberts, M., Zender, J., 2008. Back to the beginning: Persistence and the cross-section of corporate
    capital structure. Journal of Finance 63, 1575-1608.
Linck, J., Netter, J., Yang, T., 2008. The determinants of board structure. Journal of Financial Economics 87,
    308-328.
Mace, M., 1971. Directors: Myth and Reality. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Marosi, A., Massoud, N., 2008. You can enter but you cannot leave...: U.S. securities markets and foreign firms.
    Journal of Finance 63, 2477-2506.
Morse, A., Nanda, V., Seru, A., 2011. Are incentive contracts rigged by powerful CEOs? Journal of Finance
    66, 1779-1821.
Murphy, K., Zimmerman, J., 1993. Financial performance surrounding CEO turnover. Journal of Accounting
    and Economics 16, 273-315.
Murphy, K., Zabojnik, J., 2007. Managerial capital and the market for CEOs. Unpublished working paper,
    University of Southern California and Queen's University.
National Association of Corporate Directors, 1996. NACD Blue Ribbon Commission on Director
    Professionalism.
Pan, Y., Wang, T., Weisbach, M., 2015. Learning about CEO ability and stock return volatility. Review of
    Financial Studies 28, 1623-1666.
Piskorski, T., Westerfield, M., 2016. Optimal dynamic contracts with moral hazard and costly monitoring.
    Journal of Economic Theory 166, 242-281.
Quigley, T., Crossland, C., Campbell, R., 2017. Shareholder perceptions of the changing impact of CEOs:
    Market reactions to unexpected CEO deaths, 1950 ­ 2009. Strategic Management Review 38, 939-949.
Salas, J., 2010. Entrenchment, governance, and the stock price reaction to sudden executive deaths. Journal of
    Banking and Finance 34, 656-666.



                                                      42
 
Taylor, L., 2010. Why are CEOs rarely fired? Evidence from structural estimation. Journal of Finance 65, 2051-
    2087.
Vancil, R., 1987. Passing the Baton. Harvard University Press, Boston.
Wangler, L., 1994. The Real World of Separate Chairmen.
Warner, J., Watts, R., Wruck, K.,1988. Stock prices and top management changes. Journal of Financial
    Economics 20, 461-492.
Weisbach, M., 1988. Outsider directors and CEO turnover. Journal of Financial Economics 20, 431-460.
Zwiebel, J., 1996. Dynamic capital structure under managerial entrenchment. American Economic Review 86,
    1197-1215.




                                                     43
                                                                                                   Figure 1: Long-run CEO and board trends

This figure shows annual means of CEO turnover (Panel A), the proportion of non-affiliated CEO appointments (Panel
B), board independence (Panel C), and the percentage of CEOs who are also board chairs (Panel D). Blue solid (red
dashed) lines show averages (average regression residuals after controlling for firm characteristics, including firm age,
log board size, log book assets, Tobin's q, two-digit SIC industry-adjusted return on assets, and asset tangibility).
Panels A and B plot three-year moving averages. For Panels B and C, the sample begins in 1933 given that
identification of outside CEOs and dependent directors relies on historical observations for given firms.

Panel A: CEO turnover (three-year moving average)

                         18%                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Residuals (characteristics adjusted)
                         16%                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4%

                         14%                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2%
   CEO Turnover Rate




                         12%                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0%

                         10%                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -2%

                                           8%                                                                                                                                                                                                       -4%

                                           6%                                                                                                                                                                                                       -6%

                                           4%                                                                                                                                                                                                       -8%
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CEO turnover rate
                                           2%                                                                                                                                                                                                       -10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Resid.
                                           0%                                                                                                                                                                                                       -12%
                                                     1922
                                                     1925
                                                     1928
                                                     1931
                                                     1934
                                                     1937
                                                     1940
                                                     1943
                                                     1946
                                                     1949
                                                     1952
                                                     1955
                                                     1958
                                                     1961
                                                     1964
                                                     1967
                                                     1970
                                                     1973
                                                     1976
                                                     1979
                                                     1982
                                                     1985
                                                     1988
                                                     1991
                                                     1994
                                                     1997
                                                     2000
                                                     2003
                                                     2006
                                                     2009
                                                                                                                                             Year

Panel B: Outside CEO appointment (three-year moving average)

                                                   45%                                                                                                                                                                                                  15%

                                                   40%                                                                                                                                                                                                  10%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Residuals (characteristics adjusted)
            Fraction of Outside CEO Appointments




                                                   35%                                                                                                                                                                                                  5%

                                                   30%                                                                                                                                                                                                  0%

                                                   25%                                                                                                                                                                                                  -5%

                                                   20%                                                                                                                                                                                                  -10%

                                                   15%                                                                                                                                                                                                  -15%

                                                   10%                                                                                                                                                                                -20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Outside CEO appt.
                                                   5%                                                                                                                                                               Resid.            -25%

                                                   0%                                                                                                                                                                                                   -30%
                                                         1933
                                                                1936
                                                                       1939
                                                                              1942
                                                                                     1945
                                                                                            1948
                                                                                                   1951
                                                                                                          1954
                                                                                                                 1957
                                                                                                                        1960
                                                                                                                               1963
                                                                                                                                      1966
                                                                                                                                             1969
                                                                                                                                                    1972
                                                                                                                                                           1975
                                                                                                                                                                  1978
                                                                                                                                                                         1981
                                                                                                                                                                                1984
                                                                                                                                                                                       1987
                                                                                                                                                                                              1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2011




                                                                                                                                                Year


                                                                                                                                                    44
                                                       CEO is also Board Chair                                                                                                                            Board Independence




                   0%
                                   10%
                                                      20%
                                                                   30%
                                                                                40%
                                                                                           50%
                                                                                                       60%
                                                                                                              70%
                                                                                                                    80%
                                                                                                                                                                     0%
                                                                                                                                                                                10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                   20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                             30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       70%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             80%
            1921                                                                                                                                              1933
            1924                                                                                                                                              1936
            1927
                                                                                                                                                              1939
            1930
                                                                                                                                                              1942
            1933
            1936                                                                                                                                              1945
            1939                                                                                                                                              1948




                                                                                                                          Panel D: CEO-chair duality
            1942                                                                                                                                              1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Panel C: Board independence




            1945                                                                                                                                              1954
            1948                                                                                                                                              1957
            1951
                                                                                                                                                              1960
            1954
                                                                                                                                                              1963
            1957
            1960                                                                                                                                              1966
            1963                                                                                                                                              1969
            1966                                                                                                                                              1972




45
                                                                                                                                                       Year




     Year
            1969                                                                                                                                              1975
            1972                                                                                                                                              1978
            1975
                                                                                                                                                              1981
            1978
                                                                                                                                                              1984
            1981
            1984                                                                                                                                              1987
            1987                                                                                                                                              1990
            1990                                                                                                                                              1993
            1993                                                                                                                                              1996
            1996                                                                                                                                              1999
            1999




                          Resid.
                                                                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                                                                            Resid.




            2002
                                                                                                                                                              2005
            2005




                                    Chair duality
                                                                                                                                                                                     Board indp.




            2008                                                                                                                                              2008
            2011                                                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5%




                                                                                      0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -5%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25%




                                                                                                 10%
                                                                                                             20%
                                                                                                                    30%
                                                                                                                                                                     -55%
                                                                                                                                                                                -45%
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -35%
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -25%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -15%




                   -40%
                                    -30%
                                                            -20%
                                                                         -10%                                                                                                    Residuals (characteristics adjusted)
                                                    Residuals (characteristics adjusted)
                                             Figure 2: Persistence of board independence

This figure presents the dynamics of board independence for firms sorted into quartiles based on the initial level of
the board independence ratio. Specifically, for each calendar year, we form groups by ranking firms based on their
independence ratios and compute the groups' average board independences for the next 30 years. We repeat this
process for all calendar years and report the average across all the calendar years.


                        80%


                        70%


                        60%
   Board Independence




                        50%


                        40%


                        30%


                        20%
                              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
                                                              Event Time (Years)
                                              Low         Medium         High        Very high




                                                                   46
   Figure 3: Non-parametric relation between CEO tenure, board independence, and CEO-chair
                                             duality

This figure shows the univariate relation between CEO tenure and board independence (Panel A) and CEO-chair
duality (Panel B). Board independence is measured by the ratio of the number of independent directors to all directors
(see Table 1 for definition). Firm-years with at least two directors are included in the figures. CEOs with 25 or more
years of tenure are shown as 25+. The straight line is a linear trend.

Panel A: Board independence ratio

                             60%

                             58%
   Board Independence




                             56%

                             54%

                             52%                                                                y = -0.30x + 59.64
                                                                                                   R² = 0.9624
                             50%

                             48%

                             46%
                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25+
                                                                             CEO tenure


Panel B: CEO-chair duality

                             100%

                             90%

                             80%
   CEO is also Board Chair




                             70%                                                                      y = 1.80x + 44.68
                                                                                                         R² = 0.8987
                             60%

                             50%

                             40%

                             30%

                             20%

                             10%

                              0%
                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25+
                                                                             CEO tenure



                                                                             47
                         Figure 4: Dynamics of board independence and chair duality following CEO turnover
This figure presents the dynamics of board independence and chair duality following CEO turnover in year t (year t-
1 serves as baseline). The sample includes firm-years from t-1 to t+12, although any observations from t+k onward
are excluded if there is another CEO turnover in year t+k. We exclude observations if the previous CEO has less than
two years of tenure or the new CEO is replaced within two years. The presented numbers are net of regression-
estimated firm and year fixed effects and firm-level controls as in Table 4, Panel A, column 4. In Panel A, the red
dashed line shows dynamics of board independence for average new internal CEOs, and the blue solid line shows
dynamics of board independence for new internal CEOs whose ultimate tenure is at least 13 years. In Panel B (Panel
C), the blue solid line shows dynamics of independence for new internal CEOs whose average industry-adjusted ROA
(stock returns) in the first three years is above the median, and the red dashed line shows new internal CEOs whose
average ROA (stock returns) is below the median. Panel D presents the dynamics of board chair duality. Panel E
presents estimates for new external CEOs.

Panel A: New internal CEOs

                                1.0%

                                0.5%

                                0.0%
    Board Independence




                                                      0       1       2        3       4        5      6         7       8       9        10        11        12
                           -0.5%

                           -1.0%

                           -1.5%                                              Years relative to CEO turnover

                           -2.0%

                           -2.5%

                           -3.0%
                                                                                    Full            Ultimate tenure >= 12


Panel B: New internal CEOs conditional on average ROA over first three years of tenure

                                              2.5%
                                              2.0%
                                              1.5%
                         Board Independence




                                              1.0%
                                              0.5%
                                              0.0%
                                                          0       1       2    3       4     5        6      7       8       9       10        11        12
                                              -0.5%
                                              -1.0%
                                              -1.5%
                                              -2.0%                                Years relative to CEO turnover
                                              -2.5%
                                                                  Initial 3-year ROA > median               Initial 3-year ROA <= median


                                                                                                 48
Panel C: New internal CEOs conditional on average excess stock returns over first three years of
tenure

                          2.5%

                          2.0%

                          1.5%
     Board Independence




                          1.0%

                          0.5%

                          0.0%
                                                         0     1          2       3        4       5        6        7       8       9        10   11   12
                          -0.5%

                          -1.0%

                          -1.5%                                                       Years relative to CEO turnover
                          -2.0%
                                                               Initial 3-year Stock ret > median                 Initial 3-year Stock ret <= median




Panel D: New internal CEOs ­ dual chair titles

                                                         0%
                                                               0      1       2        3       4   5        6    7       8       9       10   11   12
                                                        -5%

                                                        -10%
                              CEO is also Board Chair




                                                        -15%

                                                        -20%

                                                        -25%

                                                        -30%
                                                                                      Years relative to CEO turnover
                                                        -35%

                                                        -40%
                                                                                        Full            Ultimate tenure >= 12




                                                                                                       49
Panel E: New external CEOs

                        0.0%
                                0   1   2   3        4     5        6   7        8   9   10   11   12

                        -0.5%
                                                Years relative to CEO turnover
   Board Independence




                        -1.0%


                        -1.5%


                        -2.0%


                        -2.5%


                        -3.0%


                        -3.5%




                                                               50
                          Table 1: Descriptive statistics on CEOs, corporate boards of directors and firms from 1920 to 2011

  This table presents summary statistics on corporate boards, CEOs, and firms for U.S. firms from 1920 to 2011. Panel A (B) shows the statistics for board/officer
  (firm) characteristics. "CEO turnover" equals one if the name of the CEO changes relative to the previous year; "CEO (CFO) [Chair] tenure" is the total number
  of years during which an individual serves as CEO (CFO) [Chair] of a given firm; "CEO-Chair duality" is an indicator equal to one if the CEO and chair of the
  board are the same person; "Board size" is the number of directors; "Outsider ratio" is the number of outsider directors scaled by the total number of directors,
  where outsiders are all directors other than current officers of the firm; "Indep. ratio" is the number of independent directors scaled by the total number of directors,
  where independent directors are those who are neither current nor previous officers of the firm nor family members of the CEO (identified using last names);
  "Outside CEO" is an indicator equal to one if the new CEO is not a previous officer of the firm, and zero otherwise. "Total assets" is book assets in 2000 constant
  million dollars; "Firm age" is the number of years since a firm appears in our database; "ROA" represents return on assets defined as income before taxes scaled
  by lagged assets; "Tangibility" is PP&E scaled by assets; "Industry-adj ROA" represents ROA adjusted for the average ROA at the two-digit SIC industry and
  year level; "Tobin's q" is book assets minus book equity plus market equity scaled by assets; "Cash/assets" is cash and equivalents scaled by total assets. 2000s*
  include 2010 and 2011.

  Panel A: Board and officer characteristics

               N (firm-          CEO             CEO             CFO            Chair         CEO-Chair       Board size       Outsider       Indep. ratio     Outside CEO
Variable        years)         turnover         tenure          tenure          tenure         duality                          ratio                           (new appt)

                                                                   Panel A: Full Sample (1920-2011)
Mean           86,946           0.119            6.28            5.08            5.87            0.416            9.89           0.643           0.575             0.324
Median            -             0.000            5.00            4.00            4.00            0.000            9.00           0.667           0.600             0.000
STD               -             0.323            5.61            4.70            5.32            0.493            3.53           0.186           0.193             0.468
                                                                         Panel B: By-decade Mean
1920s          3,148            0.105            4.54            4.33            3.75        0.051               11.24           0.597           0.560             0.422
1930s          5,125            0.087            6.61            6.33            5.30        0.084               10.81           0.571           0.520             0.365
1940s          6,159            0.091            7.97            7.55            6.75        0.091               10.47           0.543           0.492             0.220
1950s          6,570            0.119            7.14            6.98            6.24        0.112               11.12           0.571           0.502             0.256
1960s          9,679            0.119            5.36            4.81            4.71        0.226               10.81           0.583           0.518             0.292
1970s          15,336           0.112            5.83            4.74            5.37        0.455               10.02           0.600           0.527             0.250
1980s          12,289           0.115            7.42            5.06            6.76        0.621                9.80           0.665           0.594             0.293
1990s          14,548           0.142            5.81            3.88            5.84            0.639            8.70           0.698           0.632             0.396
2000s*         14,092           0.130            6.02            4.45            6.22            0.578            8.96           0.769           0.686             0.389



                                                                                    51
Panel B: Firm characteristics

                      N (firm-     Total assets       Firm age      ROA        Industry-adj   Tangibility   Tobin's q   Cash/assets
         Variable      years)    ($million in 2000)                                ROA
                                                      Panel A: Full Sample (1920-2011)
         Mean          86,946       2,289.14           21.15         0.053        0.000         0.339        1.442        0.072
         Median           -          375.82            16.00         0.059        0.002         0.302        1.157        0.044
         STD              -         11,897.56          17.71         0.095        0.087         0.203        0.965        0.081
                                                          Panel B: By-decade Mean
         1920s         3,148          681.27            6.43         0.076        -0.001        0.443        1.263        0.062
         1930s         5,125          707.69           11.64         0.046        0.001         0.443        1.117        0.092
         1940s         6,159          736.48           18.22         0.096        0.000         0.321        1.123        0.138
         1950s         6,570         1,080.45          24.70         0.079        0.000         0.354        1.184        0.100
         1960s         9,679         1,373.86          22.30         0.072        0.000         0.341        1.612        0.062
         1970s         15,336        1,562.01          21.20         0.064        0.000         0.332        1.169        0.038
         1980s         12,289        2,227.12          24.49         0.050        0.000         0.346        1.349        0.037
         1990s         14,548        3,026.26          21.61         0.031        0.000         0.329        1.735        0.068
         2000s*        14,092        5,178.66          23.30         0.022        0.001         0.292        1.822        0.095




                                                                    52
                       Table 2: CEO Tenure, and addition and departure of directors

This table presents the number of additions and departures of independent and dependent directors by a given CEO's
tenure for internal (Panel A) and external CEOs (Panel B). A CEO is defined as an `internal' (`external') CEO if she
is (is not) a previous officer of the firm. "N" is the number of firm-year observations for each tenure group.

Panel A: Internal CEOs

             Year rel. to       N           Independent directors            Dependent directors
              turnover
                                          # Addition     # Departure      # Addition     # Departure
                  -1           3,761         0.84            0.79            0.68            0.65
                   0           3,761         0.98            0.95            2.46            2.60
                   1           3,552         0.90            0.81            0.66            0.72
                  2            3,029         0.87            0.81            0.62            0.67
                  3            2,670         0.83            0.80            0.63            0.69
                  4            2,258         0.89            0.81            0.58            0.66
                  5            1,911         0.84            0.75            0.57            0.64
                  6            1,664         0.84            0.75            0.55            0.61



Panel B: External CEOs

             Year rel. to       N           Independent directors            Dependent directors
              turnover
                                          # Addition     # Departure      # Addition     # Departure
                  -1           1,232         1.03            0.93            0.57            0.63
                  0            1,232         1.62            1.77            2.36            2.06
                   1           1,143         1.04            1.03            0.78            0.92
                  2             893          1.02            0.89            0.61            0.66
                  3             719          0.97            0.93            0.55            0.62
                  4             563          0.94            0.83            0.57            0.58
                  5             467          0.88            0.89            0.47            0.49
                  6             390          0.89            0.70            0.44            0.54




                                                        53
                                  Table 3: Persistence of board independence
This table examines persistence of board independence. "Initial independence ratio" is the board independence ratio
for the first available observation of each firm. Panel A uses all firm-years (except for the very first year for each
firm), and Panels B and C use the cross-section of firms T years after observing initial board independence (T = 5, 10,
or 20). Panel D sorts firms into board independence ratio quartiles in a given year, and follows them over the next 10
years. Panel E reports R2's from panel regressions with various layers of fixed effects. *, **, and *** represent results
significant at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

         Dep. Var.:                                   # Indept. / # Total Directors (Independence ratio)
                                                          (1)                  (2)                 (3)
                                                Panel A: Full sample
         Initial independence ratio                   9.411***             8.574***           8.140***
                                                       (38.96)              (36.98)            (35.39)
         CEO tenure                                   -1.300***            -1.195***          -0.943***
                                                        (-7.66)              (-7.46)            (-6.12)
         Firm age                                     4.109***             3.666***           2.492***
                                                       (18.95)              (17.71)             (11.37)
         log(board size)                                   -                    -             2.966***
                                                           -                    -               (13.49)
         log(assets)                                       -                    -                0.354
                                                           -                    -                (1.21)
         q                                                 -                    -                -0.010
                                                           -                    -               (-0.07)
         ROA                                               -                    -             -0.316***
                                                           -                    -               (-3.01)
         Tangibility                                       -                    -             0.589***
                                                           -                    -                (3.35)
         Year fixed effects                                                     Y                   Y
         R2                                             0.274                 0.345               0.368
         N                                              80761                 80761               80761
                                               Panel B: Cross-Section
         Timing relative to initial year:                 t+5                  t+10                t+20
         Initial independence ratio                  10.956***              8.899***             6.760***
                                                       (37.74)               (26.81)              (14.23)
         CEO tenure                                     -0.013              -1.325***           -1.049***
                                                       (-0.03)                (-3.44)             (-2.91)
         Firm-level controls                               Y                     Y                   Y
         Year fixed effects                                Y                     Y                   Y
         R2                                           0.476               0.412                    0.324
         N                                            3633                2644                     1370
                            Panel C: Cross-section (with no controls or fixed effects)
         Timing relative to initial year:              t+5                t+10                     t+20
         Initial independence ratio                12.612***          10.640***                  7.631***
                                                     (46.70)            (33.19)                   (15.59)
         Firm-level controls
         Year fixed effects
         R2                                           0.414               0.321                    0.159
         N                                            3633                2644                     1370




                                                           54
     Panel D: Transition matrix for board independence

         Year         1        2           3          4          5      6         7           8     9       10
                                                    Year 0 Quartile = 1
     % quartile 1   82.5%     75.7%       71.0%     67.9%    65.1%      63.0%    61.7%   60.2%     59.2%   58.3%
     % quartile 2   14.1%     18.6%       21.0%     22.4%    23.6%      24.1%    24.4%   24.6%     24.3%   24.4%
     % quartile 3    2.5%      4.3%        6.0%      7.4%     8.4%       9.5%    10.2%   11.0%     12.1%   12.3%
     % quartile 4    0.9%      1.4%        2.0%      2.3%     2.9%       3.4%     3.8%    4.2%      4.4%    5.0%
                                                    Year 0 Quartile = 2
     % quartile 1   15.4%     19.9%       22.5%     24.2%    25.6%      26.9%    27.3%   27.7%     28.4%   28.6%
     % quartile 2   64.2%     53.4%       47.4%     43.2%    39.9%      37.7%    36.1%   35.0%     34.3%   33.5%
     % quartile 3   17.5%     21.7%       23.4%     24.6%    25.4%      25.3%    25.7%   25.8%     25.5%   25.9%
     % quartile 4    2.9%      5.0%        6.7%      8.0%     9.1%      10.1%    10.8%   11.5%     11.7%   12.0%
                                                    Year 0 Quartile = 3
     % quartile 1    2.6%      4.8%        6.4%      7.9%     9.4%      10.4%    11.6%   12.4%     13.1%   13.8%
     % quartile 2   17.1%     20.9%       22.9%     23.8%    24.6%      25.1%    24.9%   25.7%     25.9%   26.2%
     % quartile 3   63.9%     53.1%       46.7%     42.9%    39.8%      37.9%    36.3%   34.5%     33.8%   33.0%
     % quartile 4   16.4%     21.2%       24.0%     25.5%    26.2%      26.6%    27.1%   27.5%     27.1%   26.9%
                                                    Year 0 Quartile = 4
     % quartile 1    0.8%      1.6%        2.5%      3.2%     3.9%       4.5%     5.0%    5.7%      6.3%    7.2%
     % quartile 2    3.1%      5.6%        7.4%      9.3%    10.6%      11.9%    13.3%   14.3%     15.2%   15.8%
     % quartile 3   18.4%     23.8%       26.9%     28.6%    29.8%      30.4%    31.0%   31.5%     31.2%   31.1%
     % quartile 4   77.7%     69.1%       63.2%     58.9%    55.7%      53.2%    50.7%   48.6%     47.3%   45.8%


     Panel E: R-squared of fixed-effect regressions

Dep. Var.                                                          Independence ratio
                                    (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)
                                                       Full Sample
Firm-decade fixed effects                                      Y                                             Y
Firm-3-decade fixed effects                         Y                                              Y
Firm fixed effects                  Y                                                  Y
Year fixed effects                                                         Y           Y           Y         Y
 2
R                                  0.568        0.706       0.819        0.129        0.645       0.725     0.824
N                                  86946       86946       86946         86946        86946       86946     86946
                                           Survival Sample (at least 20 years)
R2                                 0.518          0.694      0.823       0.156        0.653       0.728     0.832
N                                  27228          27228      27228       27228        27228       27228     27228




                                                            55
                                                      Table 4: CEO tenure and board independence

This table presents the relations between the CEO's tenure (Panel A) or firm performance (Panel B), and board independence. Column 5 of Panel A measures CEO
tenure effects using the instrumental variable approach of Altonji and Shakotko (1987), which at each point in time reflects the proportion of a given CEO's ultimate
tenure. Firms with only one reported director are excluded from the sample. Column 5, which employs an instrumental variable with firm fixed effects, shows
within-firm R-squared, whereas the other columns show total R-squared. All standard errors are adjusted for sample clustering at the firm level. *, **, and ***
represent results significant at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.
Panel A: CEO tenure and board independence

                  Dep. Var.:                                                             Independence ratio
                                                     (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)               (5)                (6)
                  Sample period:                 1996-2011       1996-2011           Full             Full             Full               Full
                  Model:                             OLS             OLS            OLS               OLS         AS (1987) IV            OLS
                  CEO tenure                     -0.306***         -0.016        -0.146***        -0.150***        -0.170***          -0.247***
                                                   (-7.04)         (-0.45)         (-6.74)          (-6.87)          (-8.63)            (-8.40)
                  Firm age                        0.041***             -              -                 -                -             0.064***
                                                    (3.02)             -              -                 -                -               (5.34)
                  log(board size)                 9.663***        9.611***            -           9.966***         9.971***           11.257***
                                                    (9.71)          (9.10)            -             (14.89)          (14.91)            (15.00)
                  log(assets)                     1.621***          0.001             -             -0.280           -0.271            0.356**
                                                    (9.46)          (0.00)            -             (-1.05)          (-1.01)             (2.12)
                  q                               0.988***         -0.003             -              0.023            0.020              0.043
                                                    (5.35)         (-0.01)            -              (0.14)           (0.12)             (0.24)
                  ROA (ind-adj)                  -4.912***       -4.657***            -            -2.312**         -2.283**          -4.878***
                                                   (-3.00)         (-3.62)            -             (-2.04)          (-2.02)            (-3.48)
                  Tangibility                      1.912*           1.487             -             2.479*           2.484*           5.120***
                                                    (1.65)          (0.82)            -              (1.88)           (1.88)             (5.19)
                  Firm fixed effects                                  Y               Y                Y                Y
                  Year fixed effects                 Y                Y               Y                Y                Y                 Y
                  R2                               0.164            0.707             0.646         0.656             0.202             0.200
                  N                                20469            20469             86946         86946             86375             86946




                                                                                 56
Panel B: Firm performance and board independence

          Dep. Var.                                     Independence ratio
          Sample:                                         Non-turnover
                               (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                            ROA                                Stock return
     Performance measure:             (recent 3 years)                       (recent 3 years)
 Performance (ind-adj)      -1.319***    -3.045***     -3.263***   -5.222***    -5.504**      -3.380
                              (-2.76)      (-3.74)       (-2.77)     (-2.68)      (-2.51)     (-1.39)
 log(board size)            14.883*** 14.826*** 14.916***          14.990*** 14.931*** 14.996***
                             (17.97)      (17.14)       (16.22)     (18.00)      (17.17)      (16.20)
 log(assets)                 -0.343*       -0.289        -0.238     -0.348*      -0.365*      -0.306
                              (-1.79)      (-1.33)       (-1.02)     (-1.83)      (-1.70)     (-1.35)
 Tangibility                  -0.637       -0.285        -0.401      -0.793       -0.520      -0.594
                              (-0.90)      (-0.39)       (-0.51)     (-1.10)      (-0.69)     (-0.75)
 Firm fixed effects                           Y                                      Y
 Firm-CEO fixed effects                                     Y                                    Y
 Year fixed effects              Y            Y             Y           Y            Y           Y
 R2                           0.089        0.153        0.239       0.091        0.155       0.240
 N                            66003        66003        66003       64998        64998       64998




                                                   57
                              Table 5: CEO tenure, chair duality and compensation

This table presents the relations between the CEO's tenure and CEO-chair duality (columns 1-2) or total current
compensation including salary and bonus (columns 3-4). Columns 2 and 4 measure CEO tenure effects using the
instrumental variable approach of Altonji and Shakotko (1987), which at each point in time reflects the proportion of
a given CEO's ultimate tenure. Firms with only one reported director are excluded from the sample. Firm and year
fixed effects are included in all specifications. All standard errors are adjusted for sample clustering at the firm level.
*, **, and *** represent results significant at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

                Dep. Var.                             1 (Chair duality)           Log(Compensation)
                                                     (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)
                Model:                              OLS           AS-IV            OLS       AS-IV
                CEO tenure                       2.180***        2.382***       0.024***   0.025***
                                                  (26.38)         (30.04)         (5.73)     (9.11)
                log(board size)                 -11.369*** -11.406***             0.039       0.042
                                                  (-7.93)         (-7.96)         (0.47)     (0.52)
                log(assets)                      2.998***        2.906***       0.293***   0.293***
                                                   (4.55)          (4.40)         (7.56)     (7.86)
                q                                 0.750*          0.752*          0.007       0.007
                                                   (1.77)          (1.77)         (0.19)     (0.20)
                ROA (ind-adj)                      1.168           0.681        1.463***   1.419***
                                                   (0.36)          (0.21)         (4.37)     (4.53)
                Stock return (ind-adj)                -               -         2.564***   2.573***
                                                      -               -           (4.35)     (4.42)
                Tangibility                        4.524           4.403         -0.110      -0.118
                                                   (1.24)          (1.20)        (-0.69)     (-0.74)
                Firm fixed effects                    Y               Y              Y          Y
                Year fixed effects                    Y               Y              Y          Y
                R2                                0.534           0.197          0.880           0.832
                N                                 67887           67259          3323            3314




                                                            58
                       Table 6: Regulations, CEO tenure, and governance outcomes

This table examines the effect of the CEO's tenure on board independence, CEO-chair duality, and compensation for
years before and after 2002 when new regulations began to require firms to maintain majority independent boards.
"Post 2002" is an indicator variable equal to one for years equal to or after 2002, and zero for years before 2002. The
dependent variables are independence ratio, an indicator for CEO-chair duality, and the log of the CEO's current
compensation in columns 1, 2, and 3. Firms with only one reported director are excluded from the sample. Firm ×
post-2002 period and year fixed effects are used throughout the table. All standard errors are adjusted for sample
clustering at the firm level. *, **, and *** represent results significant at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

  Dep. Var.                                 Independence ratio         1 (Chair duality)      Log (Compensation)
                                                     (1)                       (2)                     (3)
  CEO tenure                                    -0.155***                  2.088***                0.023***
                                                  (-6.84)                   (23.69)                  (5.46)
  CEO tenure × Post 2002                        0.140***                   1.309***                 -0.008
                                                   (3.11)                    (5.33)                 (-0.48)
  log(board size)                               10.483***                 -10.119***                 0.034
                                                  (15.49)                   (-7.05)                  (0.39)
  log(assets)                                     -0.453                   2.333***                0.292***
                                                  (-1.64)                    (3.26)                  (6.62)
  q                                                -0.090                   0.728*                   0.021
                                                  (-0.58)                    (1.72)                  (0.58)
  ROA (ind-adj)                                    -1.219                    0.142                 1.216***
                                                  (-1.10)                    (0.04)                  (4.77)
  Stock return (ind-adj)                              -                         -                  2.682***
                                                      -                         -                    (4.27)
  Tangibility                                    2.863**                     4.741                  -0.134
                                                   (2.21)                    (1.27)                 (-0.79)
  Firm × period fixed effects                         Y                         Y                       Y
  Year fixed effects                                  Y                         Y                       Y
  R2                                              0.684                     0.568                     0.898
  N                                               86946                     67887                     3323




                                                          59
                Table 7: CEO turnover conditional on firm performance and CEO power

This table examines how CEO power affects the sensitivity of CEO turnover to firm performance proxied by changes
in return on assets (ROA) defined as income before taxes (as `IB' in Compustat) scaled by lagged assets (Panel A)
and average excess stock return for the 12-month period prior to the fiscal year ending date (Panel B). Both panels use
contemporaneous (t) and lagged (t-1) measures of performance. All accounting variables are from Moody's Industrial
Manual or Compustat and stock returns are from CRSP. Linear probability models (i.e., OLS) with firm and year fixed
effects are used throughout the table, although results largely hold up in logit models with firm fixed effects (i.e.,
conditional logit). As a proxy for CEO power, the columns from left to right use an indicator "Low independence"
that is equal to one if the board independence ratio is in the first quartile, an indicator for CEO-chair duality, an
indicator for average ROA during the CEO's first three years in the fourth quartile, an indicator for average stock
returns during the CEO's first three years in the fourth quartile, and an indicator for CEO tenure in the fourth quartile.
Column 2 uses data starting in 1960, to coincide with the timing of when there is less ambiguity in whether the CEO
is dual board chair. Columns 3 and 4 include only observations for CEOs with at least four years of tenure, to ensure
that average performance during the CEO's first three years is well measured. All standard errors are adjusted for
sample clustering at the firm level. *, **, and *** represent results significant at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Change in ROA as performance measure

  Dep. Var. - Model                                          CEO Turnover [t]{0,1} - OLS
                                                                              1926-2011
  Sample:                         1926-2011          1960-2011                Tenure  4                   1926-2011
  Power proxy:                    Low indep.        Chair duality    High ROA         High return         Long tenure
                                        (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)                  (5)
  ROA [t]                         -0.293***          -0.450***        -0.539***       -0.381***            -0.268***
                                    (-10.17)            (-8.11)        (-12.66)         (-8.77)              (-8.95)
  ROA [t] × Power                  0.188***           0.309***        1.360***         0.573***               0.048
                                     (3.08)             (4.85)          (17.08)          (7.48)               (0.85)
  ROA [t-1]                       -0.192***          -0.220***        -0.427***       -0.249***            -0.157***
                                     (-6.78)            (-4.11)        (-10.26)         (-6.06)              (-5.45)
  ROA [t-1] × Power                0.124**               0.097        0.856***          0.145*               -0.030
                                      (2.25)            (1.60)          (11.70)          (1.89)              (-0.57)
  Power                              -0.004          -0.214***        -0.104***       -0.031***            0.066***
                                     (-0.77)           (-36.04)        (-10.81)         (-3.23)              (20.04)
  CEO tenure                       0.007***           0.012***        0.012***         0.014***                  -
                                    (22.25)            (23.70)          (22.71)         (23.64)                  -
  log(assets)                     -0.012***             -0.007        -0.013***       -0.017***            -0.012***
                                     (-4.16)            (-1.60)         (-2.94)         (-3.71)              (-4.02)
  q                                -0.007**             -0.004          -0.004          -0.004              -0.006**
                                     (-2.52)            (-1.08)         (-1.13)         (-0.87)              (-2.31)
  Firm fixed effects                     Y                 Y               Y                Y                    Y
  Year fixed effects                     Y                 Y               Y                Y                    Y
  R2                                 0.119              0.204              0.201            0.205            0.115
  N                                  66768              43807              38505            37371            66768




                                                            60
Panel B: Excess return as performance measure

  Dep. Var. - Model                                CEO Turnover [t]{0,1} ­ OLS
                                                                     1926-2011
  Sample:                    1926-2011     1960-2011                 Tenure  4           1926-2011
  Power proxy:               Low indep.   Chair duality     High ROA       High return   Long tenure
                                   (1)          (2)              (3)              (4)          (5)
  Excess Ret [t]             -0.484***     -0.746***        -0.525***       -1.149***     -0.496***
                               (-10.22)       (-9.16)         (-7.96)         (-17.85)     (-10.60)
  Excess Ret [t] × Power         0.095      0.342***        0.987***         3.074***      0.151**
                                 (1.20)       (3.92)           (9.62)         (28.45)        (1.98)
  Excess Ret [t-1]           -0.383***     -0.340***        -0.548***       -0.349***     -0.267***
                                (-8.80)       (-4.30)         (-8.93)          (-5.49)      (-6.39)
  Excess Ret [t-1] × Power    0.234***         0.048        1.037***            0.159     -0.192***
                                 (3.33)       (0.56)          (10.08)           (1.46)      (-2.65)
  Power                         -0.007     -0.207***        -0.120***       -0.074***     0.066***
                                (-1.46)      (-37.72)        (-12.63)          (-8.29)      (18.99)
  CEO tenure                  0.007***      0.011***        0.012***         0.014***           -
                               (22.75)       (24.30)          (22.99)         (23.79)           -
  log(assets)                -0.013***      -0.009**        -0.015***       -0.017***     -0.012***
                                (-4.83)       (-2.36)         (-3.32)          (-3.92)      (-4.48)
  q                             -0.000         0.004           0.001           -0.002       -0.000
                                (-0.15)       (1.32)           (0.31)          (-0.48)      (-0.11)
  Firm fixed effects                Y            Y                Y                Y            Y
  Year fixed effects                Y            Y                Y                Y            Y
  R2                           0.118         0.198            0.195          0.217         0.115
  N                            79422         53792            42878          41756         80809




                                                61
          Table 8: Abnormal stock returns around death- and health-driven CEO turnover

This table examines cumulative abnormal returns from two days before to two days after the announcement of CEO
turnovers due to (sudden) death and serious health issues of the departing CEO for U.S. firms from 1950 to 2011,
conditional on proxies for CEO power: An indicator for CEO tenure higher than 11 years, the third quartile (column
1); an indicator for whether the CEO is also the board chair (column 2); and an indicator for whether the departing
CEO is a founder of the firm (column 3). Panel A reports for death and health-driven events, Panel B reports for death-
driven events, and Panel C reports estimates for sudden deaths only. To increase sample size, in this table only
NASDAQ firms are included in addition to NYSE/AMEX firms. White standard errors are reported in parentheses. *,
**, and *** represent results significant at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

                Dep. Var.                               Cumulative abnormal returns [-2,2]
                                                     (1)               (2)                (3)
                                      Panel A: Death and Health, 1950-2011
                Long tenure                       0.027**               -                  -
                                                   (2.05)               -                  -
                Chair duality                         -            0.031***                -
                                                      -              (3.01)                -
                Founder                               -                 -            0.031***
                                                      -                 -               (2.62)
                Constant                           0.006            -0.013*            -0.001
                                                   (1.16)           (-1.66)            (-0.12)
                R2                                   0.015           0.023                 0.025
                N                                     320             295                   336
                                          Panel B: Death only, 1950-2011
                Long tenure                        0.039***            -                      -
                                                     (2.68)            -                      -
                Chair duality                           -          0.031**                    -
                                                        -           (2.59)                    -
                Founder                                 -              -                  0.032**
                                                        -              -                   (2.53)
                Constant                             0.002          -0.013                 -0.002
                                                     (0.42)         (-1.35)               (-0.41)
                R2                                 0.037           0.022                   0.030
                N                                   246             223                     260
                                     Panel B: Sudden death only, 1950-2011
                Long tenure                      0.041**              -                      -
                                                   (2.23)             -                      -
                Chair duality                         -            0.020                     -
                                                      -            (1.33)                    -
                Founder                               -               -                  0.035**
                                                      -               -                   (2.02)
                Constant                         -0.013**         -0.021*               -0.019***
                                                  (-1.98)         (-1.73)                 (-2.77)
                R2                                   0.046              0.012              0.037
                N                                     142                123                149




                                                          62
