                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           US MONETARY POLICY AND INTERNATIONAL BOND MARKETS

                                          Simon Gilchrist
                                            Vivian Yue
                                          Egon Zakrajsek

                                       Working Paper 26012
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26012


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2019




We thank Chris Neely, Argia Sbordone, and Mohamed Shaban for helpful suggestions. We also
benefited from comments from participants at the conference on "Macroeconomic Policy Mix in
the Transatlantic Economy" organized by the European Commission, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, and CEPR; the 15th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference organized by the
IMF; and the 2017 conference on "Globalization, Development, and Economic and Financial
Stability" organized by the Asian Development Bank Institute. Harley Du, Lucas Husted,
Gerardo Sanz-Maldonado, Shaily Patel, and Rebecca Zhang provided superb research assistance
at various stages of this project. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of
the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta, or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Simon Gilchrist, Vivian Yue, and Egon Zakrajsek. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
US Monetary Policy and International Bond Markets
Simon Gilchrist, Vivian Yue, and Egon Zakrajsek
NBER Working Paper No. 26012
June 2019
JEL No. E4,E5,F3

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses high-frequency financial data to analyze the effects of US monetary policy--
during the conventional and unconventional policy regimes--on international bonds markets. We
focus on yields of dollar-denominated sovereign bonds issued by more than 90 countries since the
early 1990s, which allows us to abstract from the policy-induced movements in exchange rates
that otherwise confound the response of yields on foreign bonds denominated in local currencies.
Our results show that yields on dollar-denominated sovereign debt are highly responsive to
unanticipated changes in the stance of US monetary policy during both the conventional and
unconventional policy regimes, and that the passthrough of unconventional policy actions to
foreign bond yields is, on balance, comparable to that of conventional policy actions. In addition,
a conventional US monetary easing leads to a significant narrowing of credit spreads on
sovereign bonds issued by countries with a speculative-grade credit rating. During the
unconventional policy regime, however, yields on speculative-grade sovereign debt move one-to-
one with policy-induced fluctuations in yields on comparable US Treasuries. We also examine
whether the response of sovereign credit spreads to US monetary policy differs between policy
easings and policy tightenings and find no evidence of such asymmetry. This finding casts doubt
on the notion that US monetary easings induce excessive risk-taking in international bond
markets.

Simon Gilchrist                                  Egon Zakrajsek
Department of Economics                          Division of Monetary Affairs
New York University 19                           Federal Reserve Board
West 4th Street.                                 20th Street & Constitution Avenue, NW
New York, NY, 10003                              Washington, D.C. 20551
and NBER                                         egon.zakrajsek@frb.gov
sg40@nyu.edu

Vivian Yue
Economics Department
Emory University
602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
vivianyue1@gmail.com
1        Introduction
Among financially interconnected economies, unanticipated changes in the stance of monetary
policy in one country can quickly "spill over" to other countries. While the debate surrounding
monetary policy spillovers has a storied history in international economics (see Fleming, 1962;
Mundell, 1963), the 2008­09 global financial crisis and its aftermath--a period during which the
Federal Reserve and many other central banks implemented new and unconventional forms of
monetary stimulus--has sparked intense interest in such international monetary policy spillovers,
in both academic and policy circles (see Bernanke, 2018).
        The canonical view of international monetary policy interactions, as exemplified by the Mundell-
Fleming model, identifies the exchange rate channel as the primary mechanism through which
domestic monetary policy actions affect macroeconomic conditions abroad.1 At the same time,
a monetary policy easing at home will lower domestic longer-term interest rates and raise prices
of risky financial assets in the home country. With highly integrated global financial markets,
investor portfolio rebalancing efforts will lead to capital flows to foreign countries, putting downward
pressure on foreign longer-term yields and upward pressure on foreign asset prices, thereby easing
financial conditions abroad.
        In this paper, we contribute to the understanding of this so-called financial spillover channel.
Specifically, using high-frequency price data on dollar-denominated sovereign bonds, we empirically
quantify the transmission of US monetary policy shocks in international bond markets. By focus-
ing on the dollar-denominated sovereign debt, we abstract from the policy-induced movements in
exchange rates that can otherwise confound the response of yields on foreign bonds denominated
in local currencies. Our results, therefore, quantify the extent of US monetary policy spillovers to
foreign bond yields, which are entirely due to the financial channel as opposed to the exchange rate
channel.2 In addition, compared with most of the literature on monetary policy spillovers, we use a
nearly ideal measure of unexpected changes in the stance of US monetary policy to identify policy
shocks. Using these shocks, we analyze whether the strength and scope of the spillover effects differ
between the conventional and unconventional US monetary policy regimes. Lastly, we examine how
US monetary policy affects the credit spreads of dollar-denominated sovereign bonds.
    1
      According to this view, a monetary easing at home lowers the domestic interest rate relative to foreign rates,
inducing a depreciation of the domestic currency. One key implication of the Mundell-Fleming framework is
that a central bank cannot freely adjust its policy rate to stabilize domestic output, while also maintaining a
fixed exchange rate and an open capital account--a tradeoff frequently referred to as the "international policy
trilemma" (see Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2002). Consistent with this prediction, Obstfeld et al. (2005), Goldberg (2013),
Klein and Shambaugh (2015), and Obstfeld (2015), have shown that short-term interest rates of countries with flex-
ible exchange rates have an appreciably lower correlation with the short-term rate of the "base" country, relative to
countries with fixed exchange rates. Recently, however, Rey (2013, 2016) has argued that even floating exchange rates
will not suffice to insulate domestic financial conditions from foreign monetary policy shocks--at least not without
additional restrictions on capital mobility--thereby, reducing the "trilemma" to a "dilemma."
    2
      In principle, one could convert local currency bonds into dollar-denominated bonds using FX swap agreements.
However, as shown by Du et al. (2018), there is a significant time-varying gap between the FX-swap-implied dollar
yield paid by foreign governments and the U.S. Treasury dollar yield. Using dollar-denominated sovereign bonds,
therefore, provides a direct approach to study the financial spillover channel of US monetary policy to international
bond markets.



                                                         1
       To compare the transmission of conventional and unconventional policy measures to interna-
tional bond markets, we follow Hanson and Stein (2015) and Gertler and Karadi (2015) and use
changes in the 2-year nominal US Treasury yield on policy announcement days as a common in-
strument across the two policy regimes. In contrast to these two papers, we rely on the intraday
changes in the 2-year US Treasury yield within a narrow window bracketing Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) and other policy announcements to identify unanticipated US policy actions.3
Implicit in this approach is a highly reasonable identifying assumption that any movement in the
2-year US Treasury yield in a narrow window bracketing policy announcements is due to the unan-
ticipated changes in the stance of US monetary policy or the FOMC's communication regarding
the path for policy going forward.
       During the unconventional policy regime, the Federal Reserve implemented different forms of
forward guidance regarding the future path of the federal funds rate. The FOMC also implemented
a number of Large-Scale Asset Purchase programs (LSAPs), the primary goal of which was to
influence longer-term yields on US Treasury and agency MBS securities through direct purchases
of those assets. These policy actions were introduced to the public via announcements, either
following the regularly-scheduled FOMC meetings or in special announcements that were held
outside the regular FOMC schedule. As discussed more fully below, we analyze the extent and
scope of US monetary policy spillovers to international bond markets during both the conventional
and unconventional monetary policy regime.4
       The paper contains two sets of related empirical exercises. In the first set, we analyze the
response of yields on sovereign bonds denominated in US dollars to an unanticipated change in the
stance of US monetary policy. Specifically, from the Thompson Reuters Datastream, we obtained
daily secondary market prices of dollar-denominated sovereign bonds issued by more than 90 coun-
tries, both emerging market and advanced economies. We exploit the cross-sectional heterogeneity
of our data by constructing sovereign bond portfolios. First, we construct bond portfolios based
on duration. Second, the portfolios are conditional on whether a country falls into a speculative-
or investment-grade portion of the credit quality spectrum. Consequently, we are able to quantify
how the effects of US monetary policy on sovereign bond yields (and credit spreads) differs not
only across the conventional and unconventional policy regimes but also across "high" and "low"
risk countries.
       The results from this exercise indicate that conventional US monetary policy is transmitted
   3
      Hanson and Stein (2015) and Gertler and Karadi (2015) use daily changes in the 2-year US Treasury yield to
identify monetary policy surprises. The use of intraday data allows us to rule out the potential reverse causality, a
situation in which the daily change in the 2-year US Treasury yield, even on a policy announcement day, may not
solely reflect changes in the stance of monetary policy but may also reflect the endogenous response of policy to
changes in the economic outlook or other global macroeconomic or financial shocks.
    4
      The start of the unconventional US policy regime can be dated to November 25, 8:15 a.m. Eastern Standard
Time, when the FOMC announced--outside its regular meeting schedule--that it was going to initiate a program to
purchase the direct obligations of, and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) issued by, the housing-related government-
sponsored enterprises. A mere three weeks later, at the conclusion of its regular meeting on December 16, the FOMC
announced that it was lowering the target federal funds rate to a range between 0 to 1/4 percent--its effective lower
bound. Our definition of the conventional policy regime includes the "post-liftoff" period, that is, the period after
December 16, 2015, when the FOMC raised the policy rate from its effective lower bound.


                                                         2
very effectively to both shorter- and longer-duration yields on dollar-denominated sovereign debt.
The spillover effects of conventional US monetary policy across the portfolios of different durations
are much more uniform compared with the unconventional policy regime. That said, the extent
of spillovers from the US unconventional monetary policy actions to foreign bond yields is, on
balance, similar to that estimated for the conventional policy regime. Our results also indicate that
conventional US monetary policy has a differential effect on the yields of sovereign securities of
different credit ratings, whereas the unconventional monetary policy actions had a similar effects
on the investment- and speculative-grade sovereign bond yields.
   Our second set of empirical exercises focuses on the sovereign bond credit spreads. An additional
advantage of building bond portfolios from the "ground up" is that we can construct credit spreads
that are not subject to the duration mismatch, which is a common problem plaguing standard
sovereign credit spread indexes, such as the EMBI or EMBI+. The results from this set of exercises
show that conventional US monetary policy actions have an economically large and statistically
significant effect on credit spreads of dollar-denominated debt of countries with a speculative-grade
credit rating. Specifically, credit spreads on risky sovereign debt are estimated to narrow (widen)
significantly in response to an unanticipated US policy easing (tightening) during the conventional
regime. Sovereign credit spreads for investment-grade countries, by contrast, do not respond to
conventional US monetary policy; in other words, sovereign bond yields for low-risk countries are
estimated to decline (increase) by about as much as the yields on comparable US Treasuries in
response to a conventional US monetary policy easing (tightening).
   The US monetary policy spillovers to international bond markets during the unconventional
policy regime are somewhat more muted, according to our estimates. An unanticipated easing of
US monetary policy during this period induces a decline in speculative-grade sovereign bond yields
that is commensurate with that of yields on a portfolio of comparable US Treasuries. Interestingly,
our results indicate that the passthrough of unconventional US monetary policy to sovereign bond
yields for investment-grade countries is essentially one-to-one, that is, the same as during the
conventional policy regime. Our analysis thus indicates that the unconventional policy actions
undertaken by the FOMC over the past five years or so did not affect, on average, the level of
sovereign credit spreads across the credit quality spectrum.
   Lastly, we examine whether US monetary policy tightenings and easings have an asymmetric
effect on international bond markets. To do so, we split our policy surprises based on their sign
(i.e., positive vs. negative) and then estimate the response of sovereign bond credit spreads to those
two shocks. We find no evidence of such asymmetry, a result that casts doubt on the notion that
US monetary easings induce excessive risk-taking in international bond markets.
   Our paper fits into a rapidly growing empirical literature aimed at quantifying the effects of
unconventional policy measures on financial asset prices. Not too surprisingly, much of this re-
search to date has analyzed whether purchases of large quantities of Treasuries, agency MBS, and
agency debt by the Federal Reserve and various forms of forward guidance have lowered longer-
term US benchmark yields and the associated private interest rates; see, for example, Gagnon et al.


                                                  3
(2011); Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011); Swanson (2011); Hamilton and Wu (2012);
Justiniano et al. (2012); Wright (2012); D'Amico and King (2013); Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2013);
Gilchrist et al. (2015); and Hanson and Stein (2015)). While employing a variety of empirical ap-
proaches, a common finding that emerges from these studies is that the unconventional policy
measures employed by the FOMC since the end of 2008 have led to a significant reduction in Trea-
sury yields and that this broad-based reduction in longer-term interest rates has been passed fully
to lower borrowing costs for businesses and households.5
       To gauge the impact of LSAPs beyond US borders, Neely (2015) employs an event-style method-
ology and finds that these unconventional policy actions substantially lowered the foreign exchange
value of the US dollar and reduced longer-term yields yields for a small sample of advanced foreign
economies; Chen et al. (2014) report similar results for emerging market economies. In a follow-
up paper, Bauer and Neely (2014) use dynamic term structure models to parse out the extent to
which the declines in foreign interest rates occurred through the signaling or portfolio rebalancing
channels and find evidence that both channels were in operation. Our paper is also related to the
recent work of Fratzscher et al. (2014) and Bowman et al. (2015); the former paper systematically
analyzes the global spillovers of the Federal Reserve's asset purchase programs on a broad array
of financial asset prices, while the latter study empirically quantifies the spillover effects of US un-
conventional policies on emerging market economies. The key takeaway of these two papers is that
US unconventional monetary policy measures induced a significant portfolio reallocation among
investors and led to a notable repricing of risk in global financial markets.6
       In a recent paper, Albagli et al. (2018) document significant US monetary policy spillovers to
international bond markets. They identify US monetary policy shocks as changes in the short-
term US Treasury yields within two days of FOMC meetings, and they trace the effects of those
changes on international bond yields using panel regressions. They document that spillovers to long-
term foreign bond yields have increased substantially after the global financial crisis. The main
difference with our study is that they analyze international bonds denominated in local currencies.
As such, they provide evidence consistent with an exchange rate channel, according to which foreign
central banks face a tradeoff between narrowing policy rate differentials, or experiencing currency
movements against the US dollar. We, on the other hand, focus on the dollar-denominated sovereign
bonds, and our US monetary policy shocks are much better identified because we use intraday high-
frequency data to compute changes in short-term US Treasury yields in narrow windows bracketing
FOMC announcements. The study by Gagnon et al. (2017) explores the direct effects and spillovers
of unconventional monetary and exchange rate policies and finds that increases in US bond yields
are associated with increases in foreign bond yields and stock prices, as well as with a depreciation
of foreign currencies.
   5
     Rogers et al. (2014), on the other hand, compares the efficacy of unconventional policy measures employed by
the Bank of England, European Central Bank, and the Bank of Japan.
   6
     The work of Bredin et al. (2010), Ehrmann et al. (2011), and Hausman and Wongswan (2011) documents the
extent of spillovers in international bond markets resulting from the unanticipated changes in the conventional stance
of US monetary policy.



                                                          4
    Our paper is also related to the research based on small open economy models that feature
foreign interest rate shocks and some form of financial market frictions (see Neumeyer and Perri,
2005; Uribe and Yue, 2006). These papers show that movements in sovereign credit spreads are
an important driver of business cycles dynamics in emerging market economies and that these
spreads are influenced importantly by fluctuations in the world interest rate, namely, the long-
term US Treasury yield (see also Kamin and von Kleist, 1999; Eichengreen and Mody, 2010). The
analysis of these papers, however, uses monthly or quarterly changes in long-term US interest rates
to estimate the spillover effects of US monetary policy to international bond markets. An important
advantage of our approach is that we use high-frequency data to more cleanly identify unanticipated
changes in the stance of US monetary policy and to trace out the causal effect of these changes on
sovereign credit spreads. Indeed, our empirical results, in contrast to the aforementioned studies,
show that unanticipated changes in the stance of US monetary policy do not significantly affect
sovereign credit spreads.
    The outline for the reminder of the paper is as follows: Section 2 outlines our empirical method-
ology. In Section 3, we present our main results: subsection 3.1 discusses the construction of the
dollar-denominated sovereign bond portfolios using bond-level data; subsection 3.2 contains the re-
sults that compare the effects of US monetary policy--across the different policy regimes--on yields
of short- and long-duration sovereign bond portfolios and on yields of speculative- and investment-
grade bond portfolios; subsections 3.3 and 3.4 present the results showing how US monetary policy
affects sovereign bond credit spreads; and subsection 3.5 explores potential asymmetries of US mon-
etary policy spillovers. Section 4 concludes.


2    Empirical Framework
This section outlines the empirical approach that is used to estimate the impact of US mone-
tary policy on international bond markets during both the conventional and unconventional policy
regimes. Central to our approach is the use of intraday data, from which we can directly infer
monetary policy surprises associated with FOMC announcements. In combination with the daily
data on foreign interest rates, these high-frequency policy surprises allow us to estimate the causal
effect of US monetary policy actions on foreign bond yields.
    Our analysis requires dating the two monetary policy regimes. The sample period underlying our
analysis runs from January 2, 1992, to April 30, 2019. We divide this period into two distinct policy
regimes: (i ) a conventional monetary policy regime, a period in which the primary policy instrument
was the federal funds rate; and (ii ) an unconventional monetary policy regime, during which
the funds rate has been stuck at the effective lower bound, and the FOMC primarily conducted
monetary policy by altering the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet and
also by issuing various forms of forward guidance regarding the future trajectory for the federal
funds rate.
    As in Gilchrist et al. (2015), we assume that the unconventional policy regime began on Novem-


                                                  5
ber 25, 2008, and that prior to that day, the conventional policy regime was in effect. The un-
conventional policy regime ended on December 16, 2015, with the liftoff of the federal funds rate
from its effective lower bound. Thus, the conventional US monetary policy regime is assumed to
cover two non-overlapping periods: (i ) from February 6, 1992 to December 15, 2008; and (ii ) from
December 17, 2015 to March 29, 2019, the end of our sample period. Virtually all of the 169 an-
nouncements during the conventional policy period followed regularly-scheduled FOMC meetings;
only six were associated with the intermeeting policy moves.7
       The standard analysis of how changes in the stance of conventional US monetary policy af-
fect financial asset prices has historically relied on a single factor--the "target" surprise or the
unanticipated component of the change in the current federal funds rate target (see, Kuttner
(2001); Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002); and Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)). However, as shown by
G¨
 urkaynak et al. (2005), this characterization is incomplete, and another factor--that is, changes
in the future policy rates that are independent of the current target rate--is needed to capture fully
the effect of conventional monetary policy. This second factor, which is commonly referred to as a
"path" surprise, is closely associated with the FOMC statements that accompany changes in the
target rate and represents a communication aspect of monetary policy that assumed even greater
importance after the target rate was lowered to its effective lower bound in December 2008.
       To facilitate the comparison of the spillover effects from conventional and unconventional
US monetary policy, we follow Hanson and Stein (2015) and Gertler and Karadi (2015), and as-
sume that the change in the 2-year nominal US Treasury yield over a narrow window bracketing an
FOMC announcement captures both aspects of US monetary policy. Under this assumption, the
effect of unanticipated changes in the stance of US monetary policy on foreign interest rates can
be inferred by estimating the following regression:

                                             (n )      (n )        (n )
                                      h yi,t+h-1 = i mUS
                                                      t + i,t+h-1 ,                                           (1)

              (n )
where h yi,t+h-1 denotes an h-day change (from day t - 1 to day t + h - 1) bracketing an FOMC
announcement on day t in the yield on an n-year sovereign bond of country i; mUS
                                                                              t is the intraday
change in the (on-the-run) 2-year nominal US Treasury yield over a narrow-window surrounding
                                      (n )
an FOMC announcement; and, i,t+h-1 is a stochastic disturbance capturing the information that
possibly was released earlier in the day, and also noise from other financial market developments
that took place through day t + h - 1.
       For the conventional US policy regime, we measure the unanticipated changes in the stance of
                 t using a 30-minute window surrounding FOMC announcements (10 minutes
monetary policy mUS
before to 20 minutes after). However, the unconventional policy regime includes a number of
   7
    As is customary, we excluded from the sample the announcement made on September 17, 2001, which was made
when trading on major stock exchanges was resumed after it was temporarily suspended following the 9/11 terrorist
attacks. The other six intermeeting moves occurred on April 18, 1994; October 15, 1998; January 3, 2001; April 18,
2001; January 22, 2008; and October 8, 2008. Most of the FOMC announcements took place at 2:15 p.m. (EST);
however, announcements for the intermeeting policy moves were made at different times of the day. We obtained all
of the requisite times from the Office of the Secretary of the Federal Reserve Board.



                                                        6
                                 Figure 1 ­ The Stance of US Monetary Policy

                                                                                                             Percent

                                                                                                                       8

                                                                                                                       7

                                                                                                                       6

                                                                                                                       5

                                                                                                                       4

                                                                                                                       3
                 Target federal funds rate                                                                             2
                 2-year Treasury yield
                 Policy target range
                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                       0

   1992    1994      1996     1998     2000   2002   2004   2006   2008     2010   2012   2014   2016      2018
                                               A. Selected interest rates
                                                                                                        Basis points

                 LSAP-related announcements                                                                            20


                                                                                                                       10


                                                                                                                        0


                                                                                                                       -10


                                                                                                                       -20

  1992    1994      1996      1998    2000    2002   2004   2006   2008   2010     2012   2014   2016      2018
                            B. Unanticipated changes in the stance of monetary policy

 Note: Sample period: daily data from 01/02/1992 to 03/29/2019. The black line and the shaded band in Panel A
 depict the stance of US monetary policy, while the red line shows the daily 2-year Treasury yield. Panel B depicts
 unanticipated changes in the stance of monetary policy, as measured by the narrow-window changes in the 2-year
 Treasury yield bracketing FOMC announcements (see the text for details). The shaded region represents the
 unconventional US monetary policy regime (see Table A-1 in the Data Appendix for the list of LSAP-related
 announcements).




key speeches/testimonies through which the policymakers elaborated on the various aspects of
unconventional policy measures being employed by the FOMC. In these instances, we try to capture
the information content of announcements that reflects the market participants' interpretation of
the statements and speeches--as opposed to conveying information about the precise numerical
value of the target funds rate--so we use a wider 60-minute window bracketing an announcement
(10 minutes before to 50 minutes after) to calculate the intraday changes in the 2-year US Treasury


                                                            7
                                                                       t during this period
yield. The use of a 60-minute window to calculate the policy surprise mUS
should allow the market a sufficient amount of time to digest the news contained in announcements
associated with unconventional policy measures.8
       Panel A of Figure 1 shows the path of the target federal funds rate and the 2-year Treasury yield
over the entire sample period. Our sample period is marked by substantial variation in shorter-
term interest rates and contains a number of distinct phases of US monetary policy: The 1994­
1995 tightening phase that followed the "jobless" recovery during the early-1990s; the tightening
phase that preceded the bursting of the "tech bubble" in early 2001; the subsequent easing of
policy in response to a rapid slowdown in economic activity and the emergence of substantial
disinflationary pressures; the 2003­2004 period of very low interest rates; the gradual removal of
monetary accommodation that commenced in the spring of 2004; the aggressive reduction in the
target federal funds rate during the early stages of the 2007­2009 financial crisis; the 2009­2015
period when the federal funds rate was stuck at its effective lower bound; and the post-2015 period
of policy normalization, as the FOMC begun to raise gradually the target federal funds rate from
its effective lower bound.
                                                                                         t --associated
       Panel B depicts the sequence of monetary policy surprises--that is, the value of mUS
with the FOMC's actions during this period. During the conventional policy regime, the largest
(absolute) policy surprises are associated with the intermeeting policy actions. As shown by the
red spikes, the largest (absolute) surprises during the unconventional policy regimes correspond
to the early LSAP announcements. For both policy regimes under consideration, we estimate
equation (1) by OLS. As noted above, implicit in this approach is the assumption that movements
in the 2-year Treasury yield in narrow windows bracketing FOMC announcements are entirely
due to the unanticipated changes in the stance of US monetary policy. By any measure, this is
a reasonable assumption because we are virtually certain that no other important economic news
was released within that interval of time.9
   8
     To separate the effect of balance sheet policies from other forms of unconventional policy, we also consider a
subsample of the unconventional policy period that excludes the 12 announcements listed in Table A-1, which are
most closely identified with the asset purchase programs. These results are available from the authors upon request.
   9
     It is possible that other economic or political news or policy actions by foreign central banks might coincide with
the US monetary policy shocks, especially during the unconventional policy regime; see Greenlaw et al. (2018) for a
detailed analysis of major news events on the day when the US bond market had a big move during the unconventional
policy regime. However, as documented by Albagli et al. (2018), while US monetary policy news is not always the
only event moving US Treasury yields on FOMC announcement days, this is the case much more often than not--the
overlap frequency between FOMC meetings and all other major country events is only about seven percent at the
daily frequency. Our measure of US monetary policy surprises is based on yield changes over the 30- or 60-minute
window bracketing FOMC announcements and thus is even less affected by such news. In our case, the impact of
other news on international bond markets gets impounded in the error terms of our regressions, which would affect
the precision of our estimates but not their consistency.




                                                           8
3     US Monetary Policy and Sovereign Bond Yields
3.1    Data Sources and Methods
To abstract from the policy-induced movements in exchange rates that confound the response
of yields on foreign bonds denominated in local currencies, our paper focuses on sovereign debt
denominated in US dollars. To that purpose, we downloaded from Thompson Reuters Datastream
daily secondary market prices of dollar-denominated sovereign bonds issued by 95 countries (see
Table A-2 in Appendix A for further details).10 The data set includes the bond characteristics such
as the issuance and maturity dates, issue amount, coupon structure, as well as the daily time series
of prices.
    The micro-level aspect of our data allows us to compute bond yields at the security level. We
then construct portfolios of such dollar-denominated bond yields based on various bond character-
istics, such as duration and credit risk. We use these portfolios to estimate the response of foreign
yields to US monetary policy. To understand the economic implications of these estimates, we are
also interested in estimating the extent to which such yields respond more or less than matched-
duration US Treasury yields. Such a comparison tells us the extent to which credit spreads, and
hence sovereign risk, respond to US monetary policy.
    Importantly, because we construct bond yields from the underlying micro data on individual
bond prices, we can construct credit spreads that are free of the duration mismatch, which is
a common problem in many of the standard credit spread indexes. Specifically, in our analysis,
we follow the methodology outlined in Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) and construct a synthetic
US Treasury security that exactly replicates the cash-flows of the corresponding sovereign debt
instrument.
    Formally, we consider a dollar-denominated sovereign bond k (issued by country i) that at time t
is promising a sequence of cash-flows denoted by {C (s) : s = 1, 2, . . . , S }.11 The price of this bond
at time t is given by
                                                           S
                                              Pit [k ] =           C ( s ) D ( ts ) ,
                                                           s=1

where D(t) = exp(-rt t) denotes the discount function in period t. To calculate the price of the
corresponding synthetic US Treasury security--as denoted by PtUS [k ]--we discount the cash-flow
sequence {C (s) : s = 1, 2, . . . , S } using continuously-compounded zero-coupon US Treasury yields
in period t, which are obtained from the daily estimates of the US Treasury yield curve based on the
methodology of G¨
                urkaynak et al. (2007). The resulting price PtUS [k ] can then be used to calculate
the yield--denoted by yt
                       US
                          [k ]--of a hypothetical US Treasury security with exactly the same cash-
  10
     As can be seen from Table A-2, a significant proportion of our sample of sovereign bonds is accounted for by
securities issued by Israel. To ensure that our results were not unduly influenced by the over-representation of Israeli
securities in our sample, we re-did the analysis by excluding these securities from the sample. All the empirical
results, however, were essentially the same, both qualitatively and quantitatively, as those reported below.
  11
     The cash-flow sequence {C (s) : s = 1, 2, . . . , S } consists of the regular coupon payments and the repayment of
the principle at maturity.



                                                               9
                            Table 1 ­ Selected Sovereign Bond Characteristics
                                      (Dollar-Denominated Bonds )

       Bond Characteristic                              Mean         StdDev          Min         P50        Max
       No. of bonds per country                         18.40         47.64           1           8          454
       Maturity at issue (years)                         15.06         8.39          1.34       10.25         33
       Term to maturity (years)                          8.22          6.35           1          6.68         30
       Duration (years)                                   6.05         3.54          0.91        5.51       18.87
       Par amount ($millions)a                          564.83        879.62         1.09       57.27      11,209
       Sovereign credit rating (Moody's)                    -            -            Ca          A1         Aaa
       Coupon rate (pct.)                                4.62          3.27          0.00        5.00       13.63
       Nominal yield to maturity (pct.)                  4.97          2.98          0.11        4.46       36.57
       Credit spread (bps.)                               224          255           -50         142       3,000
    Note: Sample period: daily data from 01/02/1992 to 03/29/2019. No. of bonds = 1,748; No. of countries = 95;
   Observations = 1,888,320; see Table A-2 in the Data Appendix for the list of countries included in the sample.
   All reported statistics are based on trimmed data (see the text for details).
   a
     The par amount issued is deflated by the US CPI (2005 = 100).


flows as the underlying sovereign bond. The resulting credit spread sit [k ] = yit [k ] - yt
                                                                                           US
                                                                                              [k ], where
yit [k ] denotes the yield of the sovereign bond k , is therefore free of the bias that would occur if
the spreads had been computed simply by matching the sovereign yield to the estimated yield of a
US Treasury security of the same maturity.
       Table 1 contains the summary statistics for the key characteristics of bonds in our sample.12 An
average country in our sample has more than 18 sovereign bond issues outstanding at any point in
time. However, this distribution is skewed significantly to the right by a few countries that have a
very large number of issues trading in the secondary market at a point in time. In fact, the median
country has only eight such issues trading in any given day.
       The size distribution of the sovereign bond issues is similarly skewed, with the range running
from $1.1 million to more than $11 billion. The maturity of these debt instruments is fairly long,
with the average maturity at issue of about 15 years. In terms of default risk--at least as measured
by the Moody's sovereign credit ratings--our sample spans a significant portion of the credit-quality
spectrum. However, at "A1," the median observation is well within the investment-grade category.
An average sovereign bond in our sample has an expected return of 224 basis points more than a
comparable US Treasury security, while the standard deviation of 255 basis points is indicative of
the wide range of credit qualities in our sample.

3.2      Sovereign Bond Portfolios Yields
We exploit the cross-sectional heterogeneity of our data by constructing sovereign bond portfolios.
All of the portfolios are weighted by the market value of the underlying bond issues in the previous
  12
    To ensure that our results are not driven by a small number of extreme observations, we have eliminated obser-
vations with credit spreads of less that -50 basis points and more than 3, 000 basis points. In addition, we dropped
from our sample very small sovereign debt issues (par value of less than $1 million in 2005 dollars) and all observations
with a remaining term-to-maturity of less than one year or more than 30 years.


                                                           10
                                         Figure 2 ­ Sovereign Bond Yields

                                                                                                         Percent
                                                                                                                    12


                                                                                                                    10


                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    6


                                                                                                                    4

                   Short duration
                   Long duration                                                                                    2


                                                                                                                    0
     1992   1994     1996    1998      2000   2002   2004    2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018
                                                     A. By duration
                                                                                                          Percent

                                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                                     12


                                                                                                                        9


                                                                                                                        6


                   Investment grade
                                                                                                                        3
                   Speculative grade


                                                                                                                        0
    1992    1994    1996     1998      2000   2002    2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018
                                                     B. By credit risk

 Note: Sample period: weekly averages of daily data from 01/02/1992 to 03/29/2019. In Panel A, the two lines
 depict the yields on portfolios of dollar-denominated sovereign bonds of short (< 5 years) duration and long ( 5
 years) duration. In Panel B, the two lines depict the yields on portfolios of dollar-denominated sovereign bonds
 with an investment- and speculative-grate ratings. The shaded region represents the unconventional US monetary
 policy regime.




day. The portfolios are constructed based on bond-specific characteristics that reflect both maturity
and credit risk. To construct duration-specific portfolios, we sort bonds into short and long duration
categories, based on whether the bond's duration (on day t - 1) is above or below five years, a cutoff
corresponding roughly to the median duration in our sample. To construct portfolios based on credit
risk, we sort bonds based on whether the issuing country has a speculative- or investment-grade
sovereign credit rating (on day t - 1). The daily portfolio yields are then computed as weighted


                                                             11
                  Table 2 ­ The Effect of US Monetary Policy on Sovereign Bond Yields
                       (h-day Changes in Duration-Based Bond Portfolio Yields )

                                             Conventional MPa                          Unconventional MPb
 Regressor                                 SD                   LD                    SD                    LD

 A. 2-day changes (h = 2)
 mUS
  t                                       0.93                  0.85                 1.27                  1.19
                                         (0.11)                (0.17)               (0.25)                (0.28)

 Pr > Ep c                               <.01                  <.01                 <.01                  <.01
 R2                                      0.23                  0.17                 0.27                  0.25

 B. 6-day changes (h = 6)
 mUS
   t                                      1.21                  1.25                 1.46                  1.53
                                         (0.21)                (0.32)               (0.48)                (0.58)

 Pr > Ep c                               <.01                  <.01                  0.01                 <.01
 R2                                      0.10                  0.10                  0.16                 0.13
 Note: The dependent variable is h yt+h-1 , an h-day change (from day t - 1 to day t + h - 1) bracketing an
FOMC announcement on day t in the specified bond portfolio yield: SD = portfolio of short duration (< 5 years)
sovereign bonds; and LD = portfolio of long duration ( 5 years) sovereign bonds. The explanatory variable in all
specifications is mUS
                   t , an FOMC-induced surprise in the 2-year US Treasury yield. All specifications include a constant
(not reported) and are estimated by OLS. Heteroskedasticity-consistent asymptotic standard errors are reported in
parentheses: * p < .10; ** p < .05; and *** p < .01.
a
  169 FOMC announcements (02/06/1992­12/15/2008 and 12/17/2015­03/20/2019).
b
  65 FOMC announcements (12/16/2008­12/16/2015).
c
  p-value for the Doornik and Hansen (2008) test of the null hypothesis of normality of the OLS residuals.


averages of security-level yields, using market values of individual bond issue in the previous day
as weights. While finer gradations are possible, our sorting captures the salient differences that we
observe in the data, while maintaining a significant number of bonds in each portfolio.
       The solid line in Panel A of Figure 2 depicts the sovereign bond yields across the short- and
long-duration bond portfolios; the same information for the investment- and speculative-grade bond
portfolios is shown in Panel B.13 Clearly there is considerable time-series variation in the bond yields
of our sovereign bond portfolios. Panel A shows that sovereign bonds with long duration have higher
yields than the yields in the short-duration portfolio, except during late 1990s and in 2008, when
yields in both portfolios spiked to similar levels. Panel B shows that speculative-grade bonds carry
a substantially higher yield than their investment-grade counterparts. This difference reflects the
additional risk premium for bonds with a lower credit rating, as well as possible differences in
liquidity between investment- and speculative-grade sovereign securities.
       We begin by discussing the effect of a US monetary policy surprises on sovereign yields. In the
conventional monetary policy regime, a tightening of US policy is associated with rising US short-
term rates and a flattening of the yield curve. In contrast, in the unconventional regime, a tightening
  13
       For visual purposes, we smoothed the data by taking weekly averages of the daily bond yields.



                                                          12
of US policy is associated with a steepening of the yield curve, as short rates are anchored at
their effective lower bound. Thus, a natural starting point is to document the extent to which
US monetary policy affects foreign yields across the maturity spectrum.
   Specifically, we use OLS to estimate the following regression specification:

                                  h yp,t+h-1 = p mUS
                                                  t + p,t+h-1 ,


where h yp,t+h-1 denotes an h-day in the sovereign bond portfolio yield associated with short- and
long-duration sovereign bonds (i.e., p = SD (short duration) and p = LD (long duration)). The
h-day yield change is calculated as the change in yield from day t - 1 to day t + h - 1, where the
yield is quoted at the market closing time of the relevant country. Given the our sample of countries
covers many different time zones--and thus closing times differ across countries--we compute the
h-day yield changes from day t - 1 to day t + h - 1, which ensures that the US policy surprise
occurred within that time interval. Our baseline horizon is two days (i.e., h = 2), but given the
potentially illiquid nature of sovereign bonds, which would lead to a delayed yield response to
US monetary policy announcements, we also consider the effect of policy surprises at the 6-day
horizon (i.e., h = 6).
   Table 2 presents the results for our duration based bond portfolios. Panel A shows the results
for the 2-day changes, and Panel B shows results for the 6-day changes. According to the entries in
Panel A of the table, US monetary policy shocks impact sovereign bond yields across the duration
spectrum. The estimates imply that a monetary policy action that raises the 2-year Treasury yield
by 100 basis points leads to increases in dollar-denominated sovereign bond yields that are slightly
less than 100 basis points during the conventional policy regime and somewhat more than 100 basis
points during the unconventional regime. The results, however, do not imply significant differences
in responses across the duration spectrum.
   Regression using the 6-day changes (Panel B) produce slightly bigger estimates. In our view,
this increased responsiveness likely reflects relative illiquidity of the dollar denominated sovereign
bond market. Again, the estimated effects are very similar across the duration spectrum and imply
larger point estimates of response coefficient during the unconventional policy regime relative to the
conventional regime, though these differences are not statistically significant. In broad terms, the
results in Table 2 imply a robust response of sovereign yields to US monetary policy and capture a
"level" effect, whereby sovereign yields are rising one-for-one with a policy-induced increase in the
US 2-year Treasury yield. In addition, we do not observe substantial differences in response across
the two monetary policy regimes.
   It is worth noting that Albagli et al. (2018) find that US monetary policy spillovers to long-
term foreign yields have increased substantially after the global financial crisis. However, they
study international bonds denominated in local currencies and provide evidence consistent with an
exchange rate channel, according to which foreign central banks face a tradeoff between narrowing
policy rate differentials, or experiencing currency movements against the US dollar. Our analysis
focuses on the dollar-denominated sovereign bonds, an asset class where the exchange rate channel

                                                 13
               Table 3 ­ The Effect of US Monetary Policy on Sovereign Bond Yields
                   (h-day Changes in Credit-Risk-Based Bond Portfolio Yields )

                                           Conventional MPa                          Unconventional MPb
 Regressor                               IG                   SG                    IG                    SG

 A. 2-day changes (h = 2)
 mUS
  t                                    0.75                   1.07                1.27                  1.13
                                      (0.10)                 (0.19)              (0.20)                (0.41)

 Pr > Ep c                            <.01                   <.01                 <.01                  <.01
 R2                                   0.25                   0.15                 0.38                  0.12

 B. 6-day changes (h = 6)
 mUS
   t                                   0.77                   1.91                1.60                  1.09
                                      (0.14)                 (0.49)              (0.36)                (0.92)

 Pr > Ep c                            <.01                   <.01                 <.01                  0.01
 R2                                   0.10                   0.09                 0.23                  0.03
 Note: The dependent variable is h yt+h-1 , an h-day change (from day t - 1 to day t + h - 1) bracketing an
FOMC announcement on day t in the specified bond portfolio yield. IG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with an
investment-grade credit rating; and SG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with a speculative-grade credit rating. The
explanatory variable in all specifications is mUS
                                               t , an FOMC-induced surprise in the 2-year US Treasury yield. All
specifications include a constant (not reported) and are estimated by OLS. Heteroskedasticity-consistent asymptotic
standard errors are reported in parentheses: * p < .10; ** p < .05; and *** p < .01.
a
  169 FOMC announcements (02/06/1992­12/15/2008 and 12/17/2015­03/20/2019).
b
  65 FOMC announcements (12/16/2008­12/16/2015).
c
  p-value for the Doornik and Hansen (2008) test of the null hypothesis of normality of the OLS residuals.


does not have a direct effect.
    The estimates of the spillover effects on sovereign bonds with different durations reflect not only
the impact of the US monetary policy on the yield curve, but also the effects of policy changes on the
risk premiums. To examine whether lower credit quality portfolios respond more or less than higher
credit quality portfolios, we now consider the sovereign yield response for the portfolios sorted by
credit risk. Table 3 reports OLS estimates of the coefficients measuring the effect of a US monetary
policy surprise on sovereign bond yields of portfolios with speculative- and investment-grade credit
ratings (i.e., p = IG (investment grade) and p = SG (speculative grade)). Panel A of Table 3 shows
the results at the 2-day horizon, and Panel B reports the results for the 6-day horizon.
    In comparison to the portfolios sorted by duration, sorting by credit risk implies much larger
differences in yield responses across credit risk categories and across monetary policy regimes.
Specifically, during the conventional policy regime, the response coefficient on the portfolio of
investment-grade sovereign bonds is 0.75, implying that lower risk sovereign bond yields respond
significantly less than one-for-one to policy-induced changes in the 2-year US Treasury yield. In
contrast, the response coefficient on the portfolio of speculative-grade sovereign bonds is much
larger, especially at the 6-day horizon; in that case, our estimates imply that a US monetary policy
action that raises the 2-year Treasury yield by 100 basis points leads to an increase of almost

                                                        14
200 basis points in the speculative-grade bond portfolio yield.
    During the unconventional policy regime, however, this pattern reverses itself, as yields on
speculative-grade sovereign bonds appear less responsive to US monetary policy, compared with
yields on investment-grade sovereign bonds. Likely reflecting the smaller sample size, the response
coefficients based on this sample period are estimated with considerably less precision, especially
for the 6-day changes in speculative-grade sovereign bond yields. Moreover, the clear pattern
that speculative-grade sovereign bond yields are more responsive to US monetary policy than
their investment-grade counterparts that was seen during the conventional policy regime no longer
appears to hold during the unconventional US monetary policy regime.

3.3    Sovereign Credit Spreads
The above analysis showed that during the conventional US monetary policy regime, yields on
speculative-grade sovereign bonds responded more to monetary policy shocks than the yields on
investment-grade sovereign bonds and that this pattern no longer held during the unconventional
regime. These findings suggest that, at least during conventional policy regime, US monetary policy
may have a strong impact on sovereign risk, especially for emerging market economies, which most
often fall into the speculative-grade credit rating category.
    To formally analyze this issue, we now exploit our rich micro-level data to construct duration-
matched portfolios of corresponding US Treasury securities, once again conditional on the sovereign's
credit rating. The difference between these portfolio yields provides a measure of the spread on
the sovereign yield relative to the yield on US Treasuries with matched payout characteristics.
The solid line in Panel A of Figure 3 depicts the cross-sectional median of sovereign credit spreads
across the investment-grade country portfolios, while the shaded band represents the corresponding
interquartile range; the same information for the speculative-grade country portfolios is shown in
Panel B.14
    Clearly there is considerable cross-sectional and time-series variation in the sovereign bond
portfolios in both credit rating categories. Sovereign credit spreads for riskier countries spiked up
during the Mexican peso crisis that started in December 1994, as investors fled, not only Mexico,
but emerging markets in general. In contrast, the jump in spreads during the Asian financial
crisis in mid-1997 was noticeably less severe. The Russian financial crisis during the late summer
of 1998 also led to "financial contagion," in the sense that sovereign spreads of speculative-grade
countries increased sharply. Note that during these international financial crises, credit spreads
on dollar-denominated sovereign bonds issued by countries with an investment-grade rating barely
budged.
    The collapse of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008, an event that sparked a world-wide
financial panic, sent spreads sharply higher for both investment- and speculative-grade sovereign
credits. Consistent with previous international financial crises, the cross-sectional dispersion of
  14
     Again, for visual purposes, we smoothed the data by taking weekly averages of the daily country-specific portfolio
spreads.



                                                          15
                                         Figure 3 ­ Sovereign Credit Spreads

                                                                                                  Percentage points
                                                                                                                       6
            Median
            Interquartile range                                                                                        5

                                                                                                                       4

                                                                                                                       3

                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                       0
     1992     1994     1996       1998   2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016    2018
                                         A. Investment-grade sovereign credits
                                                                                                 Percentage points
                                                                                                                      16
            Median                                                                                                    14
            Interquartile range
                                                                                                                      12

                                                                                                                      10

                                                                                                                      8

                                                                                                                      6

                                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                      2

                                                                                                                      0
     1992     1994     1996       1998   2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018
                                         B. Speculative-grade sovereign credits

 Note: Sample period: weekly averages of daily data from 01/02/1992 to 03/29/2019. The solid line in Panel A
 depicts the median credit spread across country-specific portfolios of dollar-denominated sovereign bonds with an
 investment-grade credit rating, while the shaded bands denotes the corresponding interquartile (P75­P25) range.
 Panel B shows the same information for countries with a speculative-grade sovereign credit rating. The shaded
 region represents the unconventional US monetary policy regime.




credit spreads also widened significantly and remained high in both credit rating categories for the
remainder of our sample period. The effects of the European debt crisis that started at the end
of 2009 and intensified in early 2010 and thereafter are especially evident in the elevated and volatile
investment-grade sovereign spreads, as it took some time for the periphery eurozone countries at the
center of the crisis to be downgraded to "junk" status. Especially during this period, the impact of
US unconventional monetary policy on advanced and emerging market economies became a hotly
debated topic in global and national policy circles.
   We begin the analysis by discussing the effect of a US monetary policy surprise on sovereign
yields and the yields for the matched US Treasury portfolios. Specifically, we use OLS to estimate



                                                              16
               Table 4 ­ The Effect of US Monetary Policy on Sovereign Credit Risk
                           (2-day Changes in Bond Portfolio Yields )

                                                    Conventional MPa                    Unconventional MPb
 Dependent Variables                               mUS
                                                    t                 R2                mUS
                                                                                         t                 R2
 Sovereign bond yield ­ IG                        0.75               0.25              1.27               0.38
                                                 (0.10)                               (0.20)
 Sovereign bond yield ­ SG                        1.07               0.15              1.13               0.18
                                                 (0.19)                               (0.41)
 US Treasury yield ­ IG                           0.69               0.16              1.24               0.27
                                                 (0.10)                               (0.27)
 US Treasury yield ­ SG                           0.53               0.10              1.41               0.28
                                                 (0.12)                               (0.31)
 Memo : Credit spread responsec
 Credit spread ­ IG                               0.05                                0.03
                                                 (0.09)                              (0.28)
 Credit spread ­ SG                               0.53                               -0.28
                                                 (0.18)                              (0.48)
 Note: In each specification, the dependent variable is a 2-day change (from day t - 1 to day t + 1) bracketing
an FOMC announcement on day t in the specified bond portfolio yield: IG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with
an investment-grade credit rating; and SG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with a speculative-grade credit rating.
US Treasury (IG/SG) corresponds to a 2-day change in the yield on the portfolio of synthetic US Treasury securities
of identical duration as the sovereign bonds in the (IG/SG) portfolios. The entries denote the OLS estimates of
the portfolio-specific response coefficients to mUS
                                                  t , an FOMC-induced surprise in the 2-year US Treasury yield.
All specifications include a constant (not reported). Heteroskedasticity-consistent asymptotic standard errors are
reported in parentheses: * p < .10; ** p < .05; and *** p < .01.
a
  169 FOMC announcements (02/06/1992­12/15/2008 and 12/17/2015­03/20/2019).
b
  65 FOMC announcements (12/16/2008­12/16/2015).
c
  The response of the sovereign credit spreads for the IG and SG credit risk categories is computed as the difference
between the estimated response of sovereign bond yields and the estimated response of US Treasury yields in the
matched portfolio of US Treasuries in that credit risk category.


the following system of equations:

                                     h yp,t+h-1 = p mUS
                                                     t + p,t+h-1 ;
                                        US            US
                                     h yp,t +h-1 = p mt + p,t+h-1 ,


where h yp,t+h-1 denotes an h-day change (from day t-1 to day t+h-1) in the sovereign bond port-
folio yield associated with credit quality p = SG (speculative grade) and p = IG (investment grade),
and h yp,t
       US
           +h-1 is the corresponding h-day change in the yield on a matched portfolio of US Trea-
suries. The response of the sovereign credit spreads to US monetary policy surprises may then be
directly inferred from the difference in response between these two portfolio yields; that is, p - p ,
for p = SG and IG.
   Table 4 documents the effect of a policy-induced increase in the 2-year US Treasury yield on
the 2-day changes in the speculative and investment-grade sovereign bond portfolio yields and their
matched US Treasury equivalents. We again conduct a separate analysis across the conventional and


                                                         17
unconventional US monetary policy regimes. According to the entries in the table, a conventional
policy induced increase in the 2-year US Treasury yield of 100 basis points leads to an increase of
107 basis points in the speculative-grade bond portfolio yield and an increase of 75 basis points in
the investment-grade bond portfolio yield; both of these effects are statistically significant at the
1 percent level.
   Over the same two days, the respective yields on matched portfolios of US Treasuries are es-
timated to increase 53 basis points for the speculative-grade portfolio and 69 basis points for the
investment-grade portfolio. The implied credit spread response is thus 53 basis points for the
speculative-grade portfolio and a mere 5 basis points for the investment-grade portfolio. The stan-
dard errors associated with these responses imply that the credit spread response for speculative-
grade bonds is statistically different from zero at the 5 percent significance level, while the response
for investment-grade bonds is statistically indistinguishable from zero. Thus, during the conven-
tional policy regime, a US monetary policy easing that induces a decline in the 2-year US Treasury
yield of 100 basis points narrows credit spreads on speculative-grade sovereign bonds by about
50 basis points, but has essentially no effect on credit spreads on investment-grade sovereign bonds.
These results are consistent with the notion that US monetary policy has a direct impact on global
asset prices by reducing foreign investment-grade yields one-for-one with US Treasury yields and has
an additional impact by reducing the credit risk premiums on speculative-grade sovereign bonds.
   The right side of the table reports analogous results for the unconventional policy regime.
Again, we observe an economically important and statistically significant response in the 2-day
change of both sovereign and matched US Treasury portfolio yields to the US monetary policy
surprise. Consistent with our previous findings, the size of the response of both the sovereign yields
and the yields on comparable US Treasuries is substantially greater than those we obtain during
the conventional policy regime. During the unconventional regime, a US monetary policy easing
reduces longer-term yields by more than short-term yields. Hence, this finding reflects the fact
that portfolios of US Treasury securities with matched payout characteristics to speculative- and
investment-grade sovereign bonds are of significantly longer duration than the 2-year US Treasury
note.
   Taking the difference of responses between the sovereign bond yields and the matched US Trea-
sury yields again allows us to infer the response of the credit spread on dollar-denominated sovereign
bonds to an unanticipated change in the unconventional stance of US monetary policy. In contrast
to the conventional policy regime, there is no statistically significant decline in the credit spread on
speculative-grade sovereign bonds during the unconventional policy regime. The response of the
credit spread for investment-grade sovereign bonds is again zero, both economically and statisti-
cally. Thus, during the unconventional policy regime, US monetary policy has a direct effect on
both speculative- and investment-grade sovereign debt by reducing yields on comparable US Trea-
sury securities that are then transmitted one-for-one to yields on dollar-denominated sovereign
bonds but has no additional impact via a reduction in sovereign credit risk.
   Given the potentially illiquid nature of dollar-denominated sovereign bonds, which would likely


                                                  18
               Table 5 ­ The Effect of US Monetary Policy on Sovereign Credit Risk
                           (6-day Changes in Bond Portfolio Yields )

                                                    Conventional MPa                    Unconventional MPb
  Dependent Variables                              mUS
                                                    t                 R2                mUS
                                                                                         t                 R2
  Sovereign bond yield ­ IG                       0.77               0.10              1.60               0.23
                                                 (0.14)                               (0.36)
  Sovereign bond yield ­ SG                       1.91               0.09              1.09               0.03
                                                 (0.49)                               (0.90)
  US Treasury yield ­ IG                          0.49               0.05              1.39               0.18
                                                 (0.14)                               (0.22)
  US Treasury yield ­ SG                          0.38               0.02              1.67               0.23
                                                 (0.15)                               (0.21)
  Memo : Credit spread responsec
  Credit spread ­ IG                              0.29                                0.21
                                                 (0.09)                              (0.38)
  Credit spread ­ SG                              1.53                               -0.59
                                                 (0.47)                              (0.87)
 Note: In each specification, the dependent variable is a 6-day change (from day t - 1 to day t + 5) bracketing
an FOMC announcement on day t in the specified bond portfolio yield: IG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with
an investment-grade credit rating; and SG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with a speculative-grade credit rating.
US Treasury (IG/SG) corresponds to a 6-day change in the yield on the portfolio of synthetic US Treasury securities
of identical duration as the sovereign bonds in the (IG/SG) portfolios. The entries denote the OLS estimates of
the portfolio-specific response coefficients to mUS
                                                  t , an FOMC-induced surprise in the 2-year US Treasury yield.
All specifications include a constant (not reported). Heteroskedasticity-consistent asymptotic standard errors are
reported in parentheses: * p < .10; ** p < .05; and *** p < .01.
a
  169 FOMC announcements (02/06/1992­12/15/2008 and 12/17/2015­03/20/2019).
b
  65 FOMC announcements (12/16/2008­12/16/2015).
c
  The response of the sovereign credit spreads for the IG and SG credit risk categories is computed as the difference
between the estimated response of sovereign bond yields and the estimated response of US Treasury yields in the
matched portfolio of US Treasuries in that credit risk category.


lead to a delayed yield response to US monetary policy announcements, we now consider the effect
of a US monetary policy surprise using 6-day changes in the sovereign bond portfolio yields and
the yields on the matched portfolios of US Treasuries. These results are summarized in Table 5.
   During the conventional policy regime, the response of speculative-grade sovereign yields shows
a substantially greater response at the 6-day horizon (1.91) than at the 2-day horizon (1.07). In
contrast, the response of investment-grade sovereign yields is essentially the same at both horizons.
This suggests that there is some price discovery that takes place over this horizon or that it takes
several days for illiquidity in the speculative-grade segment of the sovereign debt market to dissipate.
In addition, the response of the yields on the matched portfolios of US Treasury securities shows
attenuation at the 6-day horizon relative to the 2-day horizon. Consequently, when we allow for the
longer horizon, the response of credit spreads to a conventional US monetary policy surprise becomes
larger in absolute value, and it is statistically significant for both speculative- and investment-grade
sovereign bonds. A policy-induced decline of 100 basis points in the 2-year US Treasury yield now
implies a narrowing of credit spreads on speculative-grade sovereign bonds of about 150 basis points

                                                         19
and a reduction of about 30 basis points in credit spreads on investment-grade sovereign bonds.
Note that both of these estimates are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
   These findings likely reflect the confluence of two factors. First, a decline in international
risk-free interest rates could lead to narrower sovereign credit spreads because it improves the
creditworthiness of riskier countries. Second, international investors' attempts to enhance portfolio
returns in a low interest rate environment--by increasing their credit risk exposure--could also put
downward pressure on credit spreads on sovereign debt issued by riskier countries. While intuitive,
our results stand in sharp contrast to those from the earlier literature, which found than an in-
crease in US shorter-term interest rates led to a narrowing of sovereign credit spreads, especially
for the emerging market economies (see Kamin and von Kleist, 1999; Eichengreen and Mody, 2010;
Uribe and Yue, 2006). Importantly, these papers uses monthly or quarterly changes in US interest
rates to estimate the spillover effects of US monetary policy to international bond markets. Our
analysis, in contrast, highlights the importance of using high-frequency data to identify the unan-
ticipated changes in the conventional stance of US monetary policy and to trace out the causal
effect of these changes on sovereign credit spreads.
   During the unconventional policy regime, our coefficient estimates imply a modest increase in
the response of both the speculative- and investment-grade sovereign yields at the 6-day horizon
compared with the 2-day horizon. In contrast, there is a substantially more pronounced response of
portfolio yields on comparable US Treasuries over the 6-day horizon relative to the 2-day horizon.
The combination of these two forces again implies no statistically significant effect of a US monetary
policy surprise on sovereign credit spreads during the unconventional policy regime. These estimates
reinforce the finding that US monetary policy easings do not lead to a statistically significant
narrowing of sovereign credit spreads during the unconventional policy regime.
   Although, we do not offer a full explanation for why the response of sovereign credit spreads to
US monetary policy differs across the conventional and unconventional policy regimes, we suggest
two possible reasons why there may be attenuation of the response of credit spreads to unconven-
tional policy actions. The first is the recognition that there is a substantially greater cross-country
dispersion in sovereign credit spreads during the unconventional regime (see Figure 3). This height-
ened dispersion suggests that country-specific idiosyncratic factors may have played a larger role
in determining sovereign credit risk during this period. This may then imply an attenuation of the
response of sovereign credit spreads to unconventional US monetary policy measures.
   A second concern, discussed in Greenlaw et al. (2018), is the fact that unconventional monetary
policy primarily relies on forward guidance to convey its policy stance. Implementation of monetary
policy through forward guidance may lead to greater scope for policy announcements to convey both
the policy stance, as well as the monetary authority's perception of the state of the economy. To
the extent that rising yields capture positive views conveyed by the monetary authority regarding
the state of the economy, we expect to see an increase in risky asset prices in response to rising
US Treasury yields during announcement periods. Such a mechanism also implies an attenuation
of the response of sovereign credit spreads to policy-prompted increases in US Treasury yields on


                                                  20
FOMC announcement days.

3.4      Micro-Level Sovereign Credit Spreads
To further examine the response of sovereign credit spreads to US monetary policy actions, we
now consider estimates based on the micro-level data, which allows us to directly control for po-
tential liquidity concerns by including an interaction between the monetary policy surprise and
bond characteristics that likely influence liquidity premiums. In addition to explicitly controlling
for observable liquidity characteristics, the panel data analysis may be viewed as providing the
equivalent of an equally-weighted portfolio analysis.
       Formally, we estimate the following regression specification:

               h si,t+h-1 [k ] = SG mUS                        US
                                     t × 1[RTGi,t-1  SG] + IG mt × 1[RTGi,t-1  IG]
                                                                                                                  (2)
                                  +   xi,t [k ] × mUS
                                                   t + i,t+h-1 [k ],


where h si,t+h-1 [k ]  h yit [k ] - h yt
                                       US
                                          [k ], is the h-day change in the credit spread on sovereign
bond k (issued by country i); 1[RTGi,t-1  p] is an indicator variable that equals 1 if country i's
sovereign credit rating at t - 1 falls into the p = SG and IG credit-rating category; and, xi,t [k ] is a
vector of (pre-determined) bond characteristics that may influence the liquidity of the bond issue k .
Specifically, xi,t [k ] consists of ln PARi [k ], ln(1 + AGEi,t [k ]), ln(1 + COUPi [k ]), and ln DURi,t [k ],
where PARi [k ] is the inflation-adjusted size of the sovereign bond issue, AGEi,t [k ] is the age (in
days) of the issue, COUPi [k ] is the fixed coupon rate, and DURi,t [k ] is the bond's duration. These
                                                         t and thus control for the fact that a portion
characteristics are interacted with the policy surprise mUS
of the credit spread response may reflect movements in liquidity premium that is a function of the
specified bond characteristics.15
       Table 6 reports the estimated effects of monetary policy on both the 2- and 6-day changes in
sovereign credit spreads. Consistent with the view that some part of the credit spread response may
be attributed to a liquidity premium that varies with issue size and other bond characteristics, the
panel-data estimates imply a smaller response of credit spreads to US monetary policy surprises
during the conventional regime relative to those obtained from the aggregate portfolio analysis.
The estimate of the response coefficient on the 2-day changes in speculative-grade credit spreads
(Panel A) declines from an estimated value of 0.53, when estimated at the portfolio level, to about
0.35 when estimated using the bond-level data. Similarly, the estimate of the response coefficient
on the 6-day changes in speculative-grade credit spreads (Panel B) falls from 1.53 to about 0.9,
though it remains highly statistically significant.
       In summary, the panel-data estimates reported in Table 6 do not change our earlier conclusion
that conventional US monetary policy actions have an economically and statistically significant

  15
    As before, we estimate equation (2) by OLS. To take into account cross-sectional dependence in the disturbance
term i,t+h-1 [k] arising from the fact that our sample consists of FOMC announcement days only, as well as the fact
that error terms of bonds issues by the same country are likely to be correlated, we report asymptotic standard errors
clustered across time (t) and countries (i) computed according to Cameron et al. (2011).


                                                         21
                                           Table 6 ­ The Effect of US Monetary Policy on Sovereign Credit Risk
                                                      (h-day Changes in Bond-Level Credit Spreads )

                                                                  Conventional MPa                                              Unconventional MPb
      Regressor                                      (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)

      A. 2-day changes (h = 2)
           t × 1[RTGi,t-1  IG]
      IG mUS                                      -0.01                  0.06                 0.07               -0.21                 -0.20                -0.19
                                                  (0.06)                (0.09)               (0.09)              (0.16)                (0.21)               (0.22)
          t × 1[RTGi,t-1  SG]
      SG mUS                                       0.36                  0.37                 0.37               -0.37                 -0.39                -0.42
                                                  (0.15)                (0.15)               (0.15)              (0.34)                (0.27)               (0.28)

      Bond-specific controls                         N                     Y                    Y                    N                     Y                    Y
      Country FE                                     N                     N                    Y                    N                     N                    Y
      Pr > W c                                     <.01                  0.03                 0.03                 0.39                  0.07                 0.05
      R2                                           0.01                  0.01                 0.02                 0.01                  0.01                 0.02
22




      B. 6-day changes (h = 6)
           t × 1[RTGi,t-1  IG]
      IG mUS                                        0.19                 0.21                 0.21               -0.10                 -0.06                -0.05
                                                   (0.09)               (0.22)               (0.21)              (0.17)                (0.20)               (0.24)
          t × 1[RTGi,t-1  SG]
      SG mUS                                        0.96                 0.88                 0.93               -0.50                 -0.53                -0.56
                                                   (0.34)               (0.38)               (0.37)              (0.60)                (0.39)               (0.42)

      Bond-specific controls                          N                    Y                   Y                     N                     Y                    Y
      Country FE                                      N                    N                   Y                     N                     N                    Y
      Pr > W c                                      0.02                 0.01                <.01                  0.42                  0.05                 0.05
      R2                                            0.02                 0.02                0.06                  0.01                  0.01                 0.01
      Note: The dependent variable is h si,t+h-1 [k], an h-day change (from day t - 1 to day t + h - 1) bracketing an FOMC announcement on day t in the credit
     spread on sovereign bond k issued by country i. The explanatory variables are mUS  t , a US policy-induced surprise in the 2-year US Treasury yield, interacted with
     the country's sovereign credit rating indicator: SG = speculative grade and IG = investment grade. In columns (2), (3), (5) and (6), the response coefficients on
     mUSt are evaluated at the sample mean of the bond-specific characteristics. All specifications include a constant (not reported) and are estimated by OLS. Robust
     asymptotic standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered in the i and t dimensions (see Cameron et al., 2011): * p < .10; ** p < .05; and *** p < .01.
     a
       169 FOMC announcements (02/06/1992­12/15/2008 and 12/17/2015­03/20/2019). No. of bonds = 992; No. of countries = 80; and Observations = 27,890.
     b
       65 FOMC announcements (12/16/2008­12/16/2015). Panel dimensions: No. of bonds = 1,237; No. of countries = 89; and Observations = 36,546.
     c
       p-value for the test of the null hypothesis that the response coefficients on mUS
                                                                                      t  are equal across the SG and IG credit risk categories.
effect on speculative-grade sovereign credit spreads. These estimates also confirms our above finding
that US monetary policy actions during the unconventional regime had no effect, on average, on
sovereign credit spreads.

3.5   Asymmetric Spillovers of US Monetary Policy
An important concern among policymakers across the globe is the extent to which an easing of
monetary policy may lead to increased risk taking in the form of compression of spreads on risky
debt. This concern became especially acute in the years immediately following the 2008­09 global
financial crisis, a period marked by a surge in capital flows to emerging market economies. At that
time, a number of policymakers, academic economists, and financial market participants argued that
these flows were contributing to loose financial conditions, excessive credit growth, and undesired
exchange rate appreciation in the recipient countries. Because those flows were occurring against a
backdrop of aggressive expansion of balance sheets by central banks in major advanced economies,
a popular narrative emerged, which argued that these unconventional monetary policy measures
were an especially important driver of capital flows to emerging market economies.
   According to this view, one should therefore observe a differential effect between monetary
policy easings and tightenings. In particular, one would expect an easing of US monetary policy
to result in a larger move in credit spreads on speculative-grade sovereign bonds relative to a
policy tightening of equal size. To examine whether US monetary tightenings and easings have an
asymmetric effect on international bond markets, we split our policy surprises based on their sign--
that is, positive vs. negative--and then re-estimate the response of portfolio yields to those two
                        (+)          (- )
shocks, denoted by mUS,
                    t       and mUS,
                                 t        . Tables 7 and 8 present our findings regarding whether the
conventional and unconventional US monetary policy actions have asymmetric effects on sovereign
bond credit spreads at the 2- and 6-day horizons, respectively.
   As shown in Table 7, during the conventional policy regime, the 2-day change in yields for
both speculative- and investment-grade bond portfolios respond significantly more to a monetary
tightening then to a monetary easing. However, the yields on synthetic US bond portfolios also
display a similarly heightened response to monetary policy tightenings. Consequently, the resulting
effect on credit spreads is the same regardless of the direction of a policy move. Notably, the
point estimates for the response of credit spreads on speculative-grade bonds are unchanged across
tightening and easing actions and are entirely in line with the 50 basis point response documented in
Table 4. During the unconventional policy regime, only monetary policy easings have a significant
effect on either sovereign yields or their US matched portfolio equivalents. This in part reflects
the fact that unanticipated policy tightenings were relatively infrequent during the unconventional
policy regime. Again, there is no evidence to suggest that monetary policy has asymmetric effects
on international bond markets.
   The results for the 6-day horizon reported in Table 8 reinforce this conclusion. We again find
that policy tightenings have substantially larger effects on sovereign yields than policy easings of the
same magnitude. As before, we find that the credit spread response for speculative-grade sovereign


                                                  23
                                    Table 7 ­ The Asymmetric Effects of US Monetary Policy on Sovereign Credit Risk
                                                      (2-day Changes in Portfolio Bond Yields )

                                                                          Conventional MPa                                           Unconventional MPb
      Dependent Variables                                   mUS,
                                                             t
                                                                 (+)
                                                                                mUS,
                                                                                 t
                                                                                     (- )
                                                                                                       R2                mUS,
                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                              (+)
                                                                                                                                             mUS,
                                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                  (- )
                                                                                                                                                                    R2
      Sovereign bond yield ­ IG                              1.30                0.45                 0.29                1.15                1.31                 0.38
                                                            (0.27)              (0.10)                                   (0.65)              (0.23)
      Sovereign bond yield ­ SG                              1.54                0.81                 0.15                1.19                1.12                 0.12
                                                            (0.35)              (0.22)                                   (1.47)              (0.43)
      US Treasury yield ­ IG                                 1.12                0.46                 0.18                0.74                1.40                 0.29
                                                            (0.21)              (0.15)                                   (0.77)              (0.33)
      US Treasury yield ­ SG                                 1.03                0.26                 0.13                0.66                1.64                 0.27
                                                            (0.23)              (0.15)                                   (0.84)              (0.37)
24




      Memo : Implied credit spread responsec
      Credit spread ­ IG                                     0.17              -0.01                                      0.41              -0.09
                                                            (0.19)             (0.11)                                    (0.73)              (0.34)
      Credit spread ­ SG                                     0.51               0.54                                      0.53              -0.53
                                                            (0.43)             (0.21)                                    (1.76)              (0.49)
      Note: In each specification, the dependent variable is a 2-day change (from day t - 1 to day t + 1) bracketing an FOMC announcement on day t in the specified
     bond portfolio yield: IG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with an investment-grade credit rating; and SG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with a speculative-grade
     credit rating. US Treasury (IG/SG) corresponds to a 2-day change in the yield on the portfolio of synthetic US Treasury securities of identical duration as the
                                                                                                                                             (+)          (-)
     sovereign bonds in the (IG/SG) portfolios. The entries denote the OLS estimates of the portfolio-specific response coefficients to mUS,
                                                                                                                                         t       and mUS,
                                                                                                                                                      t       , a positive and
     negative FOMC-induced surprises in the 2-year US Treasury yield, respectively. All specifications include a constant (not reported). Heteroskedasticity-consistent
     asymptotic standard errors are reported in parentheses: * p < .10; ** p < .05; and *** p < .01.
     a
       169 FOMC announcements (02/06/1992­12/15/2008 and 12/17/2015­03/20/2019).
     b
       65 FOMC announcements (12/16/2008­12/16/2015).
     c
       The response of the sovereign credit spreads for the IG and SG credit risk categories is computed as the difference between the estimated response of sovereign
     bond yields and the estimated response of US Treasury yields in the matched portfolio of US Treasuries in that credit risk category.
                                    Table 8 ­ The Asymmetric Effects of US Monetary Policy on Sovereign Credit Risk
                                                      (6-day Changes in Portfolio Bond Yields )

                                                                          Conventional MPa                                           Unconventional MPb
      Dependent Variables                                   mUS,
                                                             t
                                                                 (+)
                                                                                mUS,
                                                                                 t
                                                                                     (- )
                                                                                                       R2                mUS,
                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                              (+)
                                                                                                                                             mUS,
                                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                  (- )
                                                                                                                                                                    R2
      Sovereign bond yield ­ IG                              1.33                0.48                 0.12               1.86                 1.52                 0.23
                                                            (0.41)              (0.15)                                  (1.25)               (0.39)
      Sovereign bond yield ­ SG                              2.49                1.61                 0.10              -0.75                 1.66                 0.05
                                                            (0.72)              (0.77)                                  (3.15)               (0.88)
      US Treasury yield ­ IG                                 1.01                0.21                 0.06               2.04                 1.19                 0.19
                                                            (0.34)              (0.17)                                  (0.90)               (0.31)
      US Treasury yield ­ SG                                 1.05                0.03                 0.06               2.10                 1.54                 0.23
                                                            (0.35)              (0.17)                                  (0.94)               (0.31)
25




      Memo : Implied credit spread responsec
      Credit spread ­ IG                                     0.32                0.27                                   -0.18                 0.34
                                                            (0.25)              (0.10)                                  (0.95)               (0.47)
      Credit spread ­ SG                                     1.44                1.58                                   -2.85                 0.12
                                                            (0.83)              (0.75)                                  (2.89)               (0.86)
      Note: In each specification, the dependent variable is a 6-day change (from day t - 1 to day t + 5) bracketing an FOMC announcement on day t in the specified
     bond portfolio yield: IG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with an investment-grade credit rating; and SG = portfolio of sovereign bonds with a speculative-grade
     credit rating. US Treasury (IG/SG) corresponds to a 6-day change in the yield on the portfolio of synthetic US Treasury securities of identical duration as the
                                                                                                                                             (+)          (-)
     sovereign bonds in the (IG/SG) portfolios. The entries denote the OLS estimates of the portfolio-specific response coefficients to mUS,
                                                                                                                                         t       and mUS,
                                                                                                                                                      t       , a positive and
     negative FOMC-induced surprises in the 2-year US Treasury yield, respectively. All specifications include a constant (not reported). Heteroskedasticity-consistent
     asymptotic standard errors are reported in parentheses: * p < .10; ** p < .05; and *** p < .01.
     a
       169 FOMC announcements (02/06/1992­12/15/2008 and 12/17/2015­03/20/2019).
     b
       65 FOMC announcements (12/16/2008­12/16/2015).
     c
       The response of the sovereign credit spreads for the IG and SG credit risk categories is computed as the difference between the estimated response of sovereign
     bond yields and the estimated response of US Treasury yields in the matched portfolio of US Treasuries in that credit risk category.
bonds is economically large and statistically significant across both easing and tightening policy
actions. Nonetheless, we find no difference in the size of the response for speculative-grade credit
spreads to policy easings versus tightenings, with both estimates implying a 150 basis point change
in speculative-grade credit spreads in response to a 100 basis point policy-induced increase in the
2-year US Treasury yield.
    Another way to examine this question is to ask whether the credit spread differential between
speculative- and investment-grade sovereign bonds responds more during monetary tightenings rel-
ative to easings. This can be seen by computing the differential response of the credit spreads
on investment- vs. speculative-grade sovereign bonds. The 6-day change results reported in Ta-
ble 8 imply the same point estimates for both investment- and speculative-grade bond portfolios
across monetary easings and tightenings. Specifically, the point estimates of 150 basis points for
speculative-grade bonds and 30 basis points for investment-grade bonds imply that the credit curve
widens by 120 basis points in response to a monetary tightening and narrows by the same amount
in response to a monetary easing. Therefore, we see no evidence of credit spread compression in
this dimension either.
    All told, these results clearly imply that during the conventional policy regime, US monetary
policy causes an economically important change in credit spreads for speculative-grade sovereign
credits that is on the order of 50 basis points--for a 100 basis point policy-induced change in the
2-year US Treasury yield--over a 2-day horizon and 150 basis points over a 6-day horizon. But we
find no evidence to suggest an asymmetric effect across policy easings versus policy tightenings. We
interpret this evidence as inconsistent with the view that US monetary policy has asymmetric effects
on international bond markets through a risk-taking channel that leads to spread compression on
risky sovereign in response to looser US monetary policy.


4    Conclusion
Our analysis of US monetary policy spillovers employs a large micro-level data set at the daily
frequency, consisting of almost 1,800 individual dollar-denominated sovereign securities traded in
the secondary market, which were issued by more than 90 countries since the early 1990s. Using this
rich data set, we analyze how US monetary policy affects sovereign bond portfolio yields--where
portfolios are defined by duration or credit risk--as well as bond-level credit spreads. We also
compare the effects of conventional US monetary policy actions with those of the unconventional
measures employed after the target federal funds rate hit the effective lower bound. By focusing
on the dollar-denominated sovereign bonds, we abstract from the confounding effects of policy-
induced movements in exchange rates and thus directly quantify the spillover effects of US monetary
policy on international bond markets through the so-called financial channel that is an important
determinant of sovereign credit risk.
    According to our findings, foreign bond yields are highly responsive to unanticipated changes
in the stance of US monetary policy during both the conventional and unconventional policy


                                                26
regimes. Conventional US monetary policy is transmitted very effectively to both shorter- and
longer-duration yields on dollar-denominated sovereign bonds. The spillover effects of conventional
US monetary policy across the portfolios of different durations are much more uniform compared
with the unconventional policy regime. Overall, the extent of spillovers from the US unconventional
monetary policy actions to foreign bond yields is, on balance, roughly similar to that estimated for
the conventional policy regime.
   We also document that conventional US monetary policy actions have an economically large
and statistically significant effect on credit spreads of dollar-denominated debt of countries with a
speculative-grade credit rating. Specifically, credit spreads on risky sovereign debt are estimated
to narrow significantly in response to an unanticipated US policy easing during the conventional
regime. In contrast, sovereign credit spreads for investment-grade countries do not respond to
conventional US monetary policy. During the unconventional policy regime, an unanticipated
easing of US monetary policy induces a decline in sovereign bond yields that is commensurate with
that of yields on a portfolio of comparable US Treasuries. Furthermore, our analysis indicates that
the unconventional policy actions undertaken by the FOMC during the 2008­15 period did not
affect, on average, the level of sovereign credit spreads across the credit quality spectrum. Lastly,
we find no evidence that US monetary policy tightenings and easings have an asymmetric effect on
foreign bond yields. This finding cast doubt on the popular notion that US monetary easings lead
to excessive risk-taking in international bond markets.



References
Albagli, E., L. Caballo, S. Claro, and D. Romero (2018): "Channels of US Monetary Policy
 Spillovers to International Bond Markets," Forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.

Bauer, M. D. and C. J. Neely (2014): "International Channels of the Fed's Unconventional
 Monetary Policy," Journal of International Money and Finance, 44, 24­46.

Bernanke, B. S. (2018): "Federal Reserve Policy in an International Context," IMF Economic
 Review, 65, 1­32.

Bernanke, B. S. and K. N. Kuttner (2005): "What Explains the Stock Market's Reaction to
 Federal Reserve Policy?" Journal of Finance, 60, 1221­1257.

Bowman, D., J. M. Londono, and H. Sapriza (2015): "U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy
 and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies," Journal of International Money and Finance,
 55, 27­29.

Bredin, D., S. J. Hyde, and G. P. O'Reilly (2010): "Monetary Policy Surprises and Interna-
 tional Bond Markets," Journal of International Money and Finance, 29, 988­1002.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2011): "Robust Inference with Multi-Way
 Clustering," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29, 238­249.



                                                 27
Chen, J., T. Mancini Griffoli, and R. Sahay (2014): "Spillovers from United States Monetary
 Policy on Emerging Markets: Different This Time?" IMF Working Paper No. 14-240.

Cochrane, J. and M. Piazzesi (2002): "The Fed and Interest Rates: A High-Frequency Iden-
 tification," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 92, 90­95.

D'Amico, S. and T. B. King (2013): "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases:
  Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply," Journal of Financial Economics, 108, 425­448.

Doornik, J. A. and H. Hansen (2008): "An Omnibus Test for Univariate and Multivariate
 Normality," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 70, 927­939.

Du, W., J. Im, and J. Schreger (2018): "The U.S. Treasury Premium," Journal of International
 Economics, 112, 167­181.

Ehrmann, M., M. Fratzscher, and R. Rigabon (2011): "Stocks, Bonds, Money Markets, and
 Exchange Rates: Measuring International Financial Transmission," Journal of Applied Econo-
 metrics, 26, 948­978.

Eichengreen, B. and A. Mody (2010): "What Explains Changing Spreads on Emerging-Market
  Debt: Fundamentals or Market Sentiment?" in The Economics of International Capital Flows,
  ed. by S. Edwards, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 107­134.

Fleming, M. J. (1962): "Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Under Floating Exchange
  Rates," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 9, 369­380.

Fratzscher, M., M. Lo Duca, and R. Straub (2014): "On the International Spillovers of
 U.S. Quantitative Easing," Economic Journal, 128, 330­377.

Gagnon, J., M. Raskin, J. Remache, and B. Sack (2011): "The Financial Market Effects of
 the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases," International Journal of Central Banking,
 7, 3­43.

Gagnon, J. E., T. Bayoumi, J. M. Londono, and C. Sabarowski (2017): "Direct and
 Spillover Effects of Unconventional Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies," Open Economies
 Review, 28, 191­232.

Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2015): "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic
 Activity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 44­76.
                   ´ pez-Salido, and E. Zakraj
Gilchrist, S., D. Lo                          sek (2015): "Monetary Policy and Real Bor-
 rowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7,
 77­109.

Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakraj sek (2012): "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,"
 American Economic Review, 102, 1692­1720.

------ (2013): "The Impact of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs on
  Corporate Credit Risk," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 45, 29­57.

Goldberg, L. S. (2013): "Banking Globalization, Transmission, and Monetary Policy Autonomy,"
 NBER Working Paper No. 19497.



                                             28
Greenlaw, D., J. D. Hamilton, E. Harris, and K. D. West (2018): "A Skeptical View of
 the Impact of the Fed's Balance Sheet," NBER Working Paper No. 24687.
 ¨ rkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. Swanson (2005): "Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words?
Gu
 The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements," International Journal
 of Central Banking, 1, 55­93.
 ¨ rkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and J. H. Wright (2007): "The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve: 1961
Gu
 to the Present," Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 2291­2304.

Hamilton, J. D. and J. C. Wu (2012): "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools
 in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 44, 3­46.

Hanson, S. G. and J. C. Stein (2015): "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates," Journal
 of Financial Economics, 115, 429­448.

Hausman, J. and J. Wongswan (2011): "Global Asset prices and FOMC Announcements,"
 Journal of International Money and Finance, 30, 547­571.

Justiniano, A., C. L. Evans, J. R. Campbell, and J. D. Fisher (2012): "Macroeconomic
  Effects of FOMC Forward Guidance," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 44, 1­80.

Kamin, S. B. and K. von Kleist (1999): "The Evolution and Determinants of Emerging Market
 Credit Spreads in the 1990s," BIS Quarterly Review, November, 36­44.

Klein, M. W. and J. C. Shambaugh (2015): "Rounding the Corners of the Policy Trilemma:
 Sources of Monetary Policy Autonomy," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 33­
 66.

Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2011): "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on
 Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
 Fall, 215­265.

Kuttner, K. N. (2001): "Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence From the Fed
 Funds Futures Market," Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 523­544.

Mundell, R. A. (1963): "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under Fixed and Flexible
 Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science, 29, 475­485.

Neely, C. J. (2015): "Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International Effects," Journal
 of Banking and Finance, 52, 101­111.

Neumeyer, P. A. and F. Perri (2005): "Business Cycles in Emerging Markets: The Role of
 Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 345­380.

Obstfeld, M. (2015): "Trilemma and Tradeoffs: Living with Financial Globalization," BIS Work-
 ing Paper Series No. 480.

Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (2002): "Global Implications of Self-Oriented National Monetary
 Rules," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 503­535.

Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh, and A. M. Taylor (2005): "The Trilemma in History:
 Tradeoffs Among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility," Review of Eco-
 nomics and Statistics, 97, 423­438.

                                              29
Rey, H. (2013): "Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
 Independence," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Proceedings ­ Economic Policy Symposium
 ­ Jackson Hole.

------ (2016): "International Channels of Transmission of Monetary Policy and the Mundellian
  Trilemma," IMF Economic Review, 64, 6­35.

Rogers, J. H., C. Scotti, and J. H. Wright (2014): "Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of
 Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison," Economic Policy, 29, 749­
 799.

Swanson, E. T. (2011): "Let's Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Op-
  eration Twist and Its Implications for QE2," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring,
  151­188.

Uribe, M. and V. Yue (2006): "Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives Whom?"
 Journal of International Economics, 69, 6­36.

Wright, J. H. (2012): "What Does Monetary Policy Do to Long-Term Interest Rates at the Zero
 Lower Bound?" Economic Journal, 122, F447­F466.




                                             30
Appendices ­ For Online Publication
A       Data Appendix

                 Table A-1 ­ LSAP-Related Unconventional Monetary Policy Actions

          Date       Timea FOMCb                                   Highlights
        11/25/2008   08:15   N      Announcement that starts LSAP-I.
        12/01/2008   08:15   N      Announcement indicating potential purchases of Treasury securities.
        12/16/2008   14:20   Y      Target federal funds is lowered to its effective lower bound; statement
                                    indicating that the Federal Reserve is considering using its balance sheet
                                    to further stimulate the economy; first reference to forward guidance:
                                    "... economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of
                                    the federal funds rate for some time."
        01/28/2009   14:15   Y      "Disappointing" FOMC statement because of its lack of concrete language
                                    regarding the possibility and timing of purchases of longer-term Treasuries.
        03/18/2009   14:15   Y      Announcement to purchase Treasuries and increase the size of purchases of
                                    agency debt and agency MBS; also, first reference to extended period:
                                    "interests rates are likely to remain low for an extended period."
        08/10/2010   14:15   Y      Announcement that starts LSAP-II.
        09/21/2010   14:15   Y      Announcement reaffirming the existing reinvestment policy.
        11/03/2010   14:15   Y      Announcement of additional purchases of Treasury securities.
        09/21/2011   14:15   Y      Announcement of the Maturity Extension Program (MEP).
        06/20/2012   12:30   Y      Announcement of continuation of the MEP through end of 2012.
        09/13/2012   12:30   Y      Third "calendar-based" forward guidance: "likely maintain the Federal
                                    funds rate near zero at least through mid-2015." In addition, first forward
                                    guidance regarding the pace of interest rates after lift-off: "likely
                                    maintain low rates for a considerable time after the economic recovery
                                    strengthens," and announcement of LSAP-III (flow-based; $40 billion per
                                    month of agency MBS).
        12/12/2012   12:30   Y      Announcement of an increase in LSAP-III (from $40 billion to $85 billion
                                    per month);
                                    first "threshold-based" forward guidance: maintain the funds rate near zero
                                    for as long as unemployment is above 6.5%, inflation (1­2 years ahead) is
                                    below 2.5%, and long-term inflation expectations remain well-anchored.
    a
     All announcements are at Eastern Standard Time.
    b
     Y = an announcement associated with a regularly-schedule FOMC meeting; N = an intermeeting policy
    announcement.




                                                      31
                         Table A-2 ­ Sample Composition

Country Name         Country Code   Start Date    End Date     No. of Bonds   Obs.
 United Kingdom          GBR         07/30/2009   03/06/2013        7          2,636
 Austria                 AUT         05/19/2004   05/30/2014       15         10,258
 Belgium                 BEL         01/02/1992   03/29/2019       23         28,624
 Denmark                 DNK         07/30/2009   05/30/2014        8          2,976
 Italy                   ITA         01/02/1992   03/29/2014       50         59,319
 Netherlands             NLD         02/24/2012   05/30/2014        4          1,986
 Norway                  NOR         01/02/1992   04/12/1996        2          1,990
 Sweden                  SWE         01/02/2001   03/29/2019       54         29,119
 Canada                  CAN         02/14/2012   03/29/2019        5          2,078
 Japan                   JPN         01/02/1992   05/30/2014       75         92,718
 Finland                 FIN         01/02/1992   03/29/2019       29         25,979
 Greece                  GRC         05/24/1994   09/12/2011       21          9,406
 Iceland                  ISL        01/02/2001   05/30/2014        6          3,902
 Ireland                  IRL        01/02/1992   07/14/2009        6          8,550
 Portugal                PRT         09/08/1999   03/29/2019        5          5,367
 Spain                   ESP         09/23/1992   05/30/2014       15         13,720
 Turkey                  TUR         05/05/1992   03/29/2019       45         61,581
 Australia               AUS         07/30/2009   05/30/2014        1          1,208
 New Zealand             NZL         01/02/1992   05/30/2014       10         15,203
 South Africa            ZAF         12/12/1994   03/29/2019       18         28,796
 Argentina               ARG         10/01/1992   03/29/2019       29         23,548
 Bolivia                 BOL         10/29/2012   03/29/2019        6          2,190
 Brazil                  BRA         04/18/1994   03/29/2019       33         62,820
 Chile                   CHL         10/16/2001   03/29/2019        8          8,379
 Colombia                COL         10/11/1996   03/29/2019       24         48,541
 Costa Rica              CRI         07/30/2009   03/29/2019        9          9,066
 El Salvador             SLV         10/25/2002   03/29/2019        7          8,302
 Guatemala               GTM         06/06/2012   05/30/2014        4          1,638
 Honduras                HND         03/15/2013   05/30/2014        4           834
 Mexico                  MEX         03/01/1993   03/29/2019       30         43,750
 Panama                  PAN         03/11/1997   03/29/2019       15         27,731
 Paraguay                PRY         01/25/2013   03/29/2019        4          2,988
 Peru                    PER         11/26/2002   03/29/2019        9         17,068
 Uruguay                 URY         11/18/2005   03/29/2019        6          6,813
 Venezuela               VEN         01/02/1992   03/29/2019       29         46,946
 Bahamas                 BHS         11/20/2009   05/30/2014        4          2,446
 Barbados                BRB         01/02/2001   05/30/2014        5          2,078
 Bermuda                 BMU         07/20/2010   05/30/2014        6          3,292
 Jamaica                 JAM         12/19/2001   03/29/2014       10         15,355
 Trinidad & Tobago       TTO         01/02/2009   03/29/2019        5          2,904
 Cayman Islands          CYM         11/24/2009   05/30/2014        2          2,255
 South Korea             KOR         04/09/1998   03/29/2019       62         66,626
 Cyprus                  CYP         01/29/1998   06/25/2001        1           854
 Lebanon                 LBN         06/02/2014   03/29/2019       15         12,194
 Israel                   ISR        03/10/2000   03/29/2019       454        492,385
 Bahrain                 BHR         06/02/2014   03/29/2019       14         13,162
 Jordan                  JOR         11/12/2010   03/29/2019       10          7,799
 Quatar                  QAT         04/09/2009   03/29/2019       27         27,873
 Kuwait                  KWT         03/20/2017   03/29/2019        4          2,032
 Saudi Arabia            SAU         10/26/2016   03/29/2019       18          6,898
 Oman                    OMN         06/15/2016   03/29/2019       16          7,648
 Iraq                    IRQ         06/02/2014   03/29/2019        5          3,782
 Egypt                   EGY         07/02/2001   03/29/2019       25         16,834
 Sri Lanka               LKA         11/04/2010   03/29/2019       21         18,445
 Hong Kong, China        HKG         07/22/2004   07/31/2013        2          4,516




                                         32
                         Table A-2 ­ Sample Composition (continued)

Country Name                   Country Code    Start Date     End Date      No. of Bonds      Obs.
  India                            IND          02/25/2004     05/30/2014         14          13,163
  Indonesia                        IDN          03/10/2004     03/29/2019         63          75,691
  Malaysia                         MYS          05/28/1999     07/14/2010          2          4,505
  Pakistan                         PAK          02/12/2004     03/29/2019         11          12,507
  Philippines                      PHL          11/23/1996     03/29/2019         25          44,461
  Thailand                         THA          12/23/2005     09/28/2012          1          1,694
  Viet Nam                         VNM          11/03/2005     03/29/2019          6          8,629
  Angola                           AGO          11/12/2015     03/29/2019          6          2,576
  Ghana                            GHA          07/26/2013     03/29/2019         10          7,666
  Gabon                            GHA          06/02/2014     03/29/2019          2          2,414
  Ethiopia                         ETH          12/11/2014     03/29/2019          2          2,148
  Kenya                            KEN          06/24/2014     03/29/2019          6          3,466
  Ivory Coast                      CIV          03/03/2015     03/29/2019          4          2,934
  Nigeria                          NGA          02/16/2017     03/29/2019         14          3,834
  Morocco                          MAR          11/12/2012     03/29/2019          2          3,148
  Senegal                          SEN          05/06/2011     03/29/2019          7          3,627
  Namibia                          NAM          11/03/2011     05/30/2014          2          1,282
  Zambia                           ZMB          06/02/2014     03/29/2019          4          4,246
  Fiji                              FJI         07/30/2009     05/30/2014          2          1,083
  Belarus                          BLR          08/03/2010     05/30/2014          2          1,792
  Albania                          ALB          11/01/2010     05/30/2014          1           894
  Azerbaijan                       AZE          06/02/2014     03/29/2019          4          3,196
  Georgia                          GEO          10/06/2010     05/30/2014          3          1,946
  Kazakhstan                       KAZ          12/11/1996     03/29/2019         13          13,183
  Bulgaria                         BGR          04/10/2002     01/14/2014          2          5,884
  Russian Federation               RUS          11/22/1996     03/29/2019         37          51,946
  People's Republic of China       PRC          07/05/1996     03/29/2019          8          7,419
  Ukraine                          UKR          11/20/2001     03/29/2019         55          43,950
  Latvia                           LVA          06/16/2011     05/30/2014          6          3,344
  Hungary                          HUN          02/03/2005     03/29/2019          9          12,911
  Lithuania                        LTU          10/15/2009     03/29/2019          9          15,017
  Mongolia                         MNG          12/05/2012     03/29/2019          4          3,898
  Croatia                          HRV          02/12/1997     03/29/2019         13          20,577
  Slovenia                         SVN          07/25/1996     03/29/2019         11          7,419
  Slovakia                         SVK          06/02/2014     03/29/2019          2          2,414
  Poland                           POL          06/30/1995     03/29/2019         11          19,366
  Serbia                           SRB          07/15/2013     03/29/2019          7          5,904
  Romania                          ROU          02/07/2012     03/29/2019         10          12,018

Note: No. of bonds = 1,748; No. of countries = 95; Obs. = 1,888,320. Bonds in default are excluded.




                                                33
