                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           WHITELASHING: BLACK POLITICIANS, TAXES, AND VIOLENCE

                                      Trevon D. Logan

                                     Working Paper 26014
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26014


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




I thank Lee Alston, Rodney J. Andrews, Renee Bowen, Gregory A. Caldeira, John J. Clegg,
William Collins, Lisa D. Cook, Stanley L. Engerman, Megan Ming Francis, Vicky Fouka,
Stephen Hahn, Anna Harvey, Kimberly Johnson, Damon Jones, Suresh Naidu, John M. Parman,
Jon Pritchett, Richard H. Steckel, Melissa Thomasson, Ebonya L. Washington, Gavin Wright,
audiences at Washington, Harvard, Alabama, WEAI and APSA for feedback and suggestions.
Eric Bloomfield, Jacob Ginsberg, Isaac Kebe, Spencer LaHue, Matthew Mahoney, Alan
McClain, Adaeze Okoli, Tiara Shanklin, Taylor Smith, and Rachel Williams provided excellent
research assistance. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Trevon D. Logan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Whitelashing: Black Politicians, Taxes, and Violence
Trevon D. Logan
NBER Working Paper No. 26014
June 2019
JEL No. H2,H7,J10,N3,N90,R1,R51

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper provides the first evidence of the effect of tax policy on the likelihood of violent
attacks against black politicians. I find a strong positive effect of local tax revenue on subsequent
violence against black politicians. A dollar increase in per capita county taxes increases the
likelihood of a violent attack by more than 25%. The result is robust to numerous economic,
social, historical, and political factors. I also find that counties where black officeholders were
attacked had the largest negative tax revenue changes between 1870 and 1880 and that violence
against black politicians is unrelated to other forms of post-Reconstruction racial violence. This
provides the first quantitative evidence that political violence at Reconstruction's end was related
to black political efficacy.


Trevon D. Logan
The Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 N. High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
logan.155@osu.edu
"Through their constant vilification of blacks, carpetbaggers, scalawags, and Reconstruction, the "old
political leaders" fostered a climate that condoned violence as a legitimate weapon in the struggle for
Redemption."
                               - Eric Foner, Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, (1988)



1       Introduction

Is there a relationship between political violence and public finance? This paper explores the potential
link between violence and tax policy in the United States from Reconstruction to the end of the
nineteenth century. This period featured a range of violence that was particularly racialized. In the
American South, white conservatives sought to use terrorism to return to the racial social order that
prevailed during chattel slavery. This campaign of fear and intimidation found political support not
only as racialized public policy, but also as a stand against black enfranchisement, black political
leadership, expanded federal authority, and an altered public finance structure which followed the
Civil War. While claims of excessive taxation were common and feature prominently in the narrative
record, there has been little empirical analysis of the role of tax policy on political violence at the
time.
    Before the Civil War, the range of public goods in the South was relatively small and the tax
rates were low. Wealth and political inequality were pronounced, with a small number of whites
controlling the majority of wealth as well as the political infrastructure (Merritt, 2017; Ager, 2013).
Following the Civil War, black enfranchisement led to the election of black officeholders who pursued a
dramatically different policy agenda, with local taxes financing public schools, repairs and construction
of public works projects, and humanitarian aid. The resistance of whites to these policies was highly
organized. Political organization took the form of Taxpayer conventions, rifle clubs, the Ku Klux
Klan, and other groups which sought to intimidate voters, press local officials for detailed accounts
of public expenditures, and used local media to characterize elected officials as corrupt and wasteful.
Violence was also used as a tool to political ends. Estimates claim that more than 50,000 African
American were murdered by the time Reconstruction ended in 1877, with more than a third of the
murders politically motivated (Egerton, 2014).
    Given the changes in enfranchisement, blacks in policymaking positions, white claims of excessive

                                                   2
taxation, and politically motivated violence, the historical narrative has been unable to establish clear
links between these factors. While new research suggests that black officials were causally related to
taxes (Logan, 2018), the relationship between taxes and political violence during Reconstruction is
unknown. On one hand, it could be the case that racial violence was so general that it was unrelated to
variation in local taxes. On the other hand, violence could be more likely in places where blacks held
positions of influence or, more specifically, in places where they pursued more aggressive tax policies.
Unfortunately, a full accounting of racial violence during Reconstruction is not possible, and discerning
the intent of specific documented violence is difficult and unresolved among historians (Foner, 2014;
White, 2017). Nevertheless, scholars continue to draw inference on racial violence and policy during
the Reconstruction era, though there have been very few empirical tests of this relationship.
   This paper provides the first estimates of the relationship between Reconstruction-era tax policy
and the violent attacks against politicians. Using unique data on black politicians, political violence,
and local tax revenue, I find that areas with higher local per capita tax revenue were much more likely
to have violent acts committed against black policymakers. Overall, the likelihood of a violent attack
increased by more than 25% for each additional dollar in per capita tax revenue collected in 1870. Even
when restricting the analysis to counties with black representation, larger tax revenues were strongly
correlated with an increased likelihood of a violent attack against black policymakers. Additional
specifications show that the relationship is robust­ controls for a variety of county characteristics,
antebellum aspects of the slave economy, and black voter registration do not alter the relationship
in any substantive way. As a further check that this violence was related specifically to tax policy, I
show that general racial violence in the post-Reconstruction period, as proxied by black lynching, is
not related to violence against black politicians. This is the first evidence that black politicians were
more likely to be victimized in places with more aggressive public finance.
   This paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, this study adds the element of
violence to the literature on ethnic and racial divisions and public finance (Alesina et al., 1999;
Hopkins, 2009). Previous studies of political violence have concentrated on expanding welfare policy
and black civil unrest in the 20th century (see Button (1978), Fording (2001), and Wilkinson (2009)
as examples). Little research has investigated white political violence directed at black political


                                                   3
leaders. More generally, most work on political conflict concentrates on war, ethnic conflict, and
legislative processes such as gerrymandering (as in Fearon and Laitin (2003)). Works that analyze
specific violence tend to concentrate on assassinations of national leaders (Jones and Olken, 2009).
This study shows that violent acts against policymakers were strongly related to tax policies and were
pronounced at the local level.
   Second, the results here add to the growing literature on black policymakers during Reconstruction
and violence. Williams (2017) finds that lynching in the late nineteenth century (after Reconstruc-
tion's end) depresses contemporary black voter turnout. Jones et al. (2012) find that formal voting
restrictions were complementary to violence in depressing African American voter turnout, while
Chacon and Jensen (2017) and Suryanarayan and White (2019) concentrate on Union military oc-
cupation. Cook et al. (2018), however, find no relationship between lynching and black politicians
during Reconstruction. This paper adds the missing channel of public finance as a mechanism for
politically motivated racial violence, and rationalizes the contradictory findings in the literature.
   Third, this paper adds a quantitative assessment of the relationship between tax policy and violence
directed towards black policymakers. Scholars such as Du Bois (1935); Foner (2014); Franklin (1961);
Hahn (2005) and others have discussed the positive role of black politicians during Reconstruction.
The results here suggests that black politicians were successful to the extent that violence was used
against them. Even when restricting analysis to the areas with black officeholders, the areas with
more aggressive tax policy were significantly more likely to be places of violent attacks.
   Finally, this paper speaks to an omitted element of political economy in American political and
economic development. Aggressive tax policy in the South was likely to be met with violence, and
the political distinction of the American South, with fewer public goods, lower tax rates, and high
levels of inequality, could have their roots in Reconstruction era political violence (Hardy et al., 2018;
Rodden, 2010; Acharya et al., 2016; Glaser, 1994; Suryanarayan and White, 2019). I find that areas
with violence against black politicians had the largest reversions of tax policy between 1870 and 1880.
This would link such violence to a larger goal of Southern redemption­ to curtail the expansion of
federal powers, restrict the range and scope of public goods provision in the South, decrease tax rates,
and to use political violence when necessary to achieve that end.


                                                    4
2     Reconstruction and Violence

One key issue facing any policymaker during Reconstruction in the South was public finance (An-
derson, 1943). The antebellum tax base in some Southern states was predicated on slavery. In
Louisiana, for example, slaves accounted for between one-third and one-half of the tax base. Given
that the majority of Civil War battles were fought in the South, there was infrastructure repair that
placed additional demands on public finance. The humanitarian needs of the formerly enslaved were
not fully addressed at the federal level and required local public support. The historical narrative has
established that black politicians played a key role in altering the scale and scope of public financing
in the South after Reconstruction (Du Bois, 1935; Foner, 2014; Franklin, 1961; Hahn, 2005; Logan,
2018).
    Taxation and the expansion of government services were racially politicized in the South. The
popular opinion among whites was that new programs benefited blacks disproportionately. Egerton
(2014) details how Southern newspapers predicted that black officials would enact aggressive tax
policy to support public services targeted at blacks. On the issue of schooling, one of the largest
categories of local expenditures, the racist rhetoric was particularly pronounced. Sterling (1994) notes
the resistance that local whites had to funds for school buildings and teacher salaries, Holt (1977)
describes how Republicans began to propose cuts to schools to secure white support, and Williamson
(1986) and others have documented the dramatic declines in school funding which followed. It is
important to note that the resistance to school financing was not only do to the expense but to
the race of the schooled­ the belief that blacks were unfit for education led many to conclude that
educational expenditures on blacks were particularly wasteful. Fitzgerald (2007) notes that whites
"grudged every penny assessed on them for building school-houses and paying teachers, as though
they were thrown into the sea" (p. 85).
    Taxes nearly doubled between 1860 and 1870, and given the tax system at the time the majority
of the tax burden fell on white landowners (Fitzgerald, 2007). While these taxes were for relatively
new public goods such as schooling, infrastructure, railroads, public assistance, and the like, there
was an immediate backlash against the change in tax rates. In South Carolina, Democrats organized
the first Taxpayers' Convention in 1871. They demanded a full accounting of state appropriations

                                                   5
and also popularized the idea that black politicians and their sympathizers were levying heavy taxes
as a means to redistribute wealth. The publicity generated from the convention helped to fuel the
narrative of a government unrepresentative of the population and rife with corruption. States such as
Texas and Mississippi, for example, quickly organized Taxpayers' Conventions with the same aims.
   Resistance to black enfranchisement and Reconstruction was particularly violent at the local level.
The backlash against these policy changes was nestled in an antebellum past which featured racial
violence and a political regime where taxes were low and public goods relatively few. As Rable
(2007) notes, it would be simplistic to connect all racial crime to politics or racism during this time.
At the same time, the politics of Reconstruction gave rise to a class of black leaders whose very
presence violated the racist belief that blacks were inferior. Attacks on black voters, black officials,
and Republican sympathizers were common (Valelly, 2004).
   Violence was so rampant early in the Reconstruction era that the Grant administration took
action on violence and voter intimidation through the Enforcement Acts, which were passed in 1870
and 1871. The acts made it a federal crime to prevent or obstruct voting, from barring those not
constitutionally excluded from holding office to be allowed to serve, and gave the federal government
authority to prosecute cases. In situations where violence was acute, such as race riots, the acts
specifically suspended habeas corpus. Additional sections of the acts were direct responses to the
strategies employed by the Ku Klux Klan, and gave federal authorities power to prosecute violent
acts as well as conspiracies to intimidate voters or fix elections. The acts were effective in leading to
prosecution of the Ku Klux Klan, the establishment of black voting, and the creation of a class of
black officeholders in the early years of Reconstruction (Foner, 2014).
   These gains were short lived. After the 1872 election cycle, the relationship between violence
and politics was revived and extended. Egerton (2014) notes that one third of all of the race riots
in 1873 occurred the week before a local election. Rifle clubs and other civic-named organizations
sprang up throughout the South to intimidate voters and threaten local officials over policy. While
contemporary news reports concentrated on corruption, historians now conclude that one of the
chief goals of violence was to oust Republican leaders and lower taxes, particularly those earmarked
for education. Democrats routinely signaled education expenditures, which were controlled by local


                                                   6
officials, as an area rife with corruption (Foner, 2014; Williamson, 1965; Rable, 2007; Egerton, 2014).
       Violence became part of the Democratic electoral strategy by the early 1870s. In Louisiana,
Mississippi, South Carolina, and Florida the black population share was enough to ensure significant
Republican representation. Locally prominent blacks began to fear for their livelihoods and safety
given the increasing levels of violence. In response, they began to organize and collect information on
violence. The secret committee, which forbade politicians from joining, was formed to cataloged the
violence as best they could throughout the South (White, 2017). They recorded information on more
than 500 violent attacks. At the same time, federal presence in the area dwindled to less than 500
troops in Florida by 1872, making violence a very real and efficient option to gain political control.
At the other end of the spectrum, "White Men's Clubs" in Mississippi, which had been active since
1870, kept "dead books" that listed black Republicans. The goal was to monitor local black political
activity and target elites for intimidation. They organized and patrolled roads on election day to
suppress the vote and refused to employ blacks who voted Republican.
       One salient example can be found in the Colfax Massacre of 1873, which eventually provided legal
cover for overt black voter intimidation. The contested 1872 elections in Grant Parish, Louisiana,
resulted in blacks being seated in the offices of judge and sheriff. Blacks seized control of the courthouse
to take office and were attacked by whites on Easter Sunday, April 13, 1873. Even after the blacks
in the courthouse raised a white flag of surrender, whites continued cannon and rifle fire. After the
courthouse was seized by whites, it was burned with blacks still inside. Many of the blacks fleeing the
fire were led off two by two to be shot dead. The death toll is believed to be somewhere above 100 slain
in the massacre. Attempts to prosecute the perpetrators under the Enforcement Act led to the United
States v. Cruikshank decision of 1876 which disallowed federal prosecution of conspiracy charges under
the Enforcement Acts. This left gangs of armed whites essentially immune from prosecution, and the
decision emboldened whites in Southern states to re-double their efforts to intimidate black voters
(Rable, 2007; Valelly, 2004; Foner, 2014). Even before the Supreme Court decision, however, the die
had been cast in Louisiana­ whites seized control of counties and forced black officials to resign from
their elected offices (Rable, 2007).1
   1
    Rable (2007) notes that as much as one third of the murders in Louisiana during that time period are thought to
be politically motivated.


                                                        7
   The strategy of violence for political aims followed the 1874 "Alabama Plan" described by Rable
(2007). Democrats in Alabama abandoned any hope of securing black votes and instead labeled
themselves a "white man's party" while publicly issuing a call to end violence as a means to attract
moderate white support. Sympathetic white newspapers filled with stories of blacks being trained to
take up arms, with little evidence that any of this occurred. In the Alabama black belt, for example,
the tactics ranged from preventing Republicans from assembling (Eutaw county), murder of locally
prominent politicians (Sumter county), intimidation of black voters in the form of forcing them to
vote for Democrats or lose their jobs (Barbour county), forcing blacks to leave polling stations with-
out voting (Mobile county), having whites cross the border from neighboring states to cast ballots,
and preventing Republicans who won their elections from raising their bonds and therefore allowing
defeated Democrats into those offices by default. The general strategy was not to incite total vio-
lence, which would increase the prospects of Congressional or military intervention, but to intimidate
black voters to alter election outcomes. Even with this, the Attorney General in Alabama publicly
stated that anyone could murder a Republican for political intimidation without fear of punishment
(Bellesiles, 2010).
   This activity was illegal under the Enforcement Acts at the time, but by the mid-1870s Con-
gressional will to root out voter intimidation and racial violence had largely ended. Congressional
investigations into the 1874 elections in Alabama determined that "Democrats had used force to over-
turn the state's Republican majority" (Rable 2007, p. 118), but did not act on the issue. The state of
Alabama itself did not move to investigate independently nor act on the results of the Congressional
investigation. The political strategy of Redemption now had a successful template. This plan was
adopted used in Mississippi in 1875, when terroristic attacks by Redshirts, a paramilitary arm of the
Democratic party, and widespread voter intimidation brought Democrats to a significant majority.
In that election cycle, activists and were specifically targeted to decrease black voter turnout, and
high-profile individuals were targeted to serve as a warning for others of the dangers of being politi-
cally active. By the time of the United States v. Cruikshank ruling in 1876 the use of violence and
intimidation was a de facto policy throughout the South. The elections of 1876 featured rampant
"fraud, intimidation, and terrorism in the South that returned the region to conservative control and


                                                  8
restored blacks to a condition more resembling serfdom than freedom" (Rable 2007, p. 185).
   Despite the continued use of military occupation and martial law in the South, attempts to have
federal authorities intervene were not well organized. When violence erupted in Mississippi in 1875,
for example, President Grant agreed to send troops only if Mississippi could raise its own militia.
This exacerbated the problem of violence because the white mobs and rifle clubs were typically well
armed, and black militias often lacked basic ammunition (White, 2017). Even more, the violence
went undeterred. In South Carolina, armed whites, who brought their own cannon, attacked the
predominantly black town of Hamburg in July of 1876, killing five men and pillaging the town. The
mayor, following an investigation, issued arrest warrants for 87 men believed to be responsible for the
violence. One of the indicted, Matthew Butler, was made a state senator that same year. Another,
Benjamin Tillman, would become governor of South Carolina a short time later (White, 2017).
   Election day in 1876 featured a number of first in the United States. It was the first time that the
nation held a common election day. It also featured the highest white participation rate in the South
at that time or since. In South Carolina, more white votes were casts than white adult males in the
state (White, 2017), and more than 150 blacks were murdered during the campaign (Lemann, 2007).
When Hayes emerged as the President after the disputed election, the withdrawal of all federal forces
from the South was met with a promise to protect black civil rights (Riddleberger, 1960). It was in
vain. States repudiated the debt incurred under Republican leadership and curtailed the ability of
local bodies to levy taxes. By the election of 1878, Hayes himself noted that there was "atrocious"
violence throughout the South. Black political participation was already stymied­ none of the three
Republicans elected from the South that year served in majority black districts.
   Estimates of the exact range of violence vary. In Florida, the Secretary of State Jonathan Gibbs
estimated that more than 150 blacks had been assassinated between 1868 and 1871, and that more
than 50,000 blacks had been murdered in the South by 1887 (Egerton, 2014). While a complete
accounting is impossible, Congressional testimony and local accounts in newspapers speak to the
profound regularity of racial violence in the South during this time, and a significant portion was
politically motivated. Black voter turnout declined more than 20% between the late 1860s and the
1880s (Egerton, 2014). By the last decade of the nineteenth century black school funding was reduced


                                                  9
substantially, taxes were decreased, and the range of public goods offered in the South again stood in
stark contrast to the rest of the nation.



3     The Question of Political Violence and Public Finance

This paper narrows the focus of the relationship between public finance and political violence: was
the violence visited upon black politicians in the Reconstruction era related to the public finance
policies in their local communities? Racial violence took many forms in the South, and a relationship
between all violence and public finance could reflect a spurious relationship. Violence in places with
more aggressive taxation could be driven by a number of factors, and violence could serve multiple
purposes­ voter intimidation, a check on local politicians' prerogatives, or more generally violent
reaction to black leadership and political power. Similarly, the lack of a correlation between overall
violence and tax policy could obscure a relationship that would be driven by specific actors or policy.
    A related concern is that a complete cataloging of violent acts during Reconstruction is not pos-
sible, making an answer to the general question impossible. There are now studies which look at
military occupation during Reconstruction and political effects (Chacon and Jensen, 2017; Stewart
and Kitchens, 2017), but military occupation at the time was a political decision that showed strong
temporal trends as Reconstruction advanced (Foner, 2014; Franklin, 1961). In some instances, troop
deployment was sent to prevent violence and in other instances to respond to the aftermath of a riot.
In other instances, it was not sent at all. Indeed, Grant became increasingly reluctant to use military
force as Reconstruction continued, which only served to embolden resistance (Foner, 2014; Egerton,
2014; Rable, 2007). Similarly, Congressional testimony of Reconstruction violence was politically con-
structed, focused on riots and other large-scale events, and designed to stress the need for continued
military occupation. As such, the selection issues using military presence and reports of violence in
Congressional testimony may go in a variety of directions.
    We do have better and more complete data on black officeholders, as well as information on
whether or not they were victims of violence. Similarly, there is a narrative record establishing that
tax reform was a key goal in Redemption. Given that taxes were set by local policymakers, a refined



                                                  10
hypothesis would center on black political leaders and local public finance. More specifically, what
was the role of taxation in the likelihood of attacks on black politicians?
       While inherently an empirical question, the historical narrative gives alternative answers to the
question. First, the expansion of the Ku Klux Klan and political violence preceded the establishment
of Reconstruction governments, making it unlikely that all violent acts were due to politics as opposed
to attempts to re-establish antebellum racial hierarchies (Fitzgerald, 2007; Russ, 1934a,b). Even
though poor whites in particular benefited from the expansion of public goods during Reconstruction,
attempts to educate those voters on the benefits "had only limited effect on the mass of farmers,
whose wartime and racial loyalties were nearly impervious to economic arguments" (Fitzgerald 2007,
p. 99). This suggests that racial hatred could have been a guiding principle more than the role of
public finance and taxation.2 Related to this is that the majority of the tax burden was borne by
relatively few whites given the high levels of inequality at the time (Ager, 2013), making it less likely
that widespread violence, even in the name of politics and excessive taxation, would be related to
taxes.
       One aspect of the racial nature of the Redemption is that white Southern populists were vocal in
their opposition to any black political power or enfranchisement. Fitzgerald (2007), Rable (2007), and
Lemann (2007) claim that political arguments over "excessive" taxation were related to increasing Klu
Klux Klan activity and overt acts of racial intimidation, many of which were aimed at black voters and
officeholders. Political violence was needed in areas where Democratic victory required a suppressed
black vote (Foner, 2014). If this is true, there could be a link between black voting and politically
motivated violence, but not a link between taxation and violence against black officeholders.
       Despite the appeals to states' rights, Redemption featured strong federalism in public finance
when it limited black political prerogatives. This is consistent with the political ideology which led
to succession, which Dew (2002) argues which was less related to political concerns as opposed to
hostility to blacks. Similarly, Jones et al. (2012) show that informal forms of voter suppression were
effective deterrents to black political participation after Reconstruction's end. If voter suppression
   2
    See Merritt (2017) for more on landless antebellum whites and their political organization. She argues that
Reconstruction was a successful alteration of racial relations where blacks were subjected to a harsher type of treatment
which was regularly visited upon landless whites in the antebellum era.



                                                           11
was more likely to be effective via violence to black political leaders, we could see a link to voters and
violence, but not one that would work through nor be related to taxes. Given the general nature of
racial animus at the time and the extent of violence directed towards African Americans generally, it
may not be the case that tax revenues led to more or fewer politician attacks.
        Casual empirics, however, suggests that there could be a link. Louisiana was one of the most
violent states during Reconstruction, and it also had taxes which were twice the regional average
(Bellesiles, 2010). State level relationships obscure the fact that local taxation varied considerably,
and was related to the presence of black politicians (Logan, 2018). If black officeholders, who were
related to larger tax revenues, were more likely to be attacked it could be the case that this was
a function of black officeholding, but not an effect of taxes. Therefore the more specific empirical
question is whether, conditional on having black officeholders, black officeholders in locations with
higher taxes were more likely to be victims of violent attacks.



4         Data and Empirical Strategy

4.1        Data

Information on black policymakers comes from Foner (1996), which is the most comprehensive source
of black officeholders during Reconstruction. While not a complete catalog of every black officeholder
during Reconstruction, which would be impossible, Foner (1996) contains the entries of all major
officials and the supermajority of black officials ("all the major black officials at the national and
state levels and a majority of local officeholders") during Reconstruction.3 As noted by Foner (1996),
they had "control over such matters as public expenditures, poor relief, the administration of justice,
and taxation policy, local officials had a real impact on the day-to-day lives of all Southerners" (p.
xxvi).
        One concern is selection in the officials appearing in Foner (1996) which would be correlated with
    3
    As one sign of its comprehensive nature, there have been few subsequent additions to the list compiled in Foner
(1996) since its revised publication, which added 48 officials from the first edition, deleted three white politicians, and
corrected the biographies of several entries. See Hahn (2005) for information on political leadership more broadly,
which includes Union League officials, Republican Party officials, journalists, and prominent community organizers.




                                                            12
their political success. The historiography of Reconstruction, however, strongly suggests that this
would not be the case. The existing scholarship about the known black politicians was often incorrect
and narratives about the illiteracy and poverty of the black politicians continued to be repeated in
the historical narrative until the archival work in Foner (1996) and other histories were compiled.
Indeed, the histories of Reconstruction that noted black officials did so derisively­ Coulter (1968), for
example, described black officials in Georgia as swindlers who could not read, although the majority
were literate. Black officials were not included as examples of political effectiveness but most often
as prime examples of incompetence and unfitness for office (Dunning, 1907; McPherson, 1875).
   The data compiled by Foner includes not only the name and position held, but also the place of
officeholding. Figure 1 shows the map of black officeholders by county. As the figure shows, there is a
great deal of variation within states of the number of black officeholders. Of special note, Tennessee
was not required to call a new state constitutional convention under the Reconstruction Act of 1867
as it had ratified the Fourteenth Amendment prior to the passage of the Reconstruction Acts. The
majority of black officeholders began their service before 1870, and on average were out of office by
1874.
   Additional information on officeholders includes term in office and additional information for of-
ficeholders that could be determined in Census records and contemporaneous sources such as their
occupation, literacy, and slave status at birth. Table 1 shows summary statistics for the black politi-
cians. The majority of officials held legislative positions, were literate (64%), and a large number
owned significant property (23%). More than 10% were victims of violence.
   Violence visited upon officials and coded as violence ranges from threats of death to murder. For
example, George Barber of South Carolina fled his home in Fairfield County, South Carolina over Ku
Klux Klan (KKK) death threats in 1871. James Alston and hid family were threatened by the Ku
Klux Klan in 1869, and wounded by them two years later. Theophilus Steward of Georgia received
death threats after he asserted that juries should involve both black and white citizens. Charles
Caldwell of Mississippi was murdered in 1875, months after he escaped an armed mob by fleeing to
Jackson, MS. Simon Corker of South Carolina was killed in 1876 by Democrats in the Ellerton riot­
he was kneeling in prayer after being captured. The violence variable capturers the very real and


                                                   13
present threat of violence.
       County level information comes from the 1870 and 1880 census as well as electoral return data
at the county level (Haines and ICPSR, 2005; Clubb et al., 2006; ICPSR, 1999; Atack, 2016).4 The
focus on county taxes is due to the fact that very few municipalities collected any taxes in either
1870 nor 1880. For historical public finance, county tax revenue is the key metric for within-state
variation (Sylla, 1986).5 For example, in Alabama fewer than 20% of the counties reported any local
or municipal taxes. Out of all municipal taxes collected in Alabama, more than 80% came from two
urban counties, Mobile and Montgomery. Other southern states followed a similar pattern of very
little municipal taxation.
       Table 2 shows the summary statistics of county-level information. It shows means by whether the
county had a black officeholder, and whether or not an officeholder met with violence. Nearly one third
of all Southern counties had a black officeholder during Reconstruction. For the counties that were
represented by black officeholders, they averaged more than four officeholders during Reconstruction.
There are some differences between the counties represented by black officeholders. For example,
officeholders were more likely to serve in urban counties, but slightly less likely to serve in counties with
large Republican vote shares. Per capita taxes, farm values, manufacturing wages, and manufacturing
output are all larger in counties that had black officeholders. As Logan (2018) shows, black politicians
served in counties with higher tax revenues.
       Interestingly, 1870 taxes were greater in counties with violence than those without, on average
more than 40% higher. Also, those counties saw much larger per capita tax changes from 1870 to
1880-- by 1880 counties with violence had tax revenues which were only 12% higher, and overall taxes
declined in counties represented by black officeholder by more than 40% between 1870 and 1880.
   4
     While the 1880 tax records are more detailed, for consistency I construct the 1880 tax data as the 1870 tax data.In
1880 a separate line item for state and county taxes collected for schooling was created, and to be consistent these were
summed for 1880 as they could not be further divided. Even when adding and subtracting these amounts the results
remain as the overall tax revenue declined significantly in the between 1870 and 1880.
   5
     Outside of the census data, there are few sources which are comprehensive over all Southern counties for the
Reconstruction era.




                                                           14
4.2     Empirical Strategy

The basic specification estimates the bivariate relationship between taxes and violence against black
politicians:


                                              i,s =  + i,s + s +          i,s                                          (1)

    Where  is violence against an official and  is county taxes per capita in county i in state s.
The second method is the inclusion of additional controls to asses the robustness of the bivariate
relationship in a full regression specification:


                                         i,s =  + i,s + Xi,s + s +              i,s                                    (2)

    where X includes a host of controls that should determine per capita county taxes. The specifi-
cation above is designed to measure whether public finance was related to an increased likelihood of
violence and later reversion of taxes. In this analysis the measures include not only the value of farms
and real estate and wealth (the basis for property tax assessment), but also percent black in the county
(a proxy for black voting and the need of any policymaker to account for the preferences of the black
electorate), total population (a proxy for the provision of poll taxes), average manufacturing wages,
the value of manufacturing output (both of which proxy for industrial interests), illiteracy (a proxy
for voter education), Republican vote share in the 1868 Presidential election (a proxy for baseline
political preferences of the electorate), the Logan-Parman measure of racial residential segregation
(Logan and Parman (2017), a measure of physical racial separation), and indicators for rail access,
water access, and whether the county is urban (each of these being shifters of land values).6
    Key for identification here is that the violence recorded in Foner (1996) comes after 1870, when
   6
     The urban indicator also controls for potential substitution between municipal and county taxes in urban counties.
Total population and population shares eligible to vote are highly correlated, and model fit was not improved by using
the fraction of the county of voting age as a proxy for property tax payments. Total population may also reflect
the presence of more children, which could be related to preferences for redistribution. Additional specifications with
several additional controls, such as farm output, the value of machinery in agriculture, etc. showed that they did not
have any influence on the results here. Specific agricultural output measures did not improve fit, consistent with farm
output being capitalized in land values. Similarly, religious diversity, as used by Rhode and Strumpf (2003), did not
have an effect on county per capita taxes. While there was significant diversity between states, the within-state religious
diversity was not correlated with county tax revenue. Following Abadie et al. (2017), I do not cluster the standard
errors as state fixed effects are included.


                                                            15
the taxes,  , were determined. The timing of the taxes and the subsequent violence lend themselves
to an intuitive causal interpretation of the results, exploiting variation in taxes in 1870 to see if it
is related to violence thereafter. Given the structure of the timing, it is quite unlikely that reverse-
causality is present. Indeed, if the threat of violence was related to tax policy it would lead to an
underestimate of the effect as politicians would be less likely to pursue aggressive policy for fear of
attacks, lowering estimates of  . There is little narrative evidence that black politicians thought of
themselves as martyrs for the sake of tax policy. Moreover, using the small number of violent attacks
which occurred before 1870 as a check, I find that there is a weak relationship between taxes in 1870
and pre-1870 violence ( = 0.0002, t = 0.24), and the relationship turns negative when restricted to
counties with black representatives ( = -0.0015, t = 0.45). This is consistent with violence having
a negative relationship to taxes in places where politicians were attacked before 1870 taxes were
determined, but the limited number of cases leave the results imprecise.



5     Violence and Taxes

5.1    Bivariate Estimates

The bivariate estimates in Table 3 show that the likelihood of violence against a black official is well
correlated with taxes per capita in 1870. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the dichotomous
indicator for whether a black official was violently attacked in the county. Over all southern counties,
a dollar increase in per capita taxes is related to a increased probability of violence against an official.
This is over 4 percentage points in linear probability models, more than 3 percentage points in probit
models. This is substantively large, given a baseline rate of violence of 10% among black officeholders,
these results imply that a dollar increase in per capita taxes raised the likelihood of violent attack by
more than 30%.
    When restricting the sample to those counties where blacks were officeholders, the relationship
still holds. This is over 3 percentage points in linear probability models, more than 4 percentage
points in probit models. Counties where black officials were attacked saw larger declines in their per
capita tax revenues. Even with this, counties where black officials were attacked had higher per capita


                                                    16
tax revenues than others in 1880. This is consistent with the summary statistics in Table 2, which
showed that despite the larger declines in taxes in counties with violence against black politicians
those counties still had slightly higher per capita taxes in 1880. For both the change in taxes between
1870 and 1880 and 1880 taxes, however, the results in Panel A do not hold when looking among the
set of counties with black officeholders. This is consistent with substantially less variation in taxes
by 1880.
      In Panel B of Table 3 the dependent variable is the number of violent acts against black officials.
The results show that a dollar increase in per capita taxes was correlated with 0.09 more attacks
on politicians over all Southern counties, and 0.115 in counties represented by black officials. The
Poisson models show similar results.7 The incidence rate for violence against officials is 17% greater in
counties with one dollar more in county per capita taxes, and 12% greater when restricted to counties
represented by black officials. Each additional violent act is correlated with a reduction in per capita
taxes of 23 cents, rising to 42 cents when restricted to counties represented by black officials. The
number of violent acts is not related to 1880 taxes.


5.2       Regression Estimates

In Table 4 a full set of controls is added to asses whether the relationship is altered or related to factors
which determine county taxes.8 Even with a host of controls, the results are consistent with those in
Table 3. In Panel A, an additional dollar in per capita tax revenue is correlated with a 3 percentage
points (linear probability) to 9 percentage points (probit) increase in the likelihood of a violent act.
When restricting this to counties with black politicians, the likelihood increases 5 percentage points.
Each dollar increase in per capita county taxes is correlated with 0.1 additional violent acts, and a
16% greater incidence rate. When looking only at counties with black politicians, each dollar increase
in per capita county taxes is correlated with 0.16 additional violent acts, and a 18% greater incidence
rate of politician violence. Overall, the results in Table 4 show that the relationship between taxes
and violence is not lessened by the inclusion of covariates which determine variation in per capita tax
revenues.
  7
      Coefficients of the Possion are the natural logs of the ratios of incident rates.
  8
      See Logan (2018) for more on the determination of county taxes in 1870 and 1880.


                                                          17
6     Robustness

While the results of the previous section provide strong evidence that violence against black politicians
was related to tax policy, it is still the case that the relationship could be related to or mitigated
by other factors. Below, I show that the results in Table 4 are robust to the most likely threats
to the causal interpretation of the results, antebellum factors and controls for black voting during
Reconstruction. Furthermore, I show that while the relationship in Table 4 is related to tax policy,
it is not the case that violence against black politicians is a proxy for general racial violence at the
time. Overall, the checks establish that the violence against black politicians was particularly focused
on their policy agenda.


6.1    Including Antebellum Factors

There is recent research that the legacy of slavery has long lived effects on preferences for redistri-
bution and racial conflict (Acharya et al., 2016). More recent work has highlighted the relationship
between slavery and Reconstruction taxes (Suryanarayan and White, 2019). Similarly, some argue
that slavery was intimately related to black political organization (Chay and Munshi, 2011). As such,
violence against politicians could reflect antebellum racial attitudes, institutions, or inequality and
only indirectly related to politicians. Controlling for antebellum effects can be difficult, however, as
many measures which would reflect antebellum factors would be related to factors which would also
effect taxes postbellum (Wright, 2006). For example, land values are related to the crops grown and
the number of enslaved persons (both being functions of land suitability and the labor requirements
of crops).
    To investigate whether political violence was predicted by antebellum factors, I replicated the
regressions of Table 4 and added 1860 cotton production, tobacco production, and sugar production
in addition to the number of acres of improved farmland by county. I also added the number of
enslaved persons in 1860 and the number of farms with more than 15 slaves, which has been used as a
threshold for large-scale staple crop cultivation in the antebellum period (Fogel and Engerman, 1974).
Table 5 shows the results and reports the coefficients for the number of enslaved blacks in 1860 and



                                                   18
the number of farms with more than 15 enslaved individuals. The number of enslaved blacks in 1860
are not related to the presence of violence and the number of violent acts, but the number of large
plantations is related to violence against politicians. None of the agricultural production measures
were substantively or statistically related to political violence.9 The antebellum factors do not alter
the relationship between violence and 1870 taxes. Indeed, the coefficient on taxes is slightly larger
with the inclusion of antebellum controls, both over all Southern counties and when restricting to
counties which had black representatives.


6.2     Including the Racial Composition of the Electorate

One additional set of controls that could alter the relationship between taxes and violence would be
political proxies. For example, areas with more black voters could have been more likely to have violent
acts as a means of voter intimidation as opposed to public finance. As discussed earlier, violence could
be more related to voter demographics than to politicians themselves if the goal was lowering black
political participation. Similarly, areas with more Democratic Party support could have favored lower
taxes, and these areas may see violence as a means to stymie black voting to assure Democratic Party
control.10 To test for this possibility Table 6 replicates the regressions in Table 4 and includes the
share of votes for the Republican Party in 1868 and the share of registered voters who were black as
controls for political preferences and voting shares, respectively. (The regressions in Table 4 include
the percent black in all specifications.) As the table shows, the inclusion of these controls for political
preferences and black voting do not diminish the effect of 1870 taxes on violence. As with Table 5, the
inclusion of these political proxies actually strengthens the estimated effect of taxes on violence. In
both instances, the relationship between violence and taxes is quite robust. This result is consistent
with political violence being related to politicians and not voter intimidation.
   9
     In addition, specifications with the percent of the population enslaved and the county share of state agricultural
production of specific crops were analyzed. The results were similar to those in Table 5.
  10
     Unfortunately, since both of these factors are highly correlated with the number of slaves in 1860 it is not possible
to control for antebellum factors and Reconstruction-era political proxies jointly in one specification.




                                                           19
6.3       Does Politician Violence Predict other Racial Violence?

The final robusteness check looks to see if political violence was more likely to occur in places that
featured racialized violence throughout the period. If this was the case, the relationship between taxes
and political violence could be spurious as the violence would have continued long after the tax polices
were reversed. There is some evidence that political factors were related to racial violence. Williams
(2017) has found that lynching is related to depressed black voter turnout today, while Cook et al.
(2018) do not find a relationship between the number of black politicians and lynchings. If lynching
is a form of voter intimidation we would not expect a relationship between lynching and attacks on
politicians given the results in Table 6. But if attacks on politicians were part of a larger agenda of
racial violence there could be a relationship between the two.
       In Table 7 I estimate the relationship between black lynchings, which occurred post-Reconstruction,
and violence against black politicians. For lynchings I use the HAL data, which is the most widely
used data on lynchings, with the politician data described above at the county level (Cook, 2012). In
Panel A of Table 7 I find that there is no relationship between any violence against black politicians
and black lynchings from 1882 to 1930.11 This holds over all counties and those counties which were
represented by black officeholders. In Panel B of Table 7 I find that there is no relationship between
the number of violent acts against black politicians and the number of black lynchings in the post-
Reconstruction era. Again, this holds for all counties and those represented by black politicians. Put
another way, the violence visited upon black politicians does not appear to be related to subsequent
racial violence. (This relationship is the same when black voting shares are included in the speci-
fication.) This is suggestive evidence that the violence against black politicians was for a different
purpose than racial violence which followed, and that these attacks were directly related to policies
and not voter intimidation.12
  11
     Given the strong autocorrelation in lynching, the within-state variation exploited here is impervious to the time
period chosen. See Cook (2012) and Cook et al. (2018) for further details on historical lynching data.
  12
     There is a positive relationship between black lynching and black voting registration shares, which is consistent
with Williams (2017) finding that lynching is related to lower rates of black political participation.




                                                         20
7     Conclusion

In the South after the Civil War, white conservatives sought to use terrorism to return to the racial
social order that prevailed during chattel slavery, which included a relatively low level of public goods
expenditures (Merritt, 2017). This campaign of fear and intimidation found political support not
only as racialized policy, but also as a stand against black enfranchisement, black political leadership,
expanded federal authority, and the altered public finance structure which followed the Civil War.
The results here add an interesting mechanism to the well-known regional differences in public goods
provisions in the United States.
    Regional differences in public finance are pronounced in the United States. In general, states in
the South have a lower tax burden as a percent of state income, lower per capita expenditures on
public goods such as public assistance, public health insurance, and education. These states also
receive a larger share of federal aid as a percent of state revenue. This has been a long standing
feature of public finance, and some scholars have argued that the regional pattern has roots in social
norms and Reconstruction politics (Bateman et al., 2018; Acharya et al., 2016; Ager, 2013). While
commentators have repeatedly mentioned that racial dynamics of public goods provisions have played
a role, this study shows that within the South there were literally dire consequences for pursuing
aggressive systems of taxation, especially those that were seen to benefit blacks.
    This is the first study to find a statistical relationship between local tax revenue and violence
against black officeholders, a finding which suggests that political attacks were partly related to the
policies which black politicians pursued. This paper used unique data on black officeholders and
local taxes to test the relationship between local tax revenue and violence against black politicians.
While the historical narrative documents the racial violence of Reconstruction, the dismissal of black
politicians, and the claims of excessive taxation by white Democrats, whether these were empirically
related was unknown. The advocacy and funding of an extensive range of public goods was related
to the likelihood of physical violence.
    The results show Black politicians in areas with the most aggressive taxation were the more
significantly more likely to be attacked. Even more, in those areas with the most aggressive taxation,
the tax reforms after Reconstruction were also the most pronounced. These results are statistically

                                                   21
and substantively significant­ black politicians successful in local taxation policy were much more
likely to be violently attacked.
   These results hold despite inclusion of factors that historians and political scientists have thought
may weaken the relationship. In this paper I considered two such factors-antebellum effects and black
voting. Although each had been thought of historically as potentially influencing violence against
officials, I found that neither mitigated the substantive impact of taxes on the likelihood of violence
against black politicians. In addition, I found that there was little evidence to support the argument
that black politicians who were attacked came from communities which displayed more overt acts of
racial violence throughout the nineteenth century.
   The focus on taxes and black politicians allows us to look at the role that tax policy played
on violence against black officials, but it is unknown whether this relationship extends to violence
more generally. Further research documenting the number of violent acts during Reconstruction,
and discerning the motivations behind specific acts of racial violence, will aid in answering this more
general question. A related topic for future work is the relationship between violent attacks and black
voter registration and voting patterns, as it could inform the role of race in American politics more
generally (Hutchings and Valentino, 2004). As it stands, the evidence suggests that black politicians
paid a particularly high price for aggressive tax policy during Reconstruction.




References
Abadie, A., Athey, S., Imbens, G. W., and Wooldridge, J. (2017). When should you adjust standard
 errors for clustering? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Acharya, A., Blackwell, M., and Sen, M. (2016). The political legacy of american slavery. Journal of
  Politics, 78(3):621­641.
Ager, P. (2013). The persistence of de facto power: Elites and economic development in the us south,
  1840-1960. Technical report, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Alesina, A., Baqir, R., and Easterly, W. (1999). Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114(4):1243­1284.
Anderson, G. L. (1943). The South and Problems of Post-Civil War Finance. Journal of Southern
 History, 9(2):181­195.
Atack, J. (2016). Historical Transportation of Navigable Rivers, Canals, and Railroads in the United
  States. [ICPSR 36353 Computer File].

                                                  22
Bateman, D., Katznelson, I., and Lapinski, J. S. (2018). Southern Nation: Congress and White
  Supremacy after Reconstruction. Princeton University Press.
Bellesiles, M. A. (2010). 1877: America's Year of Living Violently. The New Press.
Button, J. W. (1978). Black Violence: The Political Impact of the 1960s Riots. Princeton University
  Press.
Chacon, M. and Jensen, J. (2017). De facto power, democracy, and taxation: Evidence from military
 occupation during reconstruction. Technical report, NUYAD.
Chay, K. and Munshi, K. (2011). Slavery's legacy: Black mobilization in the postbellum south.
 Manuscript, Brown Univ.
Clubb, J. M., Flaigan, W. H., Zingale, N. H., and ICPSR (2006). Electoral Data for Counties in the
  United States: Presidential and Congressional Races 1840-1972 [ICPSR 8611 Computer File].
Cook, L. D. (2012). Converging to a National Lynching Database: Recent Developments and the Way
  Forward. Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History, 45(2):55­63.
Cook, L. D., Logan, T. D., and Parman, J. M. (2018). Racial segregation and southern lynching.
  Social Science History, 42(4):635­675.
Coulter, E. M. (1968). Negro Legislators in Georgia During the Reconstruction Period. University of
  Georgia Press.
Dew, C. (2002). Apostles of Disunion: Southern Succession Commissioners and the Causes of the
  Civil War. University of Virginia Press.
Du Bois, W. (1935). Black Reconstruction in America, 1860-1880. Harcourt Brace.
Dunning, W. A. (1907). Reconstruction: Political and Economic, 1865-1877. Harper Brothers.
Egerton, D. R. (2014). The Wars of Reconstruction: The Brief, Violent History of America;s Most
  Progressive Era. Bloomsbury Press.
Fearon, J. D. and Laitin, D. D. (2003). Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War. American Political
  Science Review, 97(1):75­90.
Fitzgerald, M. W. (2007). Splendid Failure: Postwar Reconstruction in the American South. Ivan R
  Dee Press.
Fogel, R. W. and Engerman, S. (1974). Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro
  Slavery. Little, Brown & Company.
Foner, E. (1996). Freedom's Lawmakers: A Directory of Black Officeholders During Reconstruction.
  Louisiana State University Press.
Foner, E. (2014). Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863­1877. Harper Row.
Fording, R. C. (2001). The Political Response to Black Insurgency: A Critical Test of Competing
  Theories of the State. American Political Science Review, 95(1):115­130.
Franklin, J. H. (1961). Reconstruction After the Civil War. University of Chicago Press.
Glaser, J. M. (1994). Back to the Black Belt: Racial Environment and White Racial Attitudes in the
  South. Journal of Politics, 56(1):21­41.


                                                23
Hahn, S. (2005). A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery
  to the Great Migration. Belknap Press.
Haines, M. and ICPSR (2005). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
  States 1790-2002 [ICPSR 2896 Computer File].
Hardy, B. L., Logan, T. D., and Parman, J. M. (2018). The Historical Role of Race and Policy for
  Regional Inequality. Hamilton Project.
Holt, T. (1977). Black over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina during Reconstruc-
  tion. University of Illinois Press.
Hopkins, D. (2009). The Diversity Discount: When Increasing Racial and Ethnic Diversity Prevents
  Tax Increases. Journal of Politics, 71(1):160­177.
Hutchings, V. and Valentino, N. (2004). The Centrality of Race in American Politics. Annual Review
 of Political Science, 7:383­408.
ICPSR (1999). United States Historical Election Returns, 1824-1968 [ICPSR 1 Computer File].
Jones, B. F. and Olken, B. A. (2009). Hit or Miss? The Effect of Assassinations on Institutions and
  War. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2):55­87.
Jones, D. B., Troesken, W., and Walsh, R. (2012). A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political
  Economy of Disenfranchisement. Technical report, University of Pittsburgh.
Lemann, N. (2007). Redemption: The Last Battle of the Civil War. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Logan, T. D. (2018). Do black politicians matter? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Logan, T. D. and Parman, J. M. (2017). The national rise in residential segregation. Journal of
  Economic History, 77(1):127­170.
McPherson, E. (1875). The Political History of the United States of America During the Period of
 Reconstruction. Philp Solomons.
Merritt, K. L. (2017). Masterless Men: Poor Whites and Slavery in the Antebellum South. Cambridge
 University Press.
Rable, G. C. (2007). But There Was No Peace: The Role of Violence in the Politics of Reconstruction.
  University of Georgia Press.
Rhode, P. W. and Strumpf, K. S. (2003). Assessing the Importance of Tiebout Sorting: Local
 Heterogeneity from 1850 to 1900. American Economic Review, 93(4):1648­1677.
Riddleberger, P. W. (1960). The Radicals' Abandonment of the Negro During Reconstruction. Journal
  of Negro History, 45(2):88­102.
Rodden, J. (2010). The Geographic Distribution of Political Preferences. Annual Review of Political
  Science, 13:321­340.
Russ, W. A. (1934a). Registration and Disenfranchisement Under Radical Reconstruction. Mississippi
 Valley Historical Review, 21(2):163­180.
Russ, W. A. (1934b). The Negro and White Disenfranchisement During Radical Reconstruction.
 Journal of Negro History, 19(2):171­192.


                                                24
Sterling, D. (1994). The Trouble They Seen: The Story of Reconstruction in the Words of African
  Americans. Da Capo Press.
Stewart, M. A. and Kitchens, K. E. (2017). Political implications of military occupation: The creation
  of social order and the historical legacies of the u.s. civil war. Technical report, American University.
Suryanarayan, P. and White, S. (2019). Slavery, Reconstruction, and Bureaucratic Capacity in the
  American South. Technical report, Johns Hopkins University.
Sylla, R. (1986). Long-Term Trends in State and Local Finance: Sources and Uses of Funds in North
  Carolina, 1800-1977. Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, pages 819­868.
Valelly, R. M. (2004). The Two Reconstructions: The Struggle for Black Enfranchisement. University
  of Chicago Press.
White, R. (2017). The Republic for Which it Stands: The United States during Reconstruction and
 the Gilded Age, 1865-1896. Oxford University Press.
Wilkinson, S. I. (2009). Riots. Annual Review of Political Science, 12:329­343.
Williams, J. (2017). Historical lynchings and contemporary voting behavior of blacks. Technical
 report, Louisiana State University.
Williamson, J. (1965). After Slavery: The Negro in South Carolina During Reconstruction, 1861-1877.
 University of North Carolina Press.
Williamson, J. (1986). A Rage for Order. Oxford University Press New York, NY.
Wright, G. (2006). Slavery and American Economic Development. Louisiana State University Press.




                                                    25
Figure 1: Spatial Distribution of Black Officials During Reconstruction. Source: Foner (1996)




           Table 1: Summary Statistics for Black Officials During Reconstruction


                                Variable                N       Mean     Std. Dev.


                     Entered Office                  1331     1869.016 2.677765
                     Left Office                     1331      1873.63   5.650746
                     Birth Year                      1096     1832.479 11.56974
                     Death Year                         366   1893.825 17.96578
                     Literate                        1331     0.642957 0.479295


                     Victim of Violence              1331     0.104603 0.306147
                     Born Free                       1331     0.288703 0.453318
                     Property Owner (>$100)          1331     0.233612 0.423276


                     Executive                       1331     0.334728    0.47206
                     Legislative                     1331     0.567643 0.495576
                     Judicial                        1331     0.094142 0.292128


                     Note: Data come from Foner (1996) for each unique black
                     officeholder.




                                                   26
              Table 2: Summary Statistics for Southern Counties During Reconstruction

                                                                                          Black           Black
                                               All        No Black        Black        Officeholders   Officeholders
                                             Counties    Officeholders Officeholders   No Violence       Violence


Black Officials Per County                    1.216              -        4.554           3.592           6.622
                                             (4.103)             -        (6.273)        (5.227)         (7.727)
County Taxes Per Capita, 1870                 1.135           0.958       1.557           1.377           1.934
                                             (1.369)          (1.044)     (1.874)        (1.395)         (2.594)
County Taxes Per Capita, 1880                 0.901           0.905       0.890           0.856           0.965
                                             (0.757)          (0.803)     (0.619)        (0.557)         (0.726)
 County Taxes Per Capita, 1870-1880           0.023           0.069       -0.088          -0.061          -0.147
                                             (0.335)          (0.305)     (0.443)        (0.269)         (0.533)
Total Value of Farms 1870                     23964        1983389       3350403         3016886        33700000
                                            (2608863)    (23986830)     (2820776)       (2675170)       (4430000)
Segregation Measure, 1880                     0.296           0.265       0.376           0.373           0.379
                                             (0.143)          (0.141)     (0.113)        (0.116)         (0.109)
Percent Black, 1870                           0.291           0.193       0.560           0.529           0.624
                                             (0.242)          (0.181)     (0.175)        (0.175)         (0.158)
Total Population, 1870                       11656.0          9677.4     16389.3         14784.8         20065.7
                                            (14987.01)    (14136.32)    (15901.02)      (12377.73)      (21257.82)
Manufacturing Wages, 1870                    59984.0       51839.6       79467.6         60251.5        2760792.0
                                            (396261.7)    (441246.8)    (258244.7)      (179963.2)      (3670000)
Value of Manufacturing Output, 1870          294466.3      265684.3      356157.6        250510.7      15200000.0
                                            (1180786)     (1206722)     (1122916)        (463333)       (2028202)
Number Illiterate, 1870                       3260.4          2153.1      5913.0          5256.8         14404.9
                                            (3301.422)    (1904.915)    (4287.004)      (3871.83)        (212315)
1870 Rail Access?                             0.265           0.194       0.432           0.385           0.547
                                             (0.441)          (0.395)     (0.496)         (0488)         (0.500)
1870 Water Access?                            0.368           0.313       0.498           0.476           0.537
                                             (0.482)          (0.463)     (0.500)        (0.501)         (0.501)
Urban in 1870?                                0.036           0.027       0.086           0.073           0.112
                                             (0.185)          (0.130)     (0.287)        (0.261)         (0.317)
County Wealth, 1870                          4259823       3696304       5569868         4733668        111000000
                                            (15500000)   (16000000)     (14100000)      (10600000)      (14600000)
Republican Vote Share 1868 President          0.198           0.162       0.146           0.153           0.144
                                             (0.250)          (0.296)     (0.185)        (0.197)         (0.318)


N                                              974             663         311             213              98


Note: Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                         27
                     Table 3: Bivariate Relationship Between Taxes and Violence

                                                    I                      II           III               IV
Panel A: Any Violence                                   All Counties                    Only Black Officials
                                                  OLS                   Probit         OLS              Probit


Per Capita Taxes in 1870                       0.0411***               0.0334***     0.0396**          0.0476**
                                                (0.00758)              (0.00909)     (0.0166)          (0.0227)


Change in Per Capita Taxes, 1870-1880 -0.0967***                       -0.0988***     -0.140*           -0.163
                                                (0.0295)                (0.0371)     (0.0765)          (0.0996)


Per Capita Taxes in 1880                        0.0284**               0.0315**       0.0593            0.0625
                                                (0.0128)                (0.0127)     (0.0486)          (0.0516)




Panel B: Number of Violent Acts                         All Counties                    Only Black Officials
                                                  OLS                   Poisson        OLS             Poisson


Per Capita Taxes in 1870                       0.0934***               0.158***      0.115***          0.114***
                                                (0.0148)                (0.0282)     (0.0344)          (0.0308)


Change in Per Capita Taxes, 1870-1880 -0.226***                        -0.585***     -0.414***        -0.432***
                                                (0.0580)                (0.135)       (0.159)           (0.145)


Per Capita Taxes in 1880                         0.0395                0.359***       0.0761             0.158
                                                (0.0252)                (0.119)       (0.102)           (0.152)



Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 N= 825 for all counties.
N= 311 Black Officials. All regressions include state fixed effects.




                                                             28
                        Table 4: Regression Estimates for Taxes and Violence

                                                   I                    II            III                 IV
Panel A: Any Violence                                    All Counties                 Only Black Officials
                                                 OLS                Probit           OLS                Probit


Per Capita Taxes in 1870                       0.0318***            0.099*        0.0523**              0.0596*
                                                (0.009)             (0.0068)       (0.023)             (0.0328)


R- Squared/Pseudo R-Squared                      0.282              0.3919          0.2425              0.2128


Panel B: Number of Violent Acts                          All Counties                 Only Black Officials
                                                 OLS                Poisson          OLS                Poisson


Per Capita Taxes in 1870                       0.1013***           0.1461***      0.1626***            0.1626***
                                               (0.0185)             (0.0511)       (0.049)              (0.051)



R- Squared/Pseudo R-Squared                     0.4348              0.4348          0.2291              0.2291
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 N= 825 for all counties.
N= 311 Black Officials. All regressions include total value of farms in 1870, Logan-Parman
segregation measure, percent black, and total population, manufacturing wages, value of
manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, county wealth, and urban county.
All regressions include state fixed effects.




                                                              29
          Table 5: Regression Estimates for Taxes and Violence, Antebellum Controls
Add Slaves
                                                   I                  II                III               IV
Panel A: Any Violence                                  All Counties                     Only Black Officials
                                                 OLS              Probit              OLS               Probit


Per Capita Taxes in 1870                       0.0369***         0.0121**          0.0729***           0.0785**
                                                (0.009)           (0.0071)           (0.024)           (0.0347)


Slaves in 1860                                 0.000009          -0.000007          -0.00003           -0.00003
                                               (0.000013)        (0.000005)         (0.00001)          (0.00003)


Farms with > 15 Slaves                         0.0014***          0.0043*           0.0029**           0.0029*
                                                (0.0006)          (0.0003)          (0.0014)           (0.0016)


R- Squared/Pseudo R-Squared                     0.3133            0.4185             0.2809              0.245


Panel B: Number of Violent Acts                        All Counties                     Only Black Officials
                                                 OLS              Poisson             OLS              Poisson


Per Capita Taxes in 1870                       0.121***          0.2229***         0.2374***          0.2538***
                                                (0.0188)          (0.0541)           (0.049)           (0.0544)


Slaves in 1860                                  -0.00003          -0.00007          -0.00007           -0.00003
                                               (0.00003)         (0.00008)          (0.00006)          (0.00008)


Farms with > 15 Slaves                         0.0049***         0.0089**          0.0093***           0.009**
                                                (0.0012)          (0.0039)          (0.0028)            (0.004)


R- Squared/Pseudo R-Squared                     0.3089            0.4553             0.3239             0.2631
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 N= 825 for all counties.
N= 311 Black Officials. All regressions include total value of farms in 1870, Logan-Parman
segregation measure, percent black, and total population, manufacturing wages, value of
manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, county wealth, urban county,
pounds of cotton ginned (1860), pounds of tobacco (1860), pounds of cane sugar (1860), and
number of improved acres in farmland (1860).
All regressions include state fixed effects.




 

                                                            30
Table 6: Regression Estimates for Taxes and Violence, Voting and Registration Controls

                                               I                     II               III                 IV
Panel A: Any Violence                               All Counties                      Only Black Officials
                                            OLS                Probit                OLS                Probit


Per Capita Taxes in 1870                  0.0363**             0.0145             0.0548**              0.0705*
                                           (0.014)             (0.0104)            (0.024)             (0.0374)


Republican Vote Share                       0.092                  -0.682           -1.491              -2.591
                                           (0.298)             (0.725)             (2.212)              (3.031)


Black Share of Registered Voters           -0.123              0.0321               -0.213              -0.181
                                           (0.174)             (0.110)             (0.397)              (0.425)


R- Squared/Pseudo R-Squared                0.2688              0.3579               0.2397              0.2166


Panel B: Number of Violent Acts                     All Counties                      Only Black Officials
                                            OLS                Poisson               OLS                Poisson


Per Capita Taxes in 1870                 0.1248***            0.1102**            0.185***             0.1318***
                                          (0.0281)             (0.0515)            (0.052)              (0.051)


Republican Vote Share                       0.515             -20.673*               -2.48              -19.571
                                           (0.615)             (11.63)              (4.68)             (12.363)


Black Share of Registered Voters           -0.392                  -1.16            -1.061              -1.771
                                           (0.359)             (1.479)             (0.841)              (1.380)



R- Squared/Pseudo R-Squared                0.2679              0.3971               0.271               0.2572
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 N= 825 for all counties.
N= 311 Black Officials. All regressions include total value of farms in 1870, Logan-Parman
segregation measure, percent black, and total population, manufacturing wages, value of
manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, county wealth, and urban county.
All regressions include state fixed effects.




                                                         31
              Table 7: Regression Estimates for Politician Violence and Lynching
Use lynching as dependent variable
                                               I                   II                 III                IV
Panel A: Number of Lynchings                        All Counties                      Only Black Officials
                                            OLS                Poisson               OLS               Poisson


Any Act of Violence                       -0.4044              -0.2524             -0.6172             -0.0431
                                           (0.559)             (0.0445)            (0.698)             (0.0504)



R- Squared/Pseudo R-Squared                0.5249              0.3266               0.5922             0.3936


Panel B: Number of Lynchings                        All Counties                      Only Black Officials
                                            OLS                Poisson               OLS               Poisson


Number of Acts of Violence                 0.2559              0.0353               0.1148             0.0167
                                           (0.327)             (0.0266)            (0.389)             (0.0279)



R- Squared/Pseudo R-Squared                 0.525              0.3267               0.5916             0.3935
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 N= 825 for all counties.
N= 311 Black Officials. All regressions include total value of farms in 1870, Logan-Parman
segregation measure, percent black, and total population, manufacturing wages, value of
manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, county wealth, and urban county.
All regressions include state fixed effects.




                                                         32
