                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ON TESTING CONTINUITY AND THE DETECTION OF FAILURES

                                        Matthew Backus
                                          Sida Peng

                                       Working Paper 26016
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26016


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We are grateful to Timothy Armstrong, Simon Lee, Francesca Molinari, Serena Ng, and many
conference and seminar participants for thoughtful comments. All remaining errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

Е 2019 by Matthew Backus and Sida Peng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including Е notice, is given to the source.
On Testing Continuity and the Detection of Failures
Matthew Backus and Sida Peng
NBER Working Paper No. 26016
June 2019
JEL No. C01,C20,C52

                                          ABSTRACT

Estimation of discontinuities is pervasive in applied economics: from the study of sheepskin
effects to prospect theory and "bunching" of reported income on tax returns, models that predict
discontinuities in outcomes are uniquely attractive for empirical testing. However, existing
empirical methods often rely on assumptions about the number of discontinuities, the type, the
location, or the underlying functional form of the model. We develop a nonparametric approach
to the study of arbitrary discontinuities --point discontinuities as well as jump discontinuities in
the nth derivative, where n = 0,1,... -- that does not require such assumptions. Our approach
exploits the development of false discovery rate control methods for lasso regression as proposed
by G'Sell et al. (2015). This framework affords us the ability to construct valid tests for both the
null of continuity as well as the significance of any particular discontinuity without the
computation of nonstandard distributions. We illustrate the method with a series of Monte Carlo
examples and by replicating prior work detecting and measuring discontinuities, in particular Lee
(2008), Card et al. (2008), Reinhart and Rogoff (2010), and Backus et al. (2018b).


Matthew Backus
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 619
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
matthew.backus@columbia.edu

Sida Peng
Microsoft Research
sp947@cornell.edu
1       Introduction

This paper introduces a method for detecting discontinuities for when the econometrician knows
little about the underlying parametric form, the number of discontinuities, the location of discon-
tinuities, or their type (point, jump, kink, etc). Detection of these discontinuities is sometimes of
direct economic interest: e.g., the study of tipping points in residential segregation (Card et al.,
2008) or cheap-talk signaling conventions (Backus et al., 2018b). Moreover, as a specification test it
is a step in the direction of "Sherlock Holmes" inference (Leamer, 1983): by allowing the researcher
to be agnostic, it leaves open the possibility that they detect anomalies. In particular, it is useful
as a placebo test for regression discontinuity and regression kink designs.

Our agnosticism implies that we are testing against a large set of alternative hypotheses Г many
possible breaks Г and so our procedure is adaptive. We are openly engaging in "data snooping,"
i.e. model selection, and it is well-known that this is problematic for post-estimation inference.
Inference after model selection, respecting these limitations, is an area of recent interest. Our
solution eludes these problems (or, alternatively, the need for sample-splitting) by building our
chosen inferential guarantee into the model selection procedure itself, so that there is no "post"
selection. To be precise, we develop an estimator that detects discontinuities while controlling the
False Discovery Rate (FDR) Г i.e. the ratio of type I errors to the total number of rejections Г at
a pre-specified level (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).1

The model selection component of our algorithm uses a lasso framework to construct an ordered
sequence of hypothesis tests, i.e. potential discontinuities. We construct conditionally valid test
statistics for each Г that is, we explicitly condition on the event the hypothesis test was selected.
Fithian et al. (2015) demonstrates that this conditioning is closely related to Г and more powerful
than Г sample splitting. Because each hypothesis test is conditional on the last, to control the
FDR we must then solve a sequential multiple comparison problem (MCP). To this end we take
advantage of the Forward Stop algorithm of G'Sell et al. (2015) which extends FDR control from
the simultaneous MCP setting of Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) to the sequential MCP setting. In
simulations we are able to show that this sequential approach is more powerful than using standard
FDR control with confidence intervals proposed by other recent work (van de Geer et al., 2014;
Belloni et al., 2014). Intuitively, this is because that approach ignores correlation between the
    1
    FDR control has not seen wider adoption as an inferential standard in economics because it raises some philosophic
questions around the interpretation of covariates, which is always conditional on controls. For instance, the effect
of education on wages is different from the effect of education on wages conditional on a measure of ability. It is
unclear how to interpret the conditional effect when the conditioning argument, here ability, is a false detection with
some pre-specified likelihood. These issues will not arise in our context: the detection, false or otherwise, of one
discontinuity, is irrelevant to the interpretation of another located elsewhere.



                                                          1
test statistics, which ours exploits via the nested structure of the hypothesis test. We somewhat
incidentally contribute, therefore, to an emerging literature on using that correlation in FDR control
(see Fan et al., 2012; Fan and Han, 2016; Basu et al., 2017).

We also draw on a large literature on the detection of structural breaks. There are a number
of salient technical challenges that this literature has confronted, beginning with the multiple
comparison problem (MCP) implicit in testing at many potential break locations. One solution, to
formalize the MCP as an order statistic problem, was proposed by Hawkins (1987) and generalized
by Andrews (1993). A second thread in this literature has focused on the construction of confidence
intervals for the parameter governing the size of a break at the most likely location (Hansen, 2000,
2017). This is a nonstandard inference problem because nesting the null of continuity implies
a discontinuity in the parameter set, and these papers develop methods for simulating from the
distribution of the test statistic to obtain critical values. This literature suffers from the same failure
of uniform validity that plagues all "data-snooping" or adaptive estimators (Leeb and Pе
                                                                                       otscher,
2005). Applied work has therefore relied on sample splitting, with the attendant loss of power.

With respect to this literature we make several applied contributions: first, we are able to simul-
taneously test for n-th order discontinuities (points, jumps, kinks, etc). We also allow for multiple
unknown discontinuities. In this spirit the estimator is related to work on detection of multiple
structural breaks. We compare our procedure to existing procedures for looking for multiple jumps
(sequential sample splitting as in Bai (1997a), the sequential sup-F test of Bai and Perron (1998),
and application of the BIC criterion as in Yao (1988)). Prior work has focused on consistency
results without explicitly addressing the implicit multiple comparison problem, instead assuming
that   0 asymptotically. This leaves little guidance for the applied researcher, with finite data, in
choosing the size of the test. We highlight this point with a Monte Carlo simulation that shows the
attendant risk of false discoveries when applying these methods in finite sample (i.e., real) applica-
tions. Moreover, as we show in Section 4.4, even when the parametric form of the continuous part
of the relationship is known and employed by the econometrician, sequential application of existing
methods will often fail in the presence of multiple breaks. We emphasize this to highlight the signif-
icance of being nonparametric in the treatment of that form: even if one knows the true functional
form of the continuous part, in searching for the first break the model is interim-misspecified, which
can lead to erroneous results.

Finally and most importantly for applied work, our method is tractable and transparent, which we
illustrate in applications to Lee (2008), Card et al. (2008), Reinhart and Rogoff (2010), and Backus
et al. (2018b). Moreover, code for the estimator is publicly available.2
  2
      As of this writing, the most recent code can be found at https://github.com/psdsam/lasso break.



                                                         2
These applied contributions rest on several technical innovations that allow us to extend innovations
in FDR control lasso, due to G'Sell et al. (2015), to our proposed method. First, we show the
conditions under which the set of potential discontinuities, formulated as a design matrix, satisfy
the irrepresentable condition (Theorem 1). This is key for our asymptotic results. Then, we extend
results in Lockhart et al. (2014) to show that their proposed covariance test can accommodate
the interim misspecification error that emerges in our setting (Theorem 2). Finally, we close the
argument by demonstrating the asymptotic consistency of the proposed estimator (Theorem 3).
In a slight detour, we prove two additional results for the discontinuities located by our estimator
that allow us to make a direct comparison to prior work. These results, like that prior work,
depend on a substantially more restrictive environment. There we show that the location of a
single jump (Theorem 4) and a single kink (Theorem 5) enters the lasso active set is the max of
two Wiener processes. In the jump case this is similar to that for the standard sup-F test derived
in Bai (1997b). However we also derive the asymptotic distribution for the kink discontinuity case
as   0 sufficiently slowly, which is stronger than Hansen (2017). As in prior work, these two
results assume that the continuous part of the function is a constant zero.



2        Model

Our model decomposes the relationship between two variables, y and x, into a continuous part and
a finite set of discontinuities. Let x be drawn from a continuous distribution (up to a set of mass
points) with support [,  ], a compact subset of R, and

                                      y = g (x) +                       dsk (x)sk + .                          (1)
                                                    s=1...S k=0,...,K


In this setting g (x) is bounded, continuous, and differentiable up to order K , while {dsk (x)} is a
set of violations of continuity or differentiability and                 is an i.i.d. error term.3 With respect to
notation, s indexes the location of the violation and k indexes the degree. In particular,
                               
                                1(x = zs )                    (point discontinuity)
                               
                                1(x  zs )                     (jump discontinuity)
                               
                      dsk (x) = 1(x  zs )(x - zs )            (discontinuous first derivative)                 (2)
                               
                                1(x  zs )(x - zs )2
                               
                                                              (discontinuous second derivative)
                               
                                    .                             .
                               
                                    .                             .
                                    .                             .
    3
        We suppress here and where possible the index of the observations.



                                                             3
In this schema, zs denotes the location of a break point and s its magnitude. So far, we assume
no knowledge on the magnitude of breaks, the number of breaks or the type of breaks.

In empirical applications these discontinuities often have particular economic meaning:

Example 1: Jump discontinuities in Lee (2008). In this classic paper, x is the Democrat vote share
in the prior election, normalized to a margin of victory (or loss, for x < 0); y is the Democrat vote
share in the current election, and the paper is interested measuring in a single jump discontinuity
at z = 0 which is taken to represent the causal effect of incumbency on subsequent outcomes.

Example 2: Jump discontinuities in Card et al. (2008). This paper studies discontinuities in the
dynamics of neighborhood racial composition in order to study Schelling-style tipping models of
segregation. Here x is the current fraction of non-white or hispanic residents, y is the rate of change
of white residents, and the location and magnitude of a single jump discontinuity, which is assumed
to exist, are unknown.

Example 3: Kink discontinuities in Reinhart and Rogoff (2010) and Hansen (2017). The former
paper proposes proposes that economic growth is discontinuously lower when the ratio of debt to
output exceeds a particular threshold, modeled as a single kink discontinuity with an unknown
location and magnitude. Hansen (2017) develops a new method for finding a single kink disconti-
nuity at an unknown location and, in an application to the prior paper's data, finds evidence of a
growth slowdown at a debt to GDP ratio of 44%.

Example 4: Point discontinuities in Backus et al. (2018b). This paper studies bargaining on an
online platform. They take y to be an expected bargaining outcome (e.g., negotiated price or
average first buyer offer) and x the original asking price of the seller (who always moves first). The
use of round number values in the asking price (e.g., 100, 200, ...) is interpreted as a cheap-talk
signal of the seller's bargaining type, which elicits discontinuously different behavior by prospective
buyers, represented by point discontinuities in E[y |x]. In an extension that prompted the present
investigation, they take the set of discontinuities to be unknown and use lasso regression to detect
them (see their Appendix B4).

These examples highlight the wide range of interpretations of discontinuities in economic modeling.
We replicate each of them in Section 6 to illustrate the application of our estimator, to compare
results to those obtained using pre-existing methods, and to highlight the value of the added
generality. The procedure is agnostic as to the meaning of any discontinuities Г therefore it is
applicable in each of these examples but it does not, on its own, imply any structural or causal
interpretation.


                                                  4
3       Assumptions and Setup

Here we develop the assumptions and lasso framework of our estimator. Section 3.1 introduces
the central assumptions on the data-generating process. Next, Section 3.2 introduces the our
"semi-lasso" specification and presents a preliminary result that maps it back into a standard lasso
regression. Finally, Section 3.3 outlines restrictions on the design matrix Г which summarizes the
possible set of discontinuities Г that guarantee the irrepresentable condition, the key condition that
affords both the distribution of the test statistic we employ as well as the desirable asymptotic
properties of the lasso.



3.1     Assumptions


For a given finite sample {(xi , yi )}n
                                      i=1 , let (x(1) , x(2) , и и и , x(n) ) be order statistics. Note that point
discontinuities are only identified at mass points of the distribution. Moreover, detection in the
generic class of possible discontinuities is also problematic with finite data. For example, consider a
jump discontinuity of known size  , and two possible locations, z and z . If, for some i, x(i-1) < z <
z < x(i) , then the two discontinuities are equipollent, and therefore empirically indistinguishable.
Therefore, for such a sample, the maximal meaningful set of jump discontinuities is n - 1, and will be
strictly larger than n, e.g. if the econometrician is interested in multiple types (point, jump, kink,
etc.). We cannot, therefore, simply add those discontinuities as regressors and obtain consistent
estimates of their size and location using OLS. Instead, we adopt a model selection approach, and
to that end we require four strong assumptions:

Assumption 1. (Number of Discontinuities) The number of discontinuities is finite.


This assumption is reasonable for most applied work given the bounded support of x. Sparseness is
typically to be motivated by the economic intuition for the existence of the breaks in the first place,
e.g. signaling conventions or institutional rules. However, when the economist is agnostic as the to
existence or character of the discontinuities, for instance, when the method is used as a generalized
placebo test to motivate a regression discontinuity design, this assumption can be strong.4

Let Sm (x) denote the spline or power series, where m indexes the order (we omit this index in
                                           ^m (x)  Sm (x) 
all but the following assumption), so that g              ^ and the approximation error can be
                       ^m (xi ). Define Smi  Sm (xi ), Sm  [Sm1 , Sm2 , и и и , Smn ] , 2
written rmi  g (xi ) - g                                                                     2
                                                                                        m  Ermi ,
                                         n            -1
Qm  E(Smi Smi ) and hmi  Smi (           i=1 Smi Smi ) Smi .
    4
    We do not allow the number of discontinuities to grow as a function of n to rule out cases with a sequence of
discontinuities that are placed arbitrarily closely as n goes to infinity.


                                                        5
Assumption 2. (Eigenvalue Restriction) Let Km be the number of terms in power series or spline
expansion. For every Km , there is a nonsingular constant Km by Km matrix B such that smallest
eigenvalue 2
           f,min of E(BSm (x)Sm (x)B ) is bounded away from 0 uniformly in Km and there is
a sequence of constant 0 (Km ) satisfying supz BSm (x)  0 (Km ) and Km = Km (n) such that
0 (Km )2 Km /n  0 as n  0


Assumption 2 is the standard Newey (1997) assumption for series estimators. The bounds on the
smallest and largest eigenvalues will allow us to look for discontinuities in the null space of the
basis functions.

Assumption 3. (Variance) The variance  2  E( 2
                                             i ) is finite and bounded away from 0.



Assumption 3 is standard in the literature, see Newey (1997) and Hansen (2014b). We require the
variance to be bounded away from 0 so the test statistic is well defined.

We also assume g (x) satisfies smoothness requirements that allow it to be approximated nonpara-
metrically with splines or a power series. In order to derive the rate of convergence for the integrated
mean squared error (IMSE), other technical conditions are required. Assumption 4 is equivalent to
those required in Donald and Newey (1994) and Hansen (2014b).

Assumption 4. (Smoothness)


Let Sm (x) be either a spline or power series, and nested.


  1. g (x) has s times continuous derivatives on X , with s > K , where K is the maximum order
      of discontinuities to test.

  2. Recall Km is the number of terms in power series or spline expansion and define Mn as the
                                                                                4 /n = O (1)
      maximum order of the spline or power series considered. Then let maxm<Mn Km
                                     3 /n = O (1) for splines sieve.
      for a power series or maxm<Mn Km

  3. 2
     m > 0 for all m < .



Standard nonparametric approximation only requires g (x) to be continuously differentiable while
Assumption 4.1 is stronger and assumes the degree of continuity of g (x) to be greater than the degree
of discontinuity we are testing. Assumption 4.2 prevents overfitting of the model. Assumption 4.3
bounds away the approximation error from 0.



                                                   6
3.2      Semi-Lasso and Lasso Regression


Our analysis is general to discontinuities of arbitrary order, but for the sake of exposition we will
focus on points, jumps, and kinks. The design matrix D(xi ) is comprised of a series of vectors
characterizing discontinuities under consideration, e.g.:


                             1xi =x(1) , 1xi =x(2) , и и и , 1xi =x(n) ;                            (point discontinuity)

                         1xi >x(1) 1xi >x(2)        1xi >x(n-1)
                                  ,          ,иии ,             , and                               (jump discontinuity)
                           n-1       n-2                 1
      (xi - x(1) ) О 1xi >x(1) (xi - x(2) ) О 1xi >x(2)        (xi - x(n) ) О 1xi >x(n-1)
                              ,                         ,иии ,                                      (kink discontinuity)
                1                        2                              n-1
                       n
Г where k =            i=k+1 (x(i)   - x(k) )2 . We normalize all the regressors to have norm 1 so they are
balanced when penalized by lasso.

The matrix D may be comprised of multiple types of discontinuities. For example, when the
econometrician wishes to test for both jumps and kinks,

                                 1xi >x(1) 1xi >x(2)        1xi >x(n-1) (xi - x(1) ) О 1xi >x(1)
                     D(xi ) =             ,          ,иии ,            ,
                                   n-1       n-2                 1                1


                                 (xi - x(2) ) О 1xi >x(2)              (xi - x(n) ) О 1xi >x(n-1)
                                                              ,иии ,                                 .
                                              2                                  n-1


Our procedure concerns itself with the following "semi-lasso" regression which, unlike a traditional
lasso, penalizes only the vector  and not  :



                             ^ 
                            (, ^) = arg min             (yi - S (xi ) - D(xi ) )2 + | |1                              (3)
                                             ,
                                                    n



Г where, recall, S (xi ) is a vector of linear basis functions for the space of continuous functions on
[,  ], e.g. basis splines, D(xi ) is the set of potential discontinuities of interest, and  is the lasso
penalty parameter. Note that this lasso specification is unique in that the continuous part  is
entirely unpenalized Г this is why we say our approach maintains the null of continuity.

Finally, we show that minimization problem above is equivalent to a standard lasso problem in the



                                                              7
null space of the basis functions.

Lemma 1. [Invariance of LASSO under Projection] The problem of (3) is equivalent to the fol-
lowing standard lasso problem:

                             ^) = arg min       1                        2
                            (                     Mm Y - Mm D            2   + | |1              (4)
                                                2

Г where Mm is the projection matrix InОn - Sm (Sm Sm )-1 Sm .


The proof, as for all that follows, is available in Appendix A. Having transformed our problem back
into the standard lasso framework, we next turn to the condition that guarantees that our lasso is
well-behaved.



3.3      Irrepresentable Condition


Write D = (D(x1 ) , D(x2 )) , и и и , D(xn ) ) , and denote Dj the j th column of D. Denote i as the
ith entry of vector  . Let A0 be the index set of the true discontinuities and DA0 represents a
sub-matrix of D with columns corresponding to those indexed in A0 . Let A0 = sign(A0 ).

Definition 1 (Irrepresentable Condition). We say that the irrepresentable condition holds for
 < 1, if
                            max       sup       Dj DA0 (DA0 DA0 )-1 A0 < .
                            j/ A0 A      1
                                   0




In a jump discontinuity design matrix, D is a lower triangular matrix after rearranging the rows.
For example, the k th column is:

                                                      1     1           1
                        Dk =     0, 0, 0, и и и ,        ,     ,иии ,                 .
                                                     n-k   n-k         n-k


Assume A0 = {k }, that is we only have 1 single jump discontinuity. Thus DA0 DA0 = 1 and for all
j = k,
                                               min{(n - k ), (n - j )}
                                 Dj DA0 =                                    < 1.
                                                      (n - k )(n - j )
For asymptotic, we assume the location of the discontinuities represented by the ordered statistics
are fixed when n goes to infinity. Thus the irrepresentable condition holds. We show in Theorem
1 below for the general cases:

Theorem 1. [Design Matrices for Detecting Discontinuities]

                                                         8
Let p be the number of columns in the design matrix D 5 .
(a) For any set A0  {1, 2, и и и , p}, the design matrix for point discontinuities satisfies the irrepre-
sentable condition.
 (b) For any set A0  {1, 2, и и и , p}, the design matrix for jump discontinuities satisfies the irrep-

resentable condition.
 (c) For any set A0  {1, 2, и и и , p} as a singleton, the design matrix for any combinations of point

and 0 to K th order discontinuities satisfies the irrepresentable condition.

Corollary 1 (Invariant of Irrepresentable Condition under Projection). Let Pz be a projection
matrix such that Pz D has full column rank. If the design matrix D satisfies the irrepresentable
condition, then Pz D also satisfies the irrepresentable condition.


While these results are encouraging, it is also possible to demonstrate the the irrepresentable
condition will not hold for many cases of interest.

Corollary 2 (Kink Violation). The irrepresentable condition does not hold when there are two or
more kinks.


For the case where the econometrician wishes to allow for multiple kinks in arbitrary locations, the
irrepresentable condition does not hold. Recall that the irrepresentable condition requires that there
is no regressor in the complement of the active set that approximates a combination of regressors
in the active set "too well" Г i.e., such that with increasing data and a sharper regularization
parameter, they still cannot be distinguished. Our negative result on this point hinges on the fact
that for too arbitrarily close kinks, the error induced by combining them into one is second-order,
and therefore lasso cannot be guaranteed to differentiate them.

For such cases, stronger assumptions are required to guarantee consistency. Corollary 3 accom-
plishes this by assuming that there exits a partition on the support of X such that each segment
contains at most one kink discontinuity. This is sufficient to guarantee the irrepresentable condition.

Corollary 3 (Irrepresentable Condition under Partition). Let {B1 , B2 , и и и , Bs } be a partition of
the support of X . Define a block diagonal matrix  = diag [1 , 2 , и и и , s ], where i is the design
matrix in partition i. If the irrepresentable condition is satisfied in each i , the design matrix 
also satisfies the irrepresentable condition.
  5
   Notice that p = n in the jump discontinuity design matrix, but it can be different from n when we consider
multiple types of discontinuities or if we want to consider discontinuities on a subset of the support.




                                                     9
Though it imposes a stronger restriction, Corollary 3 has a natural applied interpretation: our
method can be applied on each segment of the partition, which can be accomplished with appro-
priately flexible splines.



4        Detecting Discontinuities

Our procedure considers a nested sequence of models: starting from a null of continuity, each step
in the sequence adds one additional discontinuity. The sequence of models is determined by knots
of the coefficient path following the LARS algorithm of Efron et al. (2004).6 For each step in the
sequence, we construct a test statistic. Conditional on a model, the "covariance test" is an interim
hypothesis test of the null hypothesis that the true model is contained in the current model.

This generates a sequence of interim p values associated with each marginal discontinuity, a sequence
which can be used to control the false discovery rate of the procedure. We apply the sequential MCP
approach of G'Sell et al. (2015) to select a critical threshold that guarantees the false discovery
rate. In this section we explain each of these steps in detail, and conclude with a brief discussion
of of the advantages of this approach vis-`
                                          a-vis standard mean-squared error-based approaches.



4.1        Nested Hypotheses


Recall that from Lemma 1 our problem has been transformed into a standard lasso problem.
Therefore, the model selection is determined by the choice of the lasso penalty term . The
ordinary approach would be to choose  by either cross-validation or by using an estimate of  to
approximate the rate-optimal . While convenient, these leave the researcher neither an inferential
framework nor control over the Type I error rate Г in our setting, the likelihood of falsely detecting
discontinuities. Instead, we employ the FDR lasso framework of G'Sell et al. (2015) in order to
control the probability of false inclusion of variables in the model. In particular, we use their
forward stop algorithm, which proceeds path-wise along a sequence of covariance test statistics
that offer interim significance tests for the marginal included variable (Lockhart et al., 2014). The
solution  () of (4) is a continuous and piecewise linear function and can be computed via the
LARS algorithm as Efron et al. (2004).

Define 1  2  и и и as the critical values of the penalty parameter , i.e. the points associated
with the entry of a new member in the active set, and therefore knots (change in slope) in the
    6
        These knots correspond to intercepts of the coefficient path of the lasso regression as we vary .


                                                             10
piecewise linear function  (). Let Ak = {j |j (k ) = 0} be the lasso active set associated with k .
This implies that A1 =  and A1 is a singleton, and A1 , A2 , и и и is the sequence of models induced
by the lasso path.

Lasso may add or remove variables from its active set. At every time a variable is added to the
active set, we want to test Ak  A0 = supp(0 ) where 0 is the true parameter. This setting leads
us to a sequence of nested hypothesis H1 , H2 , и и и such that each hypothesis Hk can be rejected if
all previous hypotheses H1 , H2 , и и и Hk-1 are rejected. In the next two subsections, we discuss how
to construct test statistics at each step and how to control FDR under sequential setting.

Remark. The existing literature has considered a different null hypothesis. The structural breaks
literature considers the so called "incremental null", i.e. that the k th discontinuity does not improve
the fit, irrespective of whether Ak contains the true model. We instead consider the so-called
"complete null" i.e., whether the true model is already contained in Ak . The complete null implies
the incremental null, and in this sense our approach is more conservative. See Fithian et al. (2017)
for further discussion on this point.



4.2    Covariance Test


Let < и, и > denote the dot product. Let Ak be the active set before the knot k , and suppose
predictor j enters at k . Define ^A (k+1 ) be the lasso solution at k+1 but constrained to the set
                                   k

Ak :



                     ^A (k+1 ) = arg min 1 Mm Y - Mm DA A
                                                                   2
                                                                       + k+1 Ak    1.
                       k                               k  k        2
                                     Ak 2



Then the covariance test statistic as proposed in Lockhart et al. (2014) is:

              Tk = < Mm Y, Mm D^(k+1 ) > - < Mm Y, Mm DA ^ (k+1 ) > / 2 .                           (5)
                                                        k Ak




Let the sign vector sA0  {-1, 1}|A0 | encode the active set in vector form, and consider the event:




                                                  11
B = The solution at step k0 in the lasso path has active set Ak = A0 ,

          sign(sAk ) = sign((DA0 )+ Y ) = sA0 , and the next two knots are given by
                                                 Dj (I - PAk0 )Y
             k0 +1 =           max                                           , and
                       j/ Ak0 {jk0 },s{-1,1}   s - Dj (DAk0 )+ sAk0
                                               Dj (I - PAk0 +1 )Y                       Dj (I - PAk0 +1 )Y
             k0 +2 =         max                                             и1                                  < k0 +1   .
                       j/ Ak0 +1 ,s{-1,1}   s - Dj (DAk0+1   )+ s   Ak0 +1           s - Dj (DAk0+1 )+ sAk0 +1



Event B requires more than the event of consistent selection i.e {Ak0 = A0 }. It also requires the
least squares estimate on A0 has the same signs as this lasso estimate and the next two models
in the sequence Ak0 +1 and Ak0 +2 are adding variables. A necessary and sufficient condition for
P(B )  1 is the irrepresentable condition in Zhao and Yu (2006).

Theorem 2 (Covariance Test under Measurement Error). At any given step k on the LASSO path,
let the covariance test statistics being defined as in equation (5). Under Assumption 1, 2, and 3,
                                                                             
assume the approximation error satisfies 2    m = o(1/(log(p))) and k+1  4 log p where  . Then


                                              lim P(Tk > t)  e-t .
                                             n


Thus the standard exponential distribution serves as a conservative bound.


                                                          -2s ) on 2 , where K
Remark. The standard SEIVE estimates implies a rate of O(Km        m          m is the

number of terms in Sm , s is the degree of the smoothness of g (xi ). The tuning parameter for the
nonparametric part Km is chosen to increase as n  . Heuristically, 2        2
                                                                   m = o(1/n ) is required
in order for the distribution of the test statistics not to be affected by the empirical process. One
advantage of the covariance test is its asymptotic relies on p goes to infinity instead of n. As a
result, the approximation error can be further relaxed to be order o(1/(n log(p))).



4.3   Sequential False Discovery Rate Control


At each step on the lasso path where a covariate is added to the active set, we can construct test
statistic Tk and the p-value pk associated with it. This leads to a sequential multiple comparison
                                                                  ^)/ max(1, k
problem. Recall the False Discovery Rate (FDR) is defined as E V (k           ^) , where V (k
                                                                                            ^) is the
number of null hypotheses among all the rejected hypotheses. The standard Benjamini-Hochberg
method for FDR control can not be applied directly here because it is only valid for simultaneous


                                                       12
multiple comparison problems, which are sortable. We can not sort all of the p-values as our
hypothesis are nested and have a natural order: the k   ^th hypothesis will only be rejected if the
         ^ - 1 hypothesis are all rejected. G'Sell et al. (2015) propose the forward stopping rule
previous k
^F to control FDR in a sequential MCP problem:
k

                                                                 k
                         ^F = max k  {1, и и и , n} : - 1
                         k                                           log(1 - pi )   .
                                                        k
                                                               i=1



This completes the estimator. To summarize, we set up the problem in the semi-lasso form of
equation (3). This is transformed into a standard lasso using the projection matrix of the linear
representation of g (и), as characterized by Lemma 1. Next, we compute the sequence of nested
models using the LARS algorithm. For each addition of a discontinuity we compute the covariance
test statistic described in Section 4.2. Finally, we select the k th model (and therefore all disconti-
nuities contained) according to the forward stopping rule with a pre-specified false discovery rate
chosen by the econometrician.



4.4    Advantages of the LASSO Approach


Our approach differs from mean-squared error minimization-based approaches in prior work. In-
stead, we have gone out of our way to linearize the problem in order to apply lasso regression
methods. This has a number of advantages.

First, we are able to take advantage of developments in inference for lasso regression to construct
uniformly valid confidence intervals. van de Geer et al. (2014) circumvents the post-selection
uniformity issues raised in Leeb and Pе
                                      otscher (2005) by computing approximate confidence intervals
pre-selection.

Second, the linearity of our problem also allows us to treat g (и) flexibly while still retaining the
properties of a lasso, as we establish in Lemma 1. In this way we are careful to only use local
variation to identify discontinuities. This is more than just a matter of being agnostic about g (и).
Even if the true functional form of g (и) is known to the econometrician, the model is still misspecified
in the interim when it tests for the first of multiple actual discontinuities.7 We highlight this point
with a simulation of the following model, which consists of a linear g (и) and two positive kinks:
   7
    At face value, this seems to contradict the intuition that an estimator is more efficient when known parametric
forms are exploited. But this is a straw man Г here, the known parametric form is simply used incorrectly.




                                                        13
                                                                             ^(и)
                            Figure 1: Detection with Inflexible and Flexible g




                            (a)                                                         (b)




Notes: This figure depicts a Monte Carlo simulation with 10,000 observations, two kinks at 0.3 and 0.7, and a constant
g (и). First, we apply the standard covariance test and the true, constant functional form, with no flexible treatment
of g^(и). One discontinuity is detected at a wrong location as in panel (a). Second, we use a basis spline approximation
of g^(и) and both discontinuities are detected, see panel (b).




                          Y = 1(X > z1 )(X - z1 )1 + 1(X > z2 )(X - z2 )2 + .                                       (6)


In our simulation, we let (z1 , z2 ) = (0.3, 0.7), 1 = 10 and 2 = 10 and                    N (0, 1), and we take
10,000 independent draws. Results from the application of our method are presented in Figure 1.
In Panel (a) we allow the econometrician to use the known functional form of g (и). Using that form
leads them the erroneous conclusion that there is one break in between the two. In Panel (b), the
econometrician uses a basis spline of 2nd order and five knots and identifies the two discontinuities.
                                                               ^(и) allows the estimator to use only
This difference comes from the fact that the flexible form for g
local variation to identify the first kink, ignoring the misspecification introduced by the fact that
the second is not yet in the model.

Third, there are several advantages related to the detection of multiple breaks. In particular, the
consistency of Bai (1997a) and Bai and Perron (1998) depends on T  0 sufficiently slowly to
control the multiple comparison problem asymptotically.8 This asymptotic guarantee gives little
guidance to finite-sample implementation, because the rate at which  should be set in applied
   8
     From Bai (1997a) Theorem 11: "suppose that the size of the test T converges to zero slowly (T  0 yet
lim inf t TT > 0)" and from Bai and Perron (1998) Proposition 8, "If T converges to 0 slowly enough (for the
test based on FT (l + 1|l) to remain consistent)..."


                                                          14
                      Figure 2: Simulations: Comparing True Detections and FDR




               (a) 500, b/2                           (b) 500, b                            (c) 500, 2b




              (d) 1000, b/2                           (e) 1000, b                           (f) 1000, 2b




              (g) 2000, b/2                          (h) 2000, b                            (i) 2000, 2b




Notes: These panels compare four different methods (BIC, lasso, sample splitting, and sequential sup-F) of detecting
discontinuities across different sample sizes and sizes of discontinuities. Sample sizes vary between 100, 200 and 500.
The size of discontinuities varies between b = [16, 8, 24, -16, -24, 24, 8, 16, 8, 24], b/2 and 2b. The blue (left) box
plots describe the number of true detections among the 10 discontinuities while the red (right) box plots describe the
FDR.


exercises is unspecified. In contrast, the FDR guarantee of our test has a natural interpretation
for applied work in real (i.e., finite) datasets. To highlight this point, we conducted a number of
simulations.

The simulation is constructed with varying sample sizes (n = 100, 200, 500) and 10 jump discon-
tinuities at z = (-1.5, -1, -0.5, -0.2, 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 1.5). The data generating process is given


                                                          15
as
                                              10
                                       yi =          bj и 1(xi > zj ) +   i
                                              j =1

with x drawn i.i.d from a N (0, 1) process and          i    N (0, 1) and b = [16, 8, 24, -16, -24, 24, 8, 16, 8,
24]. In this environment we consider four estimators: A BIC approach, our lasso-FDR estimator,
sample splitting (Bai, 1997a), and the sequential sup-F test (Bai and Perron, 1998). The first
approach, the BIC method, detects the most discontinuities among the four methods, between 6
and 8, but at a cost of overdetection and no control on the FDR, which hovers around 30%. The
second, our lasso-FDR method, detects between 2 and 8 discontinuities among the 10 and with
a controlled FDR rate below 5%. Lasso-FDR method outperforms all other when the size of the
discontinuities are 2b. Third, the sample splitting method uses classical Sup-F test as in Andrews
(1993) at each step. Once a discontinuity is detected, the sample is split into two by the discontinuity
and two Sup-F tests will be carried on the subsamples. In our case, sample splitting method detects
around 3 - 6 discontinuities with a FDR in the range of 10% to 20%. Sample splitting may suffer
from significant loss of efficiency when the sample size is small and when discontinuities are not
evenly distributed. Fourth and fnally, the sequential sup-F method is based on the test proposed
in Bai and Perron (1998). It is also based on the simultaneous minimization at each given number
of discontinuities. The conditional sup-F test is testing the incremental null at each given step, as
a result it should be less the conservative than the Lasso test at each step. Consistent with this,
we find that it detects more of the true discontinuities, between 6 and 8, but it also has a much
higher false discovery rate similar to the BIC method, often around 30%.

As a final point of comparison, in terms of computational efficiency, BIC method and Sequential
Sup-F method both require dynamic programming, which is of order O(n2 ). On the other hand,
the scale of Lasso method is of order O(n) and it is much faster when n is large.

A fourth advantage of our LASSO approach is that it allows backward steps Г that is, the lasso
path can remove, as well as add, variables Г which is related to our second point above concerning
interim misspecification. Asymptotically this is irrelevant if g (и) is sufficiently flexible, but in finite
samples we found that the algorithm would often attempt to smooth two nearby breaks with the
addition of a single large one, later introducing the two finer ones and replacing the original. That
finite-sample misstep is a feature of the "one-at-a-time" approach.

Fifth and finally, sup-F test-based approaches such as Andrews (1993), Bai and Perron (1998),
Bai (1997a), Hansen (2017), use a trimming parameter to rule out boundaries of the support of
X. More precisely, consider the first test of no discontinuity versus at least one discontinuity. The
sup-F statistic can be written in LASSO notation as


                                                            16
                                  TsupF = 2
                                          1 /^ 2 = sup Y Xj Xj Y /^2.
                                                       j



It is then easy to show that



                                  P(TsupF > t)  1          as n       t.


This result is shown with Corollary 1 in Andrews (1993). A trimming is required such that



                                         
                                        TsupF = sup Y Xj Xj Y,
                                                 j 


                                    
Г for  = [0 N и и и , (1 - 0 )N ], TsupF converges to a Brownian bridge, where 0 is the tuning
parameter. The trimming may yield a boot in power for discontinuities inside [0 N, (1 - 0 )N ],
but lose power against discontinuities outside the interval.

In contrast, our FDR lasso approach does not require the econometrician to choose a tuning pa-
rameter. This is particularly important if the discontinuity is located close to the boundary of
the trimmed support. In the following simulation, we compare the power curve of sup-F test and
LASSO test when the location of a jump discontinuity is moving towards the edge. We consider
the data generating process as:



                                      yi = 1 + b и 1(xi > z ) +   i



where X and     both generated under a standard normal distribution. We allow the location of the
jump discontinuity z to vary from 2 to 2.8 and the size of the discontinuity to vary from 1 to 10.
We choose 0.05 as the trimming parameter for the sup-F test, which is consistent with convention
in this literature. The following graphs are generated with sample sizes n = 200 and with 200
simulations. As shown in Figure 3, as the discontinuity moves closer to the boundary, the LASSO
test demonstrates better power comparing to the sup-F test.

Two last notes about the character of the test: First, it should not be surprising that it exhibits
variable power, depending on the quality of the local approximation to g (x). In regions where there
is little data, our approach will fail to detect discontinuities. While it is tempting to interpret this


                                                  17
                                Figure 3: Simulations: Comparing power




                  (a)                                  (b)                                 (c)




                  (d)                                  (e)                                 (f)




                  (g)                                  (h)                                  (i)




Notes: This figure compares the power of the Sup-F test against our lasso FDR approach. We consider the case with
jump discontinuity moving from 2.0 to 2.8, towards the boundary of the trimmed support. The magnitude of the
jump is varying from 1 to 10 in all cases. The sup-F test is trimmed at 0.05.


as a bias in favor of flagging discontinuities where data is abundant, say near x , rather than where
it is not, say near x , this is not precisely correct: it is a question of variable power. Rather, one
might say that it is a bias in favor of flagging discontinuities near x rather than x conditional on
the existence of discontinuities near both.

Second, as in the derivation of the rate-optimal , our approach requires an estimate of  at
every stage of the forward-stop algorithm. We estimate this object using OLS conditional on the


                                                       18
discontinuities included so far, so that the estimate is consistent under the interim null of the
sequential MCP.



5        Asymptotic Properties


5.1      Integrated Mean Squared Error


The selection consistency for our procedure can be guaranteed by allowing FDR  0 as n  .
This is a similar argument to that of Bai and Perron (1998) who let the family-wise error rate
converge to 0.

Prior work has assumed that we are given the correct specification for the continuous function
g (x). In this section, we explore the prediction consistency based on our estimator, holding the
FDR fixed, and propose a procedure that is asymptotically valid to determine the specification for
g (x).

Formally, let (yi , xi ), i = 1, и и и , n be the sample we observed. We suspect the conditional mean is
g (x) = E (y |x) with breaks at z1 < z2 < и и и < zs0 . Let              i   be a mean 0 process with variance  2
unknown. The data generating process can be summarized as:

                                                          s0
                                         yi = g (xi ) +          j dj (xi ) +    i                             (7)
                                                          j =1


where dj (xi ) represents jump discontinuities.

     ^ 
Let (,  ^) be the estimator from (3) where g (x) is approximated with spline or power series. Define
^ = {i, 
I       ^i = 0}. Recall Dl (xi ) as the lth term in D(xi ). The integrated mean squared error (IMSE)
for our estimator can be written as:
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                     s0
             IM SEn (m) =         E g
                                    ^m (x) +           Dl (x)^l - g (x) -                   dj (x)j  f (x)dx
                                                  lI                                 j =1


where

                      g
                      ^m (x) +           Dl (x)^l = Sm (x) ^m +                Dl (x)^l
                                  lI                                    lI
                                   s0                                    s0
                        g (x) +          dj (x)j = Sm (x) m +                  dj (x)j + rm (x)
                                  j =1                                  j =1


                                                          19
Theorem 3 (Convergence Rate for IMSE). Under Assumption 1, 2, 3 and 4, there exist a constant
C such that
                                                          Km      log(p)
                              IM SEn (m)  22
                                           m + 2
                                                 2
                                                             +C и
                                                           n        n


The constant C depends on the sparsity s0 and the compatibility constant  . The compatibility
constant is defined precisely in the proof (see Appendix A). For intuition, the lower bound on this
constant is restricting collinearity between the spline approximation of g (и) and the design matrix
Dn . This would fail if, for instance, the econometrician sought to identify kinks but approximated
g (и) with a piecewise linear spline, which has, by construction, kinks.

The first two terms in the IMSE expression are approximation error from the spline approximation
to g (и), while the last term is the error introduced by the detection of, or failures to detect, dis-
continuities in the lasso procedure. We show that the empirical process for LASSO approximation
can be bounded using the Glivenko-Cantelli and P-Glivenko-Cantelli theorems (see van der Vaart
(1998)).

From Theorem 3, IM SEn (m)  0 as 2
                                 m  0 and   0. Consider the following cross-validation
process for a set of models m = {0, 1, и и и , M }. We first split the sample into training and prediction.
We use the training data to detect the number of discontinuities and the parameters in g
                                                                                       ^(x) and
                                             ^
then we use the prediction data to compute IM SE n (m) under each model. We choose the model
that gives the smallest IM^SE n (m).


This procedure is asymptotically valid as when we shrink F DR to 0,   0, as n  , 2
                                                                                 m  0
and K                 ^
     n  0. Thus IM SE n (m) will be minimized under the true parameters at 0.
      m




5.2    Distribution of Break Point


The consistency of the selected break points follows from the irrepresentable condition. In this
section, we compare our estimators with those in Bai (1997a) and consider the limiting distribution
of the location of the break when the magnitude of the break is shrinking to 0 as n  . We derive
the distribution for the standard case when only one jump (or kink) discontinuity exists and g (и) is
constant. We show that the lasso-detected location has similar distribution as the traditional mean
square error estimates. However, as in that prior literature, the assumptions are more restrictive
than in the above.

Theorem 4 (Distribution of Jump Detection). Assume there is only one jump break such that the



                                                    20
data generating process is:

                                           yi = d0
                                                 1 (xi )1 + i , with

                                                       0       if xi  z,
                                      d0
                                       1 (xi ) =
                                                       1       if xi > z.

Let k > 0 be an integer such that
                                                x(k)  z < x(k+1)

                     ^ be the lasso estimator from (3). Assume n  0 but nn  . There
Let n = Op ( 1 ) and k
exist a constant v , such that

                                 2  ^
                                 n (k - k ) d arg max(-|v | + 2W (|v |)),
                                                           v


Гwhere W (v ) is a wiener process of degree v .


In the kink discontinuity case, the convergence rate is slower than the jump discontinuity case.
When the size of the discontinuity is constant with respect to the sample size n, we have a square-
root-n convergence rate to a normal distribution, similar to the result in Hansen (2017).

Theorem 5 (Distribution of Kink Detection). Assume there is only one kink break such that the
data generating process is:

                                       yi = d1
                                             1 (xi )1 + i ,

                                                   0              if xi  z .
                                   d1
                                    1 (xi ) =
                                                   (xi - z )      if xi > z

Let k > 0 be an integer such that
                                                x(k)  z < x(k+1) .

Assume 1 = E(x - x(k) ) and 2 = E(x - x(k) )2 both exit. Let 1 =                    n         ^ be the lasso
                                                                                          and k
                                                                                    n-k
estimator from (3). For any n = O(1),
                                                                                
                                                                      1
                                 n (x(k) - x(k
                                             ^) ) d N
                                                      0,
                                                                            2
                                                                                .
                                                                  2 1-      1
                                                                            2




The results in both Theorem 4 and Theorem 5 hold when the size of the kink discontinuity shrinks
                                                                                        
towards 0 at a speed slower than 1/ n. When the shrinkage speed is faster than 1/ n, the
selection consistency results of LASSO estimator no longer holds and the distributions converge to


                                                       21
a non-standard process. As a result, no uniformly valid inference for the location of discontinuity
exits.



6        Applications


6.1        Placebo Tests for Structural Breaks


A natural application of our procedure is to placebo testing for discontinuities in the RDD setting.
While the location of a break is often known in advance from institutional details Г for instance,
majority rule voting implies a threshold at fifty percent Г empirical researchers in this area would like
to validate the existence of these discontinuities and know whether there are other, unanticipated
ones that may affect results. This exercise takes advantage of the fact that we allow a flexible
specification of g (и) and multiple potential breaks.

By way of illustration, we replicate the electoral RD design of Lee (2008) using our estimator.
Data for this exercise are available from the online data archive of Angrist and Pischke (2009).9
Consistent with the design of that paper, we detect the discontinuity at the vote share margin of
winning of zero (to be precise, 0.0003), and no further discontinuities, as depicted in Figure 4.



6.2        A Jump Discontinuity with an Unknown Location


Next, we follow Card et al. (2008) and consider our test in the context of detecting neighborhood
"tipping." The theory of Schelling tipping points argues that intolerant white preferences generate
residential dynamics that lead inexorably to neighborhood segregation. Let mt denotes the minority
share of a neighborhood at time t. Their model suggests a discontinuity in the expected innovation
in minority share conditional on mt-1 so that

                      E(mt |mt-1 ) = 1(mt-1 < m )g (mt-1 ) + 1(mt-1  m )h(mt-1 ),

Г for some unknown threshold m and some functions g and h, with a jump discontinuity at the
threshold.

Our design mirrors that in Card et al. (2008). We obtained data the Neighborhood Change Database
(NCDB) from 1970-2010. As in their work, the unit of observation is the census tract, the change
    9
        See https://economics.mit.edu/faculty/angrist/data1/mhe.


                                                         22
                        Figure 4: Regression Discontinuity Design in Lee (2008)




Notes: We use data from Lee (2008) and apply our method as a placebo test for regression discontinuity design.
The x-axis represents the democratic vote share margin of victory (or loss) in period t. The y-axis represents the
vote share in the subsequent election at t + 1. The red line indicates a quadratic polynomial fit determined by
cross-validation. The green dash line represents the density plot and the marked black dotted line indicates the only
detected discontinuity at 0.


in minority shares are calculated using ten-year window, and we run our estimator separately for
each time period and metropolitan area.

Their paper assumes the existence of a single break and searches over the range [0, 2/3] to find it,
assuming that g (и) is a constant function. Here we weaken the assumptions of their approach in
two ways: first, we allow for multiple (or no) breaks. Second, we allow for more flexible forms for
the g (и) function, including our preferred specification, which chooses the degree of the polynomial
series using cross-validation.

Results are reported in Table 1. In the first part of that table, we report the number of detections
allowing for more or less flexibility in the specification of g (и). For instance, in the top-left part of
the table, we see that the sup-F test finds breaks in 87 or the 93 metropolitan areas, while the lasso


                                                         23
approach finds only 51.

Several features are apparent: first, especially in the presence of a more flexible functional form,
many metropolitan areas appear to exhibit no evidence of a structural break or "tipping point."
For between a quarter and half of the cases where a structural break is detected, the lasso approach
actually detects two rather than one. Second, many of these breaks, especially once we allow for
a more flexible functional form for g (и), are positive jumps rather than negative jumps, which is
inconsistent with the model of Schelling-style tipping points. These inconsistencies are obscured
when we assume the existence of a single jump, and so the generality afforded by our approach is
especially important as we seek to assess the fit of the model. We do not believe this undermines the
research agenda. Rather, in the spirit of "Sherlock Holmes inference" (Leamer, 1983), these results
suggest new directions Г perhaps the salient question is understanding why some metropolitan areas
exhibit tipping behavior and others do not.

In addition, variation in the results highlights the first-order significance of assumptions on the
parametric form of g (и) for the performance of the detection algorithm. Much of the power of the
Sup-F test to identify detections seems to be coming from the restrictive functional form assumption,
that g (и) is a constant function on [0, 2/3].

The second panel of Table 1 reports results for the lasso approach where the order of approximation
of g (и) is chosen by cross-validation. We note that in this, our preferred specification, there is
substantial heterogeneity in the choice of order, and second, that only in substantially less than
half of metropolitan areas are we able to find any evidence of a structural break.

Figures 5 and 6 present results for two cities, New York and Washington, DC respectively. For
New York, the procedure detects a tipping point only for changes over 1970Г1980, not for any other
interval. Moreover, the importance of the quadratic fit of g (и), here chosen by cross-validation, is
visually evident. In the absence of sufficient flexibility, it would be possible to detect a discontinuity
generated primarily by misspecification. And, given the locally negative slope, that false detection
would be likely appear to be a negative jump, equipollent with the predictions of the theoretical
model of tipping points. Likewise in DC, for half of the time periods no discontinuity is detected.
Moreover, for the period 1980Г1990, the algorithm instead detects a positive jump, which has no
interpretation in the theory.




                                                   24
                                       Table 1: Detection of Tipping Points



                                         1970-1980                  1980-1990              1990-2000              2000-2010
                                      sup-F           Lasso      sup-F         Lasso    sup-F         Lasso    sup-F         Lasso

Full sample:
  Constant:
     MSAs with detections               90              48          91        66           92        63           70        47
     Mean detected location          [0.1057]        [0.0834]   [0.1289]   [0.1103]    [0.1335]   [0.1077]    [0.1601]   [0.1286]
     (Multiple/Postive detections)     (-/4)          (20/3)      (-/2)     (20/7)       (-/1)     (24/3)       (-/0)     (11/3)
  Linear:
     MSAs with detections               69              42          78        42           73        51           41        33
     Mean detected location          [0.0901]        [0.0718]   [0.1209]   [0.1135]    [0.1258]   [0.1116]    [0.1598]   [0.1236]
     (Multiple/Postive detections)    (-/23)          (9/15)      (-/8)     (5/8)        (-/1)     (4/5)        (-/1)      (4/4)
  Qudratic:
     MSAs with detections               55              35         54         39          38          29          11        20
     Mean detected location          [0.0873]        [0.1090]   [0.1113]   [0.0989]    [0.1137]   [0.1198]    [0.1540]   [0.1094]
     (Multiple/Postive detections)    (-/25)          (9/19)     (-/26)     (9/16)      (-/12)      (4/7)       (-/1)      (2/8)
  3rd order:
     MSAs with detections               48              30          51        43           25         24          3         16
     Mean detected location          [0.0990]        [0.0952]   [0.1050]   [0.0796]    [0.1049]   [0.1312]    [0.1442]   [0.1157]
     (Multiple/Postive detections)    (-/25)         (10/12)      (-28)     (6/22)       (-/7)      (3/6)       (-/1)      (3/7)
  4th order:
     MSAs with detections               50              34         46         48          25          25          2         16
     Mean detected location          [0.1040]        [0.0916]   [0.1086]   [0.1030]    [0.1049]   [0.0882]    [0.1452]   [0.1123]
     (Multiple/Postive detections)    (-/27)          (8/17)     (-/17)     (8/21)      (-/10)      (4/9)       (-/0)      (4/8)


Cross-validation:
  MSAs with detections                  62              48         63         51          47         37           18        20
  Mean detected location             [0.0932]        [0.0834]   [0.1061]   [0.1042]    [0.1134]   [0.1347]    [0.1601]   [0.1615]
  (Multiple/Postive detections)       (-/26)         (20/21)     (-/20)    (11/22)      (-/11)     (7/12)       (-/0)     (4/8)
  Percentage of models selected:
    Constant                         20.62%           7.22%     15.32%     10.81%      22.12%      7.96%      18.58%     13.27%
    1st order                        13.40%          13.40%     12.61%     10.81%      14.16%     15.93%      15.04%     17.70%
    2st order                        18.56%          24.74%     19.82%     23.42%      24.78%     21.24%      26.55%     27.43%
    3st order                        19.59%          17.53%     22.52%     23.42%      19.47%     29.20%      25.66%     21.24%
    4st order                        27.84%          37.11%     29.73%     31.53%      19.47%     25.66%      14.16%     20.35%


# of MSAs in sample                             97                       111                    113                    113




   Notes: Here we compare the performance of the Sup-F test and our lasso FDR approach using the NCDB data to
   detect tipping points in patterns of neighborhood demographics. The upper portion of the table uses the four period
                                                                ^(и). The lower portion reports results for our preferred
   windows and five different models for the functional form of g
   procedure, which uses cross-validation to determine the order of the approximation.




                                                                 25
                               Figure 5: Change in Minority Share: New York




                             (a) 1970-1980                         (b) 1980-1990




                             (c) 1990-2000                         (d) 2000-2010




6.3   Regression Kink with an Unknown Threshold


As an opportunity to compare our approach to the traditional structural breaks literature, we
follow the replication of Reinhart and Rogoff (2010) in Hansen (2017), and achieve a similar size
and power in the detection of the first discontinuity. In this model, the discontinuity represents a
structural break in the relationship between the ratio of debt to GDP and the growth rate of GDP.

Our setup mirrors Hansen (2017); the data are entirely simulated. The data generating process is
the following:
                              yt = 1 (xt -  )- + 2 (xt -  )+ + 3 yt-1 + 4 +   t                  (8)

Г where   t    N (0,  2 ).



To evaluate size, we set 1 = 2 = 0, 3 = 0.3, 4 = 3, and  2 = 16 to match the empirical


                                                    26
                      Figure 6: Change in Minority Share: Washington DC




                       (a) 1970-1980                           (b) 1980-1990




                       (c) 1990-2000                           (d) 2000-2010




estimates from Reinhart and Rogoff (2010).

In Table 2 we report results from one thousand simulations with a bootstrap size of one thousand,
and compare our results to the MSE-based detection algorithm of Hansen (2017). Both tests exhibit
no meaningful size distortion.

Next, in Table 3 we compare the power of the two tests. We consider a range of values for 2 , from
-0.16 to -0.02, and set the kink point at  = 40. Nominal size is set at  = 0.05. The power curves
are similar, however the lasso approach performs slightly better when  is small and slightly worse
when  is large.

Table 4 documents the coverage of the two approaches. We do not condition on detection. This
makes clear the failure of uniform validity Г as   0, the coverage rate of the standard approach
erodes, while the FDR lasso approach holds at 90%, even when there is no discontinuity.



                                               27
                         Table 2: Type I error of Lasso test vs threshold F test



                                                                 
                                           0.05    0.10      0.15     0.20     0.25
                        threshold-F        0.051   0.0990    0.1469   0.1970   0.2460
                           Lasso           0.071   0.1120    0.1520   0.2040   0.2450



Notes: We compare the size of our lasso FDR test with threshold F test when there is no discontinuity in the true
data generating process. We vary the nominal level of control from 5% to 25% and report the empirical incorrect
rejection rate for 1000 simulations.


Finally, in Table 5, we show bootstrap results for the break location ^ with comparison between the
standard and lasso method. For standard method, we follow Hansen (2017) and report coverage
and length of 95% confidence interval using native (▒1.645s(^
                                                             ) ), percentile, inverse percentile,
symmetric percentile, and C , C  methods. For the lasso method, we report coverage and length
of 95% confidence interval using the native (▒1.645s(^
                                                      ) ), percentile, inverse percentile, and sym-
                              
metric percentile method. Let (                                                           
                                /2) denote the (/2) percentile of the bootstrap statistic  . The
                                                  
percentile confidence interval is represented by ((       
                                                    /2) , (1-/2) ). The inverse percentile confidence
                                
interval is represented by (2 - (1           
                                  -/2) , 2 - (/2) ). The symmetric percentile is represented by
( -                                                       
    (/2) ,  + (/2) ), where (/2) ) is the /2 quantile of | -  |. Note that C , C is not
                                                                                


available under the lasso method because the test specified in our setting can not be inverted in a
similar way to the standard MSE test. While the coverage between MSE and lasso methods are
very similar, the length of confidence interval is smaller under the lasso method.

             Table 3: Power of of Lasso test vs threshold F test with nominal size 10%



                                                              
                         -0.02    -0.04     -0.06    -0.08       -0.10    -0.12    -0.14    -0.16
            Hansen       0.0691   0.1130    0.2010   0.3110      0.4680   0.6200   0.7500   0.8540
             Lasso       0.0920   0.1540    0.2626   0.3740      0.4690   0.5460   0.6690   0.6890



Notes: We compare the power of our lasso FDR test with threshold F test when there is one kink discontinuity in the
true data generating process. We vary the magnitude of discontinuity from -0.02 to -0.16 and report the empirical
rate of detection under 1000 simulations. The nominal level of rejection is controlled at 10% level.




                                                        28
                Table 4: Coverage rate of nominal 90% CI for magnitude of discontinuity



                                                                      
                                                0.00      -0.01     -0.02     -0.04    -0.16
                       ^ ▒ 1.645s(
                                   ^)           0.8250    0.7950    0.8050    0.8100   0.8600
                         Percentile             0.8100    0.8250    0.8150    0.8450   0.9200
                     Inverse Percentile         0.8500    0.8650    0.8700    0.9000   0.8750
                    Symmetric Percentile        0.8600    0.8650    0.8650    0.8950   0.8950

                        lasso de-biased         0.8950    0.9000    0.9000    0.8950   0.9000



Notes: We compare the coverage probability for the magnitude of the discontinuity using post fitting and de-biased
methods. For post fitting, we use the full sample to estimate the location of discontinuity and then use the full sample
to construct confidence interval conditioning on the detected discontinuity. For lasso de-biased method, we first use
the full sample to detect the discontinuity and its lasso estimator. We then computer the bias for lasso estimator
based on its analytic form and add it back to the lasso estimator.


6.4       Signaling in Online Bargaining


Finally, we replicate a result from Backus et al. (2018b), that the use of a round-number asking
price in Best Offer listings on eBay.com elicits lower offers from buyers. In their paper, this result
is a component of the argument that round numbers are signals of sellers' willingness to bargain.
We are interested in the following regression:



                Mean First Buyer Offeri = g (Asking Pricei ) +                1z (Asking Pricei ) + i .
                                                                       z Z



Here Z is a set of discontinuities, 1z (x) is an indicator function for the event x  [z, z + 1), and
we are interested in selecting the correct active set of point (or rather, unit-length) discontinuities.
Our data are drawn from Collectibles listings using the publicly available Best Offer bargaining
dataset introduced by Backus et al. (2018a).10 We use observations where the asking price is in
[x - 25, x + 25] for x  {100, 200, 300, 400, 500}.

Results are presented in Figure 7. Solid vertical lines represent the selected set Г in each scenario,
the unit interval round to the nearest 100 is selected, and in the 400's case, we also select 413. This
is consistent with the round-number effects identified by that paper.
  10
       See http://www.nber.org/data/bargaining/.




                                                          29
             Table 5: Coverage rate of nominal 90% CI for the location of discontinuity



                                                                             
                                          0.05          0.10          0.15          0.20           0.25
Threshold F (MSE) method :
^ ▒ 1.645s(^
           )                              0.7900        0.7200        0.6850        0.6450         0.6050
                                          (37.9457)     (31.8450)     (27.8699)     (24.8114)      (22.2712 )
Percentile                                0.9550        0.8900        0.8650        0.8000         0.7650
                                          (40.7975)     (32.5250)     (27.0200)     (23.2675)      (20.0700)
Inverse Percentile                        0.8250        0.7950        0.7350        0.7100         0.6800
                                          (40.7975)     (32.5250)     (27.0200)     (23.2675)      (20.0700)
Symmetric Percentile                      0.9000        0.8450        0.7800        0.7500         0.7150
                                          (41.9400)     (32.1950)     (26.5050)     (22.5850)      (19.5100)
C                                         0.9050        0.8400        0.7800        0.7150         0.6450
                                          (30.6950)     (24.6100)     (20.9950)     (18.4050 )     (16.0800)
C                                         0.9200        0.8450        0.8050        0.7700         0.7250
                                          (33.3950)     (27.3200)     (23.5250)     (20.9050)      (18.6600)
Lasso (Covariance) method:
Percentile                                0.9500        0.8650        0.8000        0.7700         0.7250
                                          (28.0704)     (22.3397)     (18.9569)     (16.6049)      (14.5919)
Inverse Percentile                        0.9200        0.8550        0.7850        0.7350         0.6850
                                          (28.0704)     (22.3397)     (18.9569)     (16.6049)      (14.5919)
Symmetric Percentile                      0.9500        0.8600        0.7950        0.7550         0.6900
                                          (28.0731)     (22.2410)     (18.9754)     (16.4391)      (14.4893)



Notes: Here we compare the coverage probabilities. The location of discontinuity is selected using either mean-square-
error criterion or largest covariance between outcome and regressors, the basis for our lasso approach. We construct
confidence intervals and report the empirical coverage under different methods. The length of confidence interval is
reported in parentheses.




                                                         30
                                   Figure 7: Signaling in Online Bargaining




           (a) Prices near $100                   (b) Prices near $200                  (c) Prices near $300




                               (d) Prices near $400                  (e) Prices near $500




Notes: Here we apply our lasso FDR method to the best offer bargaining dataset, in intervals 25 above and below
the conjectured discontinuities. The x-axis are the price offered initially and y-axis is the final sell price. The orange
dots are original data and blue circles depict the mean. The black line is the detected discontinuities using LASSO
method.


7     Discussion

This paper has endeavored to introduce a new method to detect discontinuities using lasso regres-
sion. The method is robust to an unknown number, type, location, and magnitude of discontinuities.

Searching over a function to detect discontinuities is, by nature, an exercise in data snooping and
so post-selection inference is problematic, here as in prior work. This problem is complicated
further by allowing for multiple breaks, which makes the multiple selection problem sequential in
character and, as we showed, raises substantial problems for existing approaches. Our solution to
these problems is to avoid post-selection inference altogether, by building the desired inferential
guarantee, false discovery rate control, into the selection process itself.

Our lasso-based approach has the added advantage of linearity, so that it easily accommodates
flexible estimation of the continuous part of the function. We showed that this flexibility is more



                                                           31
than mere agnosticism. Even if the empiricist knows the true functional form, the sequential
character of testing for discontinuities introduces interim misspecification that can lead to false
detections.

We believe that the value of such an approach is twofold, and we highlighted both in our applica-
tions. First, when the location of a theoretically-motivated discontinuity is unknown, as in Card
et al. (2008) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2010), our approach offers a flexible approach to detection.
But second, even when we posit the existence of a discontinuity in a particular location, as in Lee
(2008) and Backus et al. (2018b), the method is a useful placebo test for additional discontinuities,
a specification test that can alert the econometrician to either a failure of their assumed model, or
the location of additional discontinuities that may complicate estimation.

Finally, we hope that we have made a small contribution to the growing literature on the adoption
of machine learning techniques in a way that maintains interpretable inferential guarantees, an
important area for future work as empirical researchers economics adopt those tools.




                                                 32
References
Andrews, D. W. K. (1993). Tests for parameter instability and structural change with unknown change point.
  Econometrica, 61(4):821Г856.

Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J.-S. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion. Princeton
  University Press.

Backus, M., Blake, T., Larsen, B., and Tadelis, S. (2018a). Sequential bargaining in the field: Evidence from millions
  of online bargaining threads. NBER Working Paper No. 24306.

Backus, M., Blake, T., and Tadelis, S. (2018b). On the empirical content of cheap-talk signaling: An application to
  bargaining. forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.

Bai, J. (1997a). Estimating multiple breaks one at a time. Econometric Theory, 13(3):315Г352.

Bai, J. (1997b). Estimation of a change point in multiple regression models. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  79(4):551Г563.

Bai, J. and Perron, P. (1998). Estimating and testing linear models with multiple structural changes. Econometrica,
  66(1):47Г78.

Basu, P., Cai, T. T., Das, K., and Sun, W. (2017). Weighted false discovery rate control in large-scale multiple
  testing. Journal of the American Statistical Association.

Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V., and Kato, K. (2014). Uniform post selection inference for lad regression and other
  z-estimation problems. Working Paper.

Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to
  multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (methodological), 57(1):289Г300.

Bе
 uhlmann, P. and van de Geer, S. (2011). Statistics for High-Dimensional Data. Springer.

Card, D., Mas, A., and Rothstein, J. (2008). Tipping and the dynamics of segregation. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 123(1):177Г218.

Donald, S. and Newey, W. K. (1994). Series estimation of semilinear models. Journal of Multivariate Analysis,
  50(1):30Г40.

Efron, B., Hastie, T., Johnstone, I., and Tibshirani, R. (2004). Least angle regression. The Annals of Statistics,
  32(2):407Г499.

Fan, J. and Han, X. (2016). Estimation of the false discovery proportion with unknown dependence. Journal of the
  Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), pages n/aГn/a.

Fan, J., Han, X., and Gu, W. (2012). Estimating false discovery proportion under arbitrary covariance dependence.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107(499):1019Г1035.

Fithian, W., Sun, D., and Taylor, J. (2015). Optimal inference after model selection. Working Paper.

Fithian, W., Taylor, J., Tibshirani, R., and Tibshirani, R. (2017). Selective sequential model selection.



                                                         33
G'Sell, M. G., Wager, S., Chouldechova, A., and Tibshirani, R. (2015). Sequential selection procedures and false
  discovery rate control. Working Paper.

Hansen, B. E. (2000). Sample splitting and threshold estimation. Econometrica, 68(3):575Г603.

Hansen, B. E. (2014a).     Nonparametric Sieve Regression: Least Squares, Averaging Least Squares, and Cross-
  Validation. Oxford Handbooks. Oxford Handbook of Applied Nonparametric and Semiparametric Econometrics
  and Statisics.

Hansen, B. E. (2014b). Oxford Handbook of Applied Nonparametric and Semiparametric Econometrics and Statistics.
  Oxford University Press.

Hansen, B. E. (2017). Regression kink with an unknown threshold. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
  35:228Г240.

Hawkins, D. L. (1987). A test for a change point in a parametric model based on a maximal wald-type statistic.
  Sankhy»
        a: The Indian Journal of Statistics, 49(3):368Г376.

Leamer, E. E. (1983). Let's take the con out of econometrics. American Economic Review, 73(1):31Г43.

Lee, D. S. (2008). Randomized experiments from non-random selection in u.s. house elections. Journal of Economet-
  rics, 142:675Г697.

Leeb, H. and Pе
              otscher, B. M. (2005). Model selection and inference: Facts and fiction. Econometric Theory, 21:21Г59.

Lockhart, R., Taylor, J., Tibshirani, R. J., and Tibshirani, R. (2014). A significance test for the lasso. The Annals
  of Statistics, 42(2):413Г468.

Newey, W. K. (1997). Convergence rates and asymptotic normality for series estimators. Journal of Econometrics,
  79(1):147Г168.

Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2010). Growth in a time of debt. American Economic Review: Papers and
  Proceedings, 100:573Г578.

Tian, X. and Taylor, J. (2017). Asymptotics of selective inference. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 44(2):480Г499.
  10.1111/sjos.12261.

van de Geer, S., Bе
                  uhlmann, P., Ritov, Y., and Dezeure, R. (2014). On asymptotically optimal confidence regions and
  tests for high-dimensional models. Annals of Statistics, 42(3):1166Г1202.

van de Geer, S. A. and Bе
                        uhlmann, P. (2009). On the conditions used to prove oracle results for the lasso. Electronic
  Journal of Statistics, 3:1360Г1392.

van der Vaart, A. (1998). Asymptotic Statistics. Cambridge University Press.

Xie, H. and Huang, J. (2009). Scad-penalized regression in high-dimensional partially linear models. The Annals of
  Statistics, 37(2):673Г696.

Yao, Y.-C. (1988). Estimating the number of change-points via schwarz' criterion. Statistics and Probability Letters,
  6(3):181Г189.

Zhao, P. and Yu, B. (2006). On model selection consistency of lasso. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7:2541Г
  2563.


                                                    Appendix-1
Appendices

A     Proofs


A-1     Proof of Lemma 1 [Invariance of LASSO under Projection]


Let L = Y - Sm  - D          2   + | |1 . Then,
                             2


                                   L
                                     = -2Sm Y + 2Sm Sm  + 2Sm D.                                    (A1)
                                   
^ must satisfy
                 L
                     = 0. Thus,
                 
                                          ^ = (S Sm )-1 S (Y - D )
                                                                                                    (A2)
                                                m        m

Substituting equation (A2) into equation (3), we have:

                                                                2
                                    L = (I - PZ )(Y - D )       2   + | |1
                                                           2
                                          = Mm Y - Mm D    2   + | |1 ,

Г where Mm = In - PZ .



A-2     Proof of Theorem 1 [Design Matrices for Detecting Discontinuities]


For point discontinuities in part (a), the design matrix is exactly the identity matrix In and thus
the irrepresentable condition holds.

Consider next jump discontinuities in part (b). For the general case, let DA0 = (Dj1 , Dj2 , и и и , Djs )
such that j1 > j2 > и и и js . Thus,


                                                                                     
                                                   n-j1    n-j1               n-j1
                                           1       n-j2    n-j3      иии      n-js
                                   
                                           n-j1            n-j2               .
                                                                              .
                                                                                     
                                                    1                         .
                                                                                     
                                           n-j2            n-j3
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                       DA0 DA0    =        n-j1    n-j2
                                                                                     .
                                                                                     
                                           n-j3    n-j3    1
                                                                                     
                                           .
                                           .                         ..              
                                   
                                           .                              .          
                                                                                     
                                           n-j1
                                           n-js    иии                        1




                                                  Appendix-2
Next, fix k and define the S -vector

                                              Dk DA0 (DA0 DA0 )-1 .



With this notation,

         min{n - k, n - j1 }           n - j1            n - j1          n - j1                 n - j1
                                = 1           + 2               + 3             + и и и + s
           (n - k )(n - j1 )           n - j1            n - j2          n - j3                 n - js

         min{n - k, n - j2 }           n - j1            n - j2          n - j2               n - j2
                                = 1           + 2               + 3             и и и + s
           (n - k )(n - j2 )           n - j2            n - j2          n - j3               n - js         (A3)
                                иии

         min{n - k, n - js }           n - j1            n - j2          n - j3               n - js
                                = 1           + 2               + 3             и и и + s            .
            (n - k )(n - js )          n - js            n - js          n - js               n - js


                                                                                   n-j1
From the above, compute the first line of (A3) minus the product of                n-j2     and the second line to
obtain

                     min{n - k, n - j1 }           n - j1 min{n - k, n - j2 }     j1 - j2
                                             -                                = 1         .
                        (n - k )(n - j1 )          n - j2   (n - k )(n - j2 )     n - j2

Thus,                                       
                                                  n-k
                                                                k  j1
                                                  n-j1

                                      1 =         n-j1 k-j2
                                                  n-k j1 -j2    j1 > k  j2 .
                                            
                                            0
                                            
                                                                j2 > k


Next we show that the irrepresentable condition holds in each of the three cases. When k  j1 ,
notice that 2 = 3 = и и и = s = 0 is a solution to the system. And since (DA0 DA0 ) is full rank,
the solution is unique. Thus
                                                               n-k
                                            sup    |A0 | =            < 1,
                                        A0    1
                                                               n - j1

Г and therefore the irrepresentable condition holds.

                                                                                     n-j2
When j1 > k  j2 , use the second line of (A3) minus the product of                   n-j3    and the third line to
obtain




                                                    Appendix-3
                      min{n - k, n - j2 }           n - j2 min{n - k, n - j3 }
                                              -
                          (n - k )(n - j2 )         n - j3   (n - k )(n - j3 )
                                j2 - j3             n - j1      (n - j1 )(n - j2 )
                          = 2           + 1                -                          .
                                n - j3              n - j2          n - j3


Next, substitute 1 to get




                      min{n - k, n - j2 }           n - j2 min{n - k, n - j3 }
                                              -
                          (n - k )(n - j2 )         n - j3   (n - k )(n - j3 )
                                j2 - j3             n - j1      (n - j1 )(n - j2 )
                          = 2           + 1                -                          .
                                n - j3              n - j2          n - j3

Thus,

                                                    n - j2 j1 - k
                                          2 =                     .
                                                    n - k j1 - j2


Notice that 3 = 4 = и и и = s = 0 is a solution to the system.


                                              n - j1 k - j2       n - j2 j1 - k
                       sup      |A0 | =                     +                   < 1,
                     A0    1
                                              n - k j1 - j2       n - k j1 - j2

Г and therefore the irrepresentable condition holds.

Finally, when j2 > k , since 1 = 0, we can rewrite the system as:

                 min{n - k, n - j2 }              n - j2        n - j2               n - j2
                                        = 2              + 3           и и и + s
                    (n - k )(n - j2 )             n - j2        n - j3               n - js

                 min{n - k, n - j3 }              n - j2        n - j3               n - j3
                                        = 2              + 3           и и и + s
                    (n - k )(n - j3 )             n - j3        n - j3               n - js
                                        иии

                 min{n - k, n - js }              n - j2        n - j3               n - js
                                        = 2              + 3           и и и + s            ,
                    (n - k )(n - js )             n - js        n - js               n - js




                                                  Appendix-4
Гand we are back to the initial system with s-1 equations. By induction, we have sup                A0    1
                                                                                                              |A0 |,
thus the irrepresentable condition holds.



Finally, for case (c), we prove by induction. First we show that the design matrix for point and
jump discontinuities satisfies the irreprenstable condition, then we assume it holds till the K - 1th
discontinuities and prove for the K th discontinuity

when there is only one discontinuity but its type (kink or jump) is unknown, the design matrix D
is a combination of both point and jump dummies :

                                    00
                                   Dk  = (0, 0, 0, и и и , 1, и и и , 0) ,

                         0                        1     1           1
                        Dk =    0, 0, 0, и и и ,     ,     ,иии , 
                                                 n-k   n-k         n-k


Since only one break exists, DA0 DA0 = 1. First, assume the break is a jump:

                              0          min{(n - k ), (n - j )}
                             Dj DA0 =                                  < 1, and
                                               (n - k )(n - j )
                             00        1
                            Dj  DA0 =     < 1.
                                      n-k


Next, instead assume the break is a point. Then,

                                     0                1
                                    Dj DA0 =             < 1, and
                                                     n-j
                                    00
                                   Dj  DA0 = 0 < 1.


By Cauchy-Schwarz, a useful proposition for the following proof is:



                                             2                                                                                       
        n                                                        n                                        n
                (x(i) - x(k) )L (x(i) - x(j ) )K  <                          (x(i) - x(k) )2L                         (x(i) - x(j ) )2K 
  i=max{k+1,j +1}                                       i=max{k+1,j +1}                           i=max{k+1,j +1}
                                                                                  
                                                          n                             n
                                                              (x(i) - x(k) )2L                (x(i) - x(j ) )2K   .
                                                        i=j +1                        i=k+1




                                              Appendix-5
The proof proceeds by induction. Assume the irrepresentable condition holds when there is only
one discontinuity up to the (K - 1)th order.

First assume the break is a Lth order where L  (K - 1):



                                  n                             L
                     K            i=max{k+1,j +1} (x(i) - x(k) ) (x(i)   - x(j ) )K
                    Dj DA0 =                                                          < 1.
                                                    L k j
                                                         K




Next assume the break is K th order, for any L  (K - 1):



                                  n                             K
                     L            i=max{k+1,j +1} (x(i) - x(k) ) (x(i)   - x(j ) )L
                    Dj DA0 =                                                          < 1,
                                                    K k j
                                                         L




Г and for L = K ,
                                  n                             K
                     K            i=max{k+1,j +1} (x(i) - x(k) ) (x(i)   - x(j ) )K
                    Dj   DA0 =                                                        < 1.
                                                    K k j
                                                         K




A-3    Proof of Corollary 1: [Invariant of Irrepresentable Condition under Pro-
       jection]


Under the projection of PZ , the irrepresentable condition becomes:

                    Dj PZ DA0 (DA0 PZ DA0 )-1 A0
                    = trace PZ DA0 (DA0 PZ DA0 )-1 A0 Dj
                    = trace (DA0 DA0 )-1 DA0 DA0 PZ DA0 (DA0 PZ DA0 )-1 A0 Dj
                    = trace (DA0 DA0 )-1 DA0 A0 Dj
                    = trace A0 Dj (DA0 DA0 )-1 DA0
                    = trace A0 Dj (DA0 DA0 )-1 DA0 DA0 DA0 (DA0 DA0 )-1
                    = trace A0 Dj DA0 (DA0 DA0 )-1
                    = Dj DA0 (DA0 DA0 )-1 A0 < 1.


                                             Appendix-6
A-4      Proof of Corollary 2 [Kink Violation]


Consider the two-kink case with, WLOG, k1 > k2 , so that
                                                                                 n
                                                                                 i=k1 +1 (x(i) -x(k1 ) )(x(i) -x(k2 ) )
                                                                                                                          
               1    1
                                                   1                                          k1 k2
              DA   DA   =          n                                                                                      ,
                 0    0            i=k1 +1 (x(i) -x(k1 ) )(x(i) -x(k2 ) )
                                                k1 k2                                            1

Г and,
                                                                                         n
                                                                                         i=k1 +1 (x(i) -x(k1 ) )(x(i) -x(k2 ) )
                                                                                                                                  
           1    1 -1       1                            1                          -                   k1 k2
         (DA   DA   ) =                 n                                                                                         ,
             0    0
                           W -          i=k1 +1 (x(i) -x(k1 ) )(x(i) -x(k2 ) )
                                                       k1 k2                                             1

                        n                                        2
                        i=k1 +1 (x(i) -x(k1 ) )(x(i) -x(k2 ) )
Гwhere W = 1 -                       k1 k2                           .


Now pick j such that k1 > j > k2 , so
                                    n                                            n
                 1  1               i=k1 +1 (x(i) -x(k1 ) )(x(i) -x(j ) )        i=j +1 (x(i) -x(k2 ) )(x(i) -x(j ) )
                Dj DA 0
                        =                        j k1                                        j k2
                                                                                                                        .

Then,

              1  1     1    1 -1
             Dj DA 0
                     (DA 0
                           DA 0
                                ) [1, 1]
                             n
                    1        i=k1 +1 (x(i)- x(k1 ) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                =
                    D                     j k1
                        n                                          n
                        i=k1 +1 (x(i) - x(k1 ) )(x(i) - x(k2 ) )   i=j +1 (x(i) - x(k2 ) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                -
                                      k 1 k 2                                    j k 2
                        n                                          n
                        i=k1 +1 (x(i) - x(k1 ) )(x(i) - x(k2 ) )   i=k1 +1 (x(i) - x(k1 ) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                -
                                      k 1 k 2                                    j k 1
                        n
                        i=j +1 (x(i) - x(k2 ) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                +
                                       j k 2




                                                            Appendix-7
                         n                                             n
              1                    - x(k1 ) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                         i=k1 +1 (x(i)                                 i=j +1 (x(i) - x(k2 ) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
            =                                                    +
              W                    j k1                                             j k2
                    n
                            ( x(i) - x (k1 ) )( x (i) - x (k2 ) )
              1 - i=k1 +1
                                   k1 k2
                 n                                                 n
                 i=k1 +1 (x(i) - x(k1 ) )(x(i) - x(j ) )           i=j +1 (x(i) - x(k2 ) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
            =                                              +
                               j k 1                                            j k2
                    n
                            (x(i) - x(k1 ) )(x(i) - x(k2 ) ) -1
              1 + i=k1 +1                                             .
                                   k1 k2


                   n                                            n
                   i=k1 +1 (x(i) -x(k1 ) )(x(i) -x(j ) )        i=j +1 (x(i) -x(k2 ) )(x(i) -x(j ) )
Define f (j ) =                 j k1                       +                j k2                       .

                                             n
                                             i=k1 +1 (x(i) -x(k1 ) )(x(i) -x(k2 ) )                           1 D (D D )-1 [1, 1] >
Notice that f (k1 ) = f (k2 ) = 1+                         k1 k2                      and f is concave. Thus Dj  A0 A0 A0
1 and the irrepresentable condition fails.



A-5     Proof of Corollary 3 [Irrepresentable Condition under Partition]


Note that A0 = diag (1    2            s
                     A0 , A0 , и и и , A0 ) is block diagonal, so that




                   (A0 A0 )-1 = diag ((1  1 -1    2  2 -1            s  s -1
                                       A0 A0 ) , (A0 A0 ) , и и и , (A0 A0 ) ).



For the j th column of , the non-zero entries are i
                                                  j , i.e. the j th column in block i, thus




                                     j A0 (A0 A0 )-1 = i i   i  i   -1
                                                       j A0 (A0 A0 ) ,

Гand so,

      max    sup       j A0 (A0 A0 )-1 A0 =                        max        max         sup              i i   i  i
                                                                                                           j A0 (A0 A0 )
                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                           < 1.
      j/ A0 A      1
                                                                i{1,2,иии ,s} j / A0 A        1
             0                                                                        0




                                                               Appendix-8
A-6      Proof of Theorem 2 [Covariance Test under Measurement Error]


Let Y = Sm  + rm + DA0 A0 + and Mm = (I - Sm (Sm Sm )-1 Sm ), then

                                  Mm Y = Mm DA0 A0 + rm + Mm .

Recall that rm is the measurement error in the spline approximation. We can plug this into the
definition of the test statistic Tk in (5), yielding

                   Tk = Y Mm D (k+1 ) - Y Mm DAk Ak (k+1 ) / 2
                      = A0 DA0 Mm D (k+1 ) - A0 DA0 Mm DAk Ak (k+1 ) / 2
                      + rm D (k+1 ) - DAk Ak (k+1 )                    / 2

                      +    Mm D (k+1 ) - Mm DAk Ak (k+1 ) / 2 .


Our strategy is to bound the approximation error, which appears in the second term of the expan-
                                                            +
sion above. Define PAk = Mm DAk (DAk Mm DAk )-1 DAk Mm and PA k
                                                                = Mm DAk (DAk Mm DAk )-1 .
Consider the term

                                                                                  +             +
        rm D (k+1 ) - DAk Ak (k+1 )             = rm (PAk+1 - PAk )y - k+1 и rm (PA k+1
                                                                                        sk+1 - PA k
                                                                                                    sk )
                                                                    +             +
                                                = (k - k+1 ) и rm (PA k+1
                                                                          sk+1 - PA k
                                                                                      sk )
                                                                                +             +
                                                 (k - k+1 ) и rm          2    PA k+1
                                                                                      sk+1 - PA k
                                                                                                  sk 2 .



The last inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz. Notice that |s0 | is a constant with respect to n
in our application. From Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 in Tian and Taylor (2017), for some   0 as
                        
n  , when k+1  4 log p with probability 1 - :



                                                     |sk |0  Cs0 .

Thus,
                             +        2          2    +     2
                            PA k
                                 sk   2    sk    0   PA k        C 2 s2            2
                                                                      0 max |Mm D |ij .
                                                                         i,j



By normalization, maxi,j |Mm D|ij is of order O(n-1/2 ). Thus when 2      2
                                                                   m = E(rmi ) = o(1/(log p)),

                                           2
                                                                        +            +
 E rm D (k+1 ) - DAk Ak (k+1 )                  n и 2             2
                                                    m и (k - k+1 ) и E PAk+1 sk+1 - PAk sk
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                           2   = op (1).



                                                     Appendix-9
Now consider a new process,
                                       Y  = Mm DA0 A0 + .

Define the test statistic

                   
                  Tk = Y  Mm D (k+1 ) - Y  Mm DAk Ak (k+1 ) / 2

                      = A0 DA0 Mm D (k+1 ) - A0 DA0 Mm DAk Ak (k+1 ) / 2
                      +     Mm D (k+1 ) - Mm DAk Ak (k+1 ) / 2 .


Thus by Theorem 2 in Lockhart et al. (2014),



                                                      
                               lim P(Tk > t) = lim P(Tk > t)  e-t .
                               n                  n




A-7    Proof of Theorem 3 [Convergence Rate for IMSE]


First, a definition: we say that the compatibility condition is met for the set A0 if, for some m > 0
(independent of n), and for all  satisfying Ac
                                             0      1    3  A0   1,   it holds that



                                      A0   2
                                           1    ( ^ m  )s0 /m
                                                            2
                                                              ,                                 (A4)

Г where s0 is the number of elements in A0 and ^ m = (Mm Dn ) Mm Dn , which is the sample co-
variance matrix. Define m to be the compatibility constant.



Here we apply Lemma 1 in Xie and Huang (2009) and show that the compatibility constant for ^m
is asymptotically transformation invariant for spline and polynomial basis as n  , i.e.


                              1 ^
                                m - Dn Dn         0        in probability.
                              n


Thus




                                           Appendix-10
                           ^ m   D Dn 
                                    n
                                 -       0                    in probability.
                           A0 21       2
                                    A0 1



By Theorem 1, the irrepresentable condition holds for the design matrix Mn Dn . Since the irrep-
resentable condition implies compatibility condition as shown in Theorem 9.1 in van de Geer and
Bе
 uhlmann (2009), there exits some 0 > 0 such that


                                       ( Dn Dn  )      2
                                                   s0 /0 .
                                         A0 21


As a result, there exist an absolute constant  > 0 such that for some m0 > 0,


                                        ( ^ m)
                                                s0 / 2 .
                                         A0 21


The compatibility assumptions leads to the following results as shown in Lemma 6.1 in Bе
                                                                                       uhlmann
and van de Geer (2011):



                                 Mm Dn (^ -  ) 2 /n  42 s0 / 2 .                                  (A5)
                                               2            m




                              (^ - )   2
                                            (^ - )      2
                                                             162 s2  4
                                       2                1         0 /m                            (A6)


     ^ 
Let (, ^) be estimates from the lasso as in (3). Notice that

                                                                        s0
        ^ = (S Sm )-1 S (Yn - Dn  ) = (S Sm )-1 S
                                                             g (X ) +         dk (X )k + - Dn ^
              m        m                m        m
                                                                        k=1
                                                            s0
          = (Sm Sm )-1 Sm (g (X ) + ) + (Sm Sm )-1 Sm             dk (X )k - Dn ^
                                                            k=1

          =еm - (S Sm )-1 S Dn (^ - ) ,
                  m        m




Г where е = (S Sm )-1 S (g (X ) + ) are coefficients for a standard SEIVE regression on g (X ) + .
              m        m




                                           Appendix-11
                                                    s0                 2
IM SEn (m) =       ^m (x) - g (x) + Dn (x) 
                 E g                       ^-            dk (x)k           f (x)dx
                                                k=1
                                                         2
            =      ^m (x) - g (x) + Dn (x) (
                 E g                        ^ - )            f (x)dx
                                                                                                       2
            =    E Sm (x) (еm - m ) - rm (x) - Sm (x)(S Sm )-1 S Dn (^ -  ) + D(x) (^ - )                  f (x)dx
                                                       m        m


            =    E(Sm (x)(еm - m ) - rm (x))2 f (x)dx

                               (B 1)
                                                                                 2
            +    E Dn (x) (^ -  ) - Sm (x)(S Sm )-1 S Dn (^ - )                      f (x)dx
                                            m        m

                                            (B 2)

            +2    E Sm (x)(~m - m ) - rm (x)         Dn (x) (^ -  ) - Sm (x)(S Sm )-1 S Dn (^ -  ) f (x)dx .
                                                                              m        m

                                                                  (B 3)




First we look at (B3):


2   E Sm (x)(~m - m ) - rm (x)     Dn (x) (^ -  ) - Sm (x)(S Sm )-1 S Dn (^ -  ) f (x)dx
                                                            m        m

                                  2                                                            2
     E Sm (x)(~m - m ) - rm (x)       + E Dn (x) (^ -  ) - Sm (x)(S Sm )-1 S Dn (^ - )             f (x)dx
                                                                   m        m

= B1 + B2


Notice that part (B1) is the standard SEIVE term and as shown in theorem 1 in Hansen (2014a),

                                                              Km
                                       (B 1) = 2
                                               m+
                                                  2
                                                                 .
                                                               n


Now consider part (B2).



                                                                       2
(B 2) =     Dn (x) (^ -  ) - Sm (x) (S Sm )-1 S Dn (^ - )                  f (x)dx
                                      m        m


     = (^ - )       (Dn (x) - Sm (x) (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn ) (Dn (x) - Sm (x) (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn )f (x)dx (^ -  ).

                                                              (B 4)




                                           Appendix-12
Define E(Sm (x) Sm (x)) = Qm . Define



                                                                                                                                  
                                                               P(x>x(1) )           P(x>x(2) )               P(x>x(n-1) )
                                                                  n-1
                                                                                        
                                                                                     n-1 n-2
                                                                                                      иии           
                                                                                                                n-1 1 
                                                              
                                                               P(x>x(2) )           P(x>x(2) )               P(x>x(n-1) ) 
                                                                                                      иии
                                                              
                                                               n-1n-2                  n-2
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                n-2 1 
                                                                                                                          
            DDn =          Dn (x)Dn (x) f (x)dx =             
                                                                          .                                             .         .
                                                                          .
                                                                          .                                             .
                                                                                                                        .         
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                 P(x>x(n-1) )       P(x>x(n-1) )             P(x>x(n-1) )
                                                                        
                                                                    n-1 1
                                                                                           
                                                                                       n-2 1
                                                                                                      иии        1




Notice that
                1(x1 >x(1) )         1(x2 >x(1) )              1(xn >x(1) )      1(x1 >x(1) )         1(x1 >x(2) )                1(x1 >x(n-1) ) 
                  
                    n-1
                                       
                                         n-1
                                                        иии      
                                                                   n-1
                                                                                       
                                                                                       -1
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                          n-2
                                                                                                                            иии        
                1(x1 >x(2) )         1(x2 >x(2) )              1(xn >x(2) )      1(x2n                                                   1
                                                                                  >x(1) )             1(x2 >x(2) )                1(x2 >x(n-1) ) 
        
                  
                    n-2
                                       
                                         n-2
                                                        иии      
                                                                   n-2               n-1
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                          n-2
                                                                                                                            иии        
                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                 
Dn Dn = 
                                                                                                                                                 
                      .
                      .                                              .
                                                                     .
                                                                                            .
                                                                                            .                                           .
                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                   
        
                      .                                              .         
                                                                                            .                                           .          
                                                                                                                                                   
               1(x1 >x(n-1) )      1(x2 >x(n-1) )             1(xn >x(n-1) )        1(xn >x(1) )      1(xn >x(2) )                1(xn >x(n-1) )
                    
                      1
                                        
                                          1
                                                        иии        
                                                                     1
                                                                                      
                                                                                        n-1
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                          n-2
                                                                                                                            иии        
                                                                                                                                         1
                                                         
                               n-2                   1
                 1             n-1     иии          n-1 
         
                 n-2                                 1 
                               1       иии
         
                 n-1                                n-2 
        =         .                                 .   ,
                                                        
         
                  .
                  .                                 .
                                                    .   
                                                        
                  1             1
                 n-1           n-2     иии          1



Г and
                                                               n-1
                                                         (1) )- n        P(x>x(2) )- n- 2                           1
                                                                                                      P(x>x(n-1) )- n
                                              P(x>x                                                                           
                                     n-1
                                                                                
                                                                            n-1 n-2
                                                                                      n
                                                                                                иии           
                                                                                                          n-1 1
                                  x>x(2) )- n- 2
                                                                         P(x>x(2) )- n- 2                           1
                                                                                                                      
                                P(                                                                    P(x>x(n-1) )- n
                                n-1n-2       n                                        n
                                                                                                иии           
                                                                                                                      
                      1                                                                                  
                                                                              n-2                         n-2 1
                                                                                                                      
                 DDn - Dn Dn =        .                                                                       .
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                              .
                      n        
                                      .
                                      .                                                                       .
                                                                                                              .               
                                               1                                       1                                    1
                                                                                                                              
                                               P(x>x(n-1) )- n           P(x>x(n-1) )- n              P(x>x(n-1) )- n
                                                       
                                                   n-1 1
                                                                                 
                                                                             n-2 1
                                                                                                иии         1




    ^ be the empirical distribution. By Glivenko-Cantelli, P
                                                           ^ (x > x(i) ) =                                        n-i           
Let P                                                                                                              n    + op (1/ n), and
therefore

                                                    1
                                       DDn -          D Dn           0        with probability 1.
                                                    n n




                                                              Appendix-13
Second, Define
                                                                                                                           
                                                        1(x>x(1) )Sm (x) f (x)dx                      E(Sm (x) |x>x(1) )
                                                                                                           
                                                                  n-1                                        n-1           
                                                        1(x>x(2) )Sm (x) f (x)dx                      E(Sm (x) |x>x(2) )
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           
                                                                  n-2                                        n-2
                                                                                                                           
         DSn =      Dn (x)Sm (x) f (x)dx =                           .
                                                                                         =
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                           .
                                           
                                                                     .
                                                                     .
                                                                                          
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           
                                                       1(x>x(n-1) )Sm (x) f (x)dx                   E(Sm (x) |x>x(n-1) )
                                                                                                            
                                                                   1                                           1




                                  1(x1 >x(1) )     1(x2 >x(1) )                  1(xn >x(1) )                      
                                    
                                      n-1
                                                     
                                                       n-1
                                                                     иии           
                                                                                     n-1              Sm (x1 )
                                  1(x1 >x(2) )     1(x2 >x(2) )                  1(xn >x(2) )            
                                    
                                      n-2
                                                     
                                                       n-2
                                                                     иии           
                                                                                     n-2
                                                                                                Sm (x2 ) 
                 Dn Sm   =
                                                                                                         
                                        .
                                        .                                            .
                                                                                     .
                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                         
                          
                                        .                                            .        
                                                                                                    .    
                                                                                                         
                                 1(x1 >x(n-1) )   1(x2 >x(n-1) )               1(xn >x(n-1) )
                                                                     иии                       Sm (xn )
                                        1                1                            1
                                                                         n                      
                                                                         i=1   1(xi >x(1) )Sm (xi )
                                                                                  
                                                                                    n-1
                                                                         n                             
                                                                         i=1   1(xi >x(2) )Sm (xi )
                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                    n-2
                                                                                                       
                         =        Dn (x)Sm (x) f (x)dx =                             .
                                                                                                       .
                                                         
                                                                                     .
                                                                                     .
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                     n                                 
                                                                     i=1   1(xi >x(n-1) )Sm (xi )
                                                                                 
                                                                                   1



Notice first that


                                  n
                             1
                                       1(xi > x(1) )Smj (xi ) p E(Smj (x)|x > x(1) ).
                             n
                                 i=1



And notice 1(xi > x(1) )Smj (xi )  0 (m). By P-Glivenko-Cantelli, (see van der Vaart (1998)),



                    sup Pn 1(xi > x(1) )Smj (xi ) - P1(xi > x(1) )Smj (xi )  0                             a.s.
                     j



And finally,

           Qn =       Sm (x)Sm (x) f (x)dx =               Smi (x)Smj (x)f (x)dx                               = InОn ,
                                                                                                i=1:n,j =1:n



Г and,




                                                      Appendix-14
                                                        
                                                        1 i = j
                                   Smi (xk )Smj (xk ) =
                                                        0 otherwise.


We can further decompose (B4) into the empirical processes below:


(B 4) =       (Dn (x) - Sm (x) (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn ) (Dn (x) - Sm (x) (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn )f (x)dx

=      (Dn (x)Dn (x) - Dn (x)Sm (x) (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn

- Dn Sm (Sm Sm )-1 Sm (x)Dn (x) + Dn Sm (Sm Sm )-1 Sm (x)Sm (x) (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn )f (x)dx

=         Dn (x)Dn (x) f (x)dx -       Dn (x)Sm (x) f (x)dx(Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn

- Dn Sm (Sm Sm )-1          Sm (x)Dn (x) f (x)dx + Dn Sm (Sm Sm )-1    Sm (x)Sm (x) f (x)dx(Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn

= DDn - DSn (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn - Dn Sm (Sm Sm )-1 (DSn ) + Dn Sm (Sm Sm )-1 Qn (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn
    1                                     1             1
=     Dn (I - Sm (Sm Sm )-1 Sm )Dn + DDn - Dn Dn - DSn - Dn Sm (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn
    n                                     n             n
                 (B 5)                       (B 6)                          (B 7)
                           1                                      1
- Dn Sm (Sm Sm )-1    DSn - Dn Sm        + Dn Sm (Sm Sm )-1   Qn - Sm Sm (Sm Sm )-1 Sm Dn .
                           n                                      n
                    (B 8)                                          (B 9)




For part (B5),

             1
    (^ - )     D (I - Sm (Sm Sm )-1 Sm )Dn (^ -  ) = Mm Dn (^ - )       2
                                                                             42 s0 /m
                                                                                    2
                                                                                       42 s0 / 2 .
             n n                                                        n




The last inequality follows from equation (A5).

For part (B6),

                ^ -  ) DDn -       1        ^ -  )  DDn - 1 D Dn          ^ - ) 2
               (                     Dn Dn (                           и (
                                   n                         n n     
                                                                                2
                                                                              
                                                    op (1/ n)162 s2  4
                                                                  0 /m  op (1/ n).



                                                        
Similarly, (B7) and (B8) can be shown to be order op (1/ n). And (B9) is 0.




                                             Appendix-15
As a result,




                                                                          Km
                               IM SEn (m)  22
                                            m + 2
                                                  2
                                                                             + 42 s0 / 2 .
                                                                           n




A-8     Proof of Theorem 4 [Distribution of Jump Detection]


Let {(yi , xi )}n                                  0
                i=1 be observed data. Assume yi = di 1 + i , such that




                                                             0       if xi  z
                                                 d0
                                                  i =                                                    (A7)
                                                             1       if xi > z.

Let {(x(1) , x(2) , и и и , x(n) )} be the ordered statistic of {xi }n
                                                                     i=1 . Let k > 0 be an integer such that


                                                     x(k)  z < x(k+1) .

Now define
                                          (j )           0               if xi  x(j )
                                         Di      =                                                       (A8)
                                                         1               if xi > x(j ) .
                                                         n-j

                     (k) ~                                   
We can rewrite yi = Di                  ~
                          1 + i , where 1 =                      n - k1 . Thus:

                                                 n
                                 (j )                 (j ) (k) ~     (j )
                             D          Y =          Di Di      1 + Di
                                              i=1
                                                                     n
                                              
                                                     (n-k)~1         i=j +1   i
                                              
                                                      
                                                        n-j
                                                                 +   
                                                                       n-j
                                                                                      if j  k            (A9)
                                         =
                                                                     n
                                                           ~1
                                                     (n-j )          i=j +1   i
                                                                 +                   if j > k.
                                              
                                                       n-j             n-j




                                                        Appendix-16
                                  ^ = arg maxj V (j )
Define V (j ) = (D(j ) Y )2 , and k

                  V (j ) - V (k ) = (D(j ) Y )2 - (D(k) Y )2
                                = Y (D(j ) D(j ) - D(k) D(k) )Y
                                =~1 D(k) D(j ) D(j ) - D(k) D(k) D(k) ~1 + h( , ~1 )

                                =~1 D(k) D(j ) D(j ) D(k) - 1 ~1 + h( , ~1 ).




              h( , ~1 ) = 2~1 D(k) (D(j ) D(j ) - D(k) D(k) ) + (D(j ) D(j ) - D(k) D(k) ) .



Define

                                          ~1 1 - D(k) D(j ) D(j ) D(k) 
                                                                       ~1
                                 (j ) =                                     .
                                                        |j - k |


if j > k

                                                        ~2
                                                         1   2
                                              (j ) =       = 1 .
                                                       n-k


if j < k

                                                     ~2
                                                          n-k 2
                                                      1
                                           (j ) =       =     .
                                                    n-j   n-j 1


                                                                          ^ - k| > C ) <  :
By selection consistency of LASSO, for any fixed constant C , we have P (|k




                                                Appendix-17
                                    ^ - k | > C ) = P ( sup V (j )  V (k ))
                                P (|k
                                                             |j -k|>C

                                                         P ( sup |h( , ~1 )|                    inf       |j - k | (j ))
                                                             |j -k|>C                      |j -k|>C

                                                                            h( , ~1 )
                                                        P        sup                   inf  (j )
                                                              |j -k|>C       j-k      |j -k|>C

                                                                            h( , ~1 )
                                                        P        sup                   K                  ,
                                                              |j -k|>C       j-k

            2 > 0.
Г where K = 1



When j > k ,

                                                                        n                                 n
            (j )       (j )            (k)       (k)        1                     2      1                          2
       (D          D          ) - (D         D         ) =                   l        -                         l
                                                           n-j                          n-k
                                                                  l=j +1                              l=k+1
                                                                                      n                                 j                   n
                                                              j-k                                2       2
                                                        =                                   l         -                         l                   l
                                                          (n - j )(n - k )                              n-k
                                                                                  l=j +1                            l=k+1               l=j +1
                                                                        j
                                                           1                      2
                                                        -                     l
                                                          n-k
                                                                  l=k+1

                                                        = (j - k )o(1).


Similarly, one can show the same rate of convergence when j < k .



Next consider 2~1 D(k) (D(j ) D(j ) - D(k) D(k) ) .



When k > j ,

                                                                                                      n                     n
         2~1 D(k) D(j ) D(j ) - 2~1 D(k) D(k) D(k) = 21 n - k                                                 l - 21                l
                                                        n-j
                                                                                                l=j +1                  l=k+1
                                                                                                     n                                  k
                                                                                      j-k                               n-k
                                                                            = 21                              l + 21                            l
                                                                                      n-j                               n-j
                                                                                                l=k+1                               l=j +1

                                                                            = (j - k )o(1).



                                                               Appendix-18
                                             ^ - k| > C ) <  .
and for any  , we can find a C such that P (|k




                                              
For Asymptotic, consider 1  0 but       n1  . In this case,  (j ) can no longer be treated as
                                             ^ is
               2 ). Thus, the convergence of k
Op (1) but Op (1

                                              ^ = k + Op ( 1         -2
                                              k                           ).

Let
                                                    ^ = k + v-2 .
                                                    k        n

where n = Op ( 1 ) and v is a real number in a compact set. Define



                              K (B ) = {w : w = k + [v- 2
                                                      n ], |v | < B }.

we derive the limiting process of V (w) - V (k ) for w  K (B ) and then use the continuous mapping
                                                                                   
theorem for arg max to derive the asymptotic distribution. Recall that 1 =     ~1 / n - k




        V (w) - V (k ) = ~1 D(k) D(w) D(w) D(k) - 1 ~1 + 2~1 D(k) (D(w) D(w) - D(k) D(k) )

                     + (D(w) D(w) - D(k) D(k) ) .


When w > k ,

                                                                      n-w
                                    D(k) D(w) D(w) D(k) =                 .
                                                                      n-k

Thus,

                                                                                       -2
               ~1 D(k) D(w) D(w) D(k) - 1 
                                          ~1 = -~2 w - k                       = -~2 [vn ] = -v.
                                                 1                                 1
                                                   n-k                               n-k


Next,
                                                                 n
                                   (k)        (w)       (w)      l=w+1 l
                               D         (D         D         ) =              , and
                                                                     n-k




                                                    Appendix-19
                                                                                                n
                                                                          l=k+1                                  l
                                                      D(k) (D(k) D(k) ) =       .
                                                                           n-k
So
                                                                                               w                                      w
     ~1 D(k) (D(w) D(w) ) - ~1 D(k) (D(k) D(k) ) = -1                                                                         v-
                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                        l   = -1                              l   d -W1 (v ),
                                                                                                                              w-k
                                                                                              l=k+1                                  l=k+1


Г where W1 is a wiener process of degree v .



And finally,



                                                                          n                                      n
           (w)       (w)        (k)       (k)        1                                 2      1                               2
      (D         D         -D         D         ) =                                l       -                              l
                                                    n-w                                      n-k
                                                                  l=w+1                                     l=k+1
                                                            n                                       w                                  w               n
                                 w-k                                          2      1                               2      2
                           =                                          l           -                          l           -                        l           l   .
                             (n - w)(n - k )                                        n-k                                    n-k
                                                           l=k+1                                l=k+1                                 l=k+1           l=k+1

                           = op (1)




When w < k

                                                                                                   n-k
                                                       D(k) D(w) D(w) D(k) =                           .
                                                                                                   n-w

Thus,

                                                                                                                  -2
                     ~1 D(k) D(w) D(w) D(k) - 1 
                                                ~1 = -~2 k - w                                              =~2 [vn ] =  2 v-2 .
                                                       1                                                      1         1   n
                                                         n-w                                                    n-w


Next,
                                                                                                            n
                                                     (k)        (w)       (w)               n-k
                                                 D         (D         D           ) =                                    l,
                                                                                           n-w
                                                                                                        l=w+1

                                                                                                n
                                                                          l=k+1                                  l
                                                      D(k) (D(k) D(k) ) =       .
                                                                           n-k




                                                                      Appendix-20
So
                                                                                                    k                      n
       ~1 D   (k)        (w)       (w)      ~1 D    (k)        (k)       (k)      ~1    n-k                     ~   w - k l=k+1 l
                    (D         D         ) -              (D         D         ) =                          l + 1         
                                                                                       n-w                          n-w    n-k
                                                                                                 l=w+1
                                                                k                                       n
                                                 n-k                                         w - k l=k+1 l
                                          = 1                              l+       n - k1                 d W2 (v ),
                                                 n-w                                         n-w    n-k
                                                           l=w+1


Г where W2 is another wiener process of degree v .



Thus
                                           V (k + [v- 2
                                                    n ]) - V (k ) d -|v | + 2W (|v |).

By the continuous mapping theorem:

                                            2  ^
                                            n (k - k ) d arg max(-|v | + 2W (|v |)).
                                                                                v
                                                                                                                                    (A10)



A-9      Proof of Theorem 5 [Distribution of Kink Detection]


Assume there is only one 1th-order discontinuity such that the data generating process is:

                                                    yi = d1
                                                          i 1 + i ,

                                                                 0                     if xi  z
                                                    d1
                                                     i =
                                                                 (xi - z )            if xi > z.

Let k > 0 be an integer such that
                                                               x(k)  z < x(k+1) .


Define
                                             (j )          0                              if xi  x(j )
                                            Di      =
                                                           (xi - x(j ) )/j                if xi > x(j ) ,

                           n
Г where j =                i=j +1 (x(i)    - x(j ) )2



Consider the correlation matrix D(j ) Y




                                                                     Appendix-21
                       n
          (j )                   (j )                                            (j )
      D          Y =         Di         (xi - z ) и 1(xi > z )1 + Di
                       i=1
                       
                             1          n                                                 1         n
                       
                             j          i=k+1 (x(i)    - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) +          j         i=j +1 (x(i)    - x(j ) )   i         if j  k
                  =
                             1          n                                                 1         n
                       
                             j          i=j +1 (x(i)   - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) +          j         i=j +1 (x(i)    - x(j ) )   i        if j > k.


                                  ^ = arg maxj V (j ).
Define V (j ) = (D(j ) Y )2 , and k




V (j ) - V (k ) = (D(j ) Y )2 - (D(k) Y )2
                                   n                                              n
                           1                                     2        1                                     2         h1 ( , 1 )              if j  k
                   =                      (x(i) - x(j ) )   i        -                   (x(i) - x(k) )     i       +
                           j                                              k                                               h2 ( , 1 )              if j > k,
                                 i=j +1                                         i=k+1



Г where




                             n                                              2                  n                                             2
            12                                                                   12
h1 ( , 1 ) = 2                     (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )                - 2                   (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(k) )
            j                                                                    k
                        i=k+1                                                                 i=k+1

                                                                              (h11 )
                             n                                    n                                                                 n
               1
             +2 2                  (x(i) - x(j ) )      i                (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) - 21                             (x(i) - x(k) )   i    .
               j          i=j +1                                i=k+1                                                       i=k+1

                                                                                        h12




                                                                          2
                             n                                                                  n                                             2
                  2
                  1                                          12
h2 ( , 1 ) =                  (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) - 2                                       (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(k) )
                  2
                  j     i=j +1
                                                             k
                                                                                              i=k+1

                                                                                h21
                             n                                    n                                                                 n
                  1
             +2                    (x(i) - x(j ) )      i                (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) - 21                             (x(i) - x(k) )   i    .
                  2
                  j       i=j +1                                i=j +1                                                      i=k+1

                                                                                        h22




                                                                      Appendix-22
First consider the common terms in V (j ) - V (k ) when j  k and j > k . We show that it is of
order Op (x(k) - x(j ) ). This quantity will be shown of order smaller than h11 , h12 , h21 and h22 .



       n                                             n
 1                                 2           1                                    2
           (x(i) - x(j ) )     i       -                   (x(i) - x(k) )       i
 j                                             k
     i=j +1                                        i=k+1
           n                                         n                                        n                                  n
  1                                1                                                    1                             1
=              (x(i) - x(j ) ) i -                         (x(i) - x(k) )   i                     (x(i) - x(j ) ) i +                    (x(i) - x(k) )   i
  j                                k                                                    j                             k
        i=j +1                                     i=k+1                                    i=j +1                              i=k+1




                   n                                         n                                         max(j,k)
           1                                         1                                        1
                          (x(i) - x(j ) ) i =                    (x(i) - x(j ) ) i +                                (x(i) - x(j ) )       i
           j                                         j                                        j
                 i=j +1                                    i=k+1                                 i=min(j +1,k+1)
                                                             n                                            n
                                                     1                                         k - j
                                               =                   (x(i) - x(j ) ) i +                       (x(i)     - x(j ) )     i
                                                     k                                         k j
                                                           i=k+1                                      i=k+1
                                                              max(j,k)
                                                 1
                                               +                                (x(i) - x(j ) ) i .
                                                 j
                                                         i=min(j +1,k+1)




                                                                                                                   1        max(j,k)
Then by the irrepresentable condition, j  k as long as 1 = O(1/ n), thus                                           j        i=min(j +1,k+1) (x(i) -
x(j ) ) i = o(1) and



                                           n                                                          n
                       k - j                                               2k - j
                                                                                 2
                                               (x(i) - x(j ) ) i =                                        (x(i) - x(j ) )   i
                       k j                                               k j (k + j )
                                       i=k+1                                                         i=k+1

                                                                     = Op ((x(j ) - x(k) )).




                                                                   Appendix-23
This is due to
                               n                                n
           2
           k   -   2
                   j   =            (x(i) - x(k) ) -  2
                                                                       (x(i) - x(j ) )2
                            i=k+1                             i=j +1
                               n                                                            max(j,k)
                       =            (x(i) - x(k) )2 - (x(i) - x(j ) )2 -                                    (x(i) - x(j ) )2
                            i=k+1                                                        i=min(j +1,k+1)
                                                  n                                             max(j,k)
                       = (x(j ) - x(k) )                  (2x(i) - x(j ) - x(k) ) -                              (x(i) - x(j ) )2 .
                                                 i=k+1                                      i=min(j +1,k+1)




As a result
                                             n                                       n
                                    1                                        1
                                                 (x(i) - x(j ) ) i -                      (x(i) - x(k) )     i
                                    j                                        k
                                         i=j +1                                   i=k+1
                                                                n
                                         (x(k) - x(j ) )
                                   =                                    i   + O((x(k) - x(j ) )) .
                                              k
                                                              i=j +1

                                   = Op (x(k) - x(j ) )



Together with


                                     n                                        n
                            1                                   1
                                            (x(i) - x(j ) ) i +                     (x(i) - x(k) )      i   = Op (1)
                            j                                   k
                                   i=j +1                                   i=k+1



We have


                        n                                               n
                 1                                    2        1                                    2
                               (x(i) - x(j ) )    i       -                   (x(i) - x(k) )    i       = Op (x(k) - x(j ) )
                 j                                             k
                      i=j +1                                        i=k+1



Next, we focus on h11 , h12 , h21 and h22 . Lmma 2 highlights the connection among these four
quantities, that is



                 h21 ( , 1 ) = h11 ( , 1 ) + O(1),                     and        h22 ( , 1 ) = h12 ( , 1 ) + op (1)




                                                              Appendix-24
As a result, we can combine the case of k < j and k > j and only consider h11 and h12 :




                            n                                            2
              12
                                                                               2 2
       h11   = 2                    (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )            - 1 k
              j
                        i=k+1
                                                                                                           
                                n                                            2
                 2
                 1
             =                       (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )               - 4   2 2   2 
                                                                                   k - k j - k
                 2
                 j       i=k+1
                                                                                                           
                                n                                            2
                 2
                 1
             =                       (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )               - 4   2 2   2 
                                                                                   k - k j - k
                 2
                 j       i=k+1
                               2                n                                     n
                              1
             = (x(k) - x(j ) ) 2                        (x(i) - x(k) )                    (x(i) - x(k) )(2x(i) - x(j ) - x(k) )
                              j
                                              i=k+1                                  i=k+1
                        n
             -2
              k                 (x(i) - x(k) ) + (x(i) - x(j ) )
                     i=k+1
                                      2         n                                     n
                                      1
             = (x(k) - x(j ) )                          (x(i) - x(k) )                    (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                                      2
                                      j       i=k+1                                  i=k+1
                         n
             -   2
                 k              (x(i) - x(k) ) + (x(k) - x(j ) )
                     i=k+1
                                                                                                     
                                                    n                            2
                                    12
             = (x(k) -      x(j ) )2 2                   (x(i) - x(k) )              - 2
                                                                                       k (n - k )
                                                                                                  .
                                    j
                                               i=k+1




Notice that this quantity is of order O (n - k )(x(k) - x(j ) )2 1
                                                                 2 . Next for h ,
                                                                               12




                                                              Appendix-25
                      n                                   n                                                          n
           1
   h12   =2 2                (x(i) - x(j ) )   i                (x(i) - z )(x(i) - x(j ) ) - 21                               (x(i) - x(k) )   i
           j
                     i=k+1                            i=k+1                                                         i=k+1
                        n         n
              1
         =2                             (x(l) - z )(x(l) - x(j ) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) - (x(l) - x(j ) )2 (x(i) - x(k) )                            i
              2
              j      i=k+1      l=k+1
                                          n           n
              1
         =2     (x(k) - x(j ) )                               (x(l) - x(i) )(x(l) - x(j ) )             i
              2
              j                        i=k+1       l=k+1
                                         n           n
              1
         =2     (x(k) - x(j ) )                               (x(l) - x(i) )(x(l) - x(k) )              i
              2
              j                        i=k+1       l=k+1
                                          n           n
              1
         +2     (x(k) - x(j ) )2                              (x(l) - x(i) )          i        .
              2
              j                         i=k+1       l=k+1




We show next that for any 1 =                  n ,        x(k) - x(j ) = O(- 1
                                               n-k                         n ). From h11 and h12 above




                                                                                                                                  
                                                                             n                         2
                                                 2
              V (j ) - V (k ) = (x(k) - x(j ) )2 2
                                                 1 
                                                                                  (x(i) - x(k) )            - 2
                                                                                                              k (n - k )
                                                                                                                         
                                                j
                                                                        i=k+1
                                                                         n           n
                                       1
                                 +2      (x(k) - x(j ) )                                     (x(l) - x(i) )(x(l) - x(k) )            i
                                       2
                                       j                            i=k+1          l=k+1
                                                                       n              n
                                       1
                                 +2      (x(k) - x(j ) )2                                     (x(l) - x(i) )    i         .
                                       2
                                       j                                i=k+1       l=k+1


And when V (j ) > V (k ), we have
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                         n                      2
                                                      2
                                                      k                   1
                         |x(k) - x(j ) |n                       -                             (x(i) - x(k) )        
                                                    n-k                  n-k
                                                                                    i=k+1
                                               n                         n
                                   1                       1
                           2                                                     (x(l) - x(i) )(x(l) - x(k) )         i
                                  n-k                     n-k
                                              i=k+1                 l=k+1
                                                                    n                         n
                                                     1                            1
                          + 2|x(k) - x(j ) |                                                       (x(l) - x(i) )     i       .
                                                    n-k                          n-k
                                                                 i=k+1                    l=k+1



                2          1          n                             2
Notice that     k
               n-k   >    n-k         i=k+1 (x(i)   - x(k) )            by Cauchy-Schwarz. Thus




                                                                Appendix-26
                                                          n                      n
                               C1      2                           1
         |x(k) - x(j ) |                                                                 (x(l) - x(i) )(x(l) - x(k) )       i           .
                             n + O(1) n - k                       n-k
                                                     i=k+1               l=k+1



Thus x(k) - x(j ) = O(- 1                          -1
                      n ). Now let x(k) - x(j ) = vn , we have




                                                                                                   
                                                      n                              2
                             v2              1                                                2
                                                                                              k
    V (j ) - V (k ) =                                         (x(i) - x(k) )             -         
                        2
                        k /(n   - k)        n-k                                              n-k
                                                   i=k+1
                                                                                                                                                (A11)
                                                     n                   n
                         v        2                             1
                    + 2                                                          (x(l) - x(i) )(x(l) - x(k) )           i           .
                     k /(n - k ) n - k                         n-k
                                                  i=k+1               l=k+1



We can further expand the second term in equation A11 as

                         n         n
               2
                                        (x(l) - x(i) )(x(l) - x(k) )         i
              n-k
                        i=k+1 l=k+1
                             n   n
                   1
              =                          (x(l) - x(i) )(x(l) - x(k) ) i + (x(i) - x(l) )(x(i) - x(k) )                  l       .
                  n-k
                          i=k+1 l=k+1



This is in the form of V -statistic. Define il = (x(l) - x(i) )(x(l) - x(k) ) i + (x(i) - x(l) )(x(i) - x(k) ) l .
Then by hoeffding decomposition, since




                                    E(il |i) = El (x(l) - x(k) )(x(l) - x(i) )                    i.




we have the variance




                   1                                                                                               2
        var                        il    = var (E(il |i)) = E El (x(l) - x(k) )(x(l) - x(i) )
               (n - k )3/2    il
                                                                                                                                    2
                                         = 2 E(x(l) - x(k) )2           E(x(l) - x(k) )2 - E(x(l) - x(k) )                                  .



On the other hand, the first term in equation A11


                                                     Appendix-27
                                                                        
                             n                          2
                 1                                                  2   p                                                      2
                                  (x(i) - x(k) )            -       k     - E(x(i) - x(k) )2 - E(x(i) - x(k) )                       .
                n-k                                             n-k
                          i=k+1




Thus
                                                                  2                                         Z
                                      n (x(k) - x(k
                                                  ^) ) d arg max(v C + vZ ) = -                               ,
                                                                               v                           2C


Г and


                                                                                                        
                                                  Z                                    1                
                                             -      N0,
                                                                                                        .
                                                 2C                                (E(x(l) -x(k) ))2    
                                                                        2 1-
                                                                                   (E(x(l) -x(k) )2 )


Notice that we will not be able to perform the same algebra trick for general k -th order discontinuity
as




                n                                                   2
     2
     1                                 K                        K         2 2
                        (x(i) - x(k) ) (x(i) - x(j ) )                  - 1 k
     2
     j      i=k+1
                                                                                                           
                         n                                                 2
         2
         1
     =   2
                             (x(i) - x(k) )K (x(i) - x(j ) )K                  - 4   2 2   2 
                                                                                 k - k j - k
         j
                     i=k+1

                       2                 n       K -1
                      1
     = (x(k) - x(j ) ) 2                            (x(i) - x(j ) )a (x(i) - x(k) )2K -a-1
                      j
                                       i=k+1 a=0
            n
     и              (x(i) - x(k) )K (x(i) - x(j ) )K + (x(i) - x(k) )2K
         i=k+1
                    n     K -1                                                             n
     -2
      k                          (x(i) - x(j ) )a (x(i) - x(k) )K -a-1                          (x(i) - x(k) )K + (x(i) - x(j ) )K       .
                i=k+1 a=0                                                               i=k+1




                                                                    Appendix-28
A-10         Lemma 2 [Kink Detection Algebra 1]

                                             
Lemma 2. For any 1 of order greater than O(1/ n)

                                                   n                                        2
                                   12
                                                                                                  2 2
                      h21 ( , 1 ) = 2                  (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )            - 1 k + O(1)
                                   j
                                               i=k+1

                          n                             n                                                      n
                  1
h22 ( , 1 ) = 2               (x(i) -x(j ) )   i               (x(i) -x(k) )(x(i) -x(j ) ) -21                      (x(i) -x(k) )   i   +op (1).
                  2
                  j    i=k+1                           i=k+1                                              i=k+1



Proof. Notice that the first equation is equivalent as showing



                                               2
          n                                                           n                                        2
 2
 1                                            12
               (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) = 2                           (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )           + O(1) when k < j.
 2
 j      i=j +1
                                              j
                                                                i=k+1




                                                                                                                               2
         n                                     2        n                                     j
2
1                                                   12
              (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )        = 2      (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) +       (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
2
j                                                   j i=j +1
     i=k+1                                                                                  i=k+1
                                                                                         2
                                                     2  n
                                                    1
                                                   = 2      (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                                                    j i=j +1
                                                                  j                                        2
                                                    12
                                                   + 2                    (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                                                    j
                                                               i=k+1
                                                                                                          
                                                       2          n                                                  j
                                                       1
                                                   +                      (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )                  (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) .
                                                       2
                                                       j       i=j +1                                              i=k+1



                                                                                                          j
Then by the irrepresentable condition, j  k as 1 = O(1/ n), thus                                          i=k+1 (x(i)      - x(j ) )(x(i) -
x(k) ) = O(1) thus the last three terms in the above equation are of order O(1). To show the second
equation with respect to h22 , notice that it is equivalent as showing




                                                            Appendix-29
                         n                              n
                1
                           (x(i) - x(j ) ) i           (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                2
                j   i=j +1                       i=k+1
                          n                           n
                    1
                =             ( x (i) - x     )
                                          (j ) i           (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )         + op (1).
                    2
                    j i=j +1                        i=j +1




and since



                                 n                              n
                     1
                                (x(i) - x(j ) ) i           (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                     2
                     j   i=j +1                       i=k+1
                               n                           n
                         1
                     -             ( x (i) - x     )
                                               (j ) i           (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) )
                         2
                         j i=j +1                        i=j +1
                                     n                              j
                          1
                     =                   (x(i) - x(j ) )   i            (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) .
                          2
                          j       i=j +1                        i=k+1



                                                                                            1     j
Then, by the irrepresentable condition, j  k as 1 = O(1/ n), thus                           j     i=k+1 (x(i) - x(j ) )(x(i) -
x(k) ) = o(1) and thus


                             n                              j
                 1
                                  (x(i) - x(j ) )   i           (x(i) - x(k) )(x(i) - x(j ) ) = op (1).
                 2
                 j       i=j +1                         i=k+1




                                                        Appendix-30
