                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DECLINING WORKER TURNOVER:
                THE ROLE OF SHORT DURATION EMPLOYMENT SPELLS

                                         Michael J. Pries
                                        Richard Rogerson

                                       Working Paper 26019
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26019


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




We are thankful for helpful comments and suggestions from seminar participants at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the 2019 MidWest Macro Conference at the University of
Georgia. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26019.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael J. Pries and Richard Rogerson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Declining Worker Turnover: the Role of Short Duration Employment Spells
Michael J. Pries and Richard Rogerson
NBER Working Paper No. 26019
June 2019
JEL No. E24,J23

                                         ABSTRACT

Using the Quarterly Workforce Indicators, we document that a significant amount of the decline
in labor market turnover during the last two decades is accounted for by the decline in
employment spells that last less than a quarter. Using a search and matching model that
incorporates noisy signals about the quality of a worker-firm match, we show that improved
candidate screening by firms can account for the decline in short-lived employment spells.
Quantitative exercises show that this explanation can account for the observed changes in various
labor market outcomes, whereas alternative potential explanations, such as increased hiring costs,
cannot.


Michael J. Pries
Department of Economics
3034 Jenkins and Nanovic Halls
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
mpries@nd.edu

Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics
JRR Building Room 292
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rdr@princeton.edu
1        Introduction
Following the recent literature documenting a large secular decline in labor market flows in
the US over the past few decades (see, for example, Davis and Haltiwanger (2014), Hyatt
and Spletzer (2013), and Molloy et al. (2016)), researchers have sought to understand the
source of this decline.1 One strand of this literature assesses the extent to which this
declining "dynamism" represents a reduction in the responsiveness of incumbent firms to
changing circumstances or of entrepreneurs to new possibilities. (See, for example, the
recent paper by Engbom (2018)). In this paper, we present evidence that an additional
and novel channel also plays a quantitatively significant role. In particular, we argue that
changes in the manner in which firms hire new employees have also made an important
contribution to the decline in labor market flows. These changes result in newly formed
matches that are of higher expected quality and therefore more likely to endure. This
increase in the quality of newly formed matches leads to less subsequent turnover and can
explain an important part of the overall decline in labor market flows.
        The starting point for our analysis is the observation that much of the decline in worker
turnover in the US labor market is accounted for by a decrease in employment spells of
very short (less than a quarter) duration. Using data from the QWI (Quarterly Workforce
Indicators), we document that in 1999, spells that lasted a quarter or less accounted for
about 8% of all employment spells, and that by 2015, this figure had fallen to 4.9%.2 This
decline in employment spells that end in their first quarter accounted for more than half
(55%) of the overall 27.6% decline in the rate of separations.
        This reduction in short-duration employment spells is pervasive; that is, it is not due
to shifting demographics or to changes in industry or firm-size composition. As such, it
must be the result of changes in the labor market environment--changes in search frictions,
changes in policy, or some other change in how the labor market functions. To assess these
possibilities we develop a version of the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides (DMP) model that
can account for the salient features of the employment spell distribution in the US.
        Our model differs from simple DMP models along two dimensions. First, when a worker
and firm meet they observe a noisy signal about match quality. Second, matches are "expe-
rience goods" in the sense that the quality of the match is revealed over time as production
takes place. This second feature gives rise to a match hazard rate that declines rapidly
with match tenure, and allows us to capture the key features of the empirical relationship
between tenure and hazard rates. In the model's equilibrium, a firm and worker will choose
    1
     This literature has also documented a secular decline in several measures of establishment and firm
dynamics as well. See, for example, Decker et al. (2017), and Pugsley and Sahin (2018).
   2
     Both of these numbers are higher--slightly over 10% in 1999 and about 5.5% in 2015--if one uses a
point in time measure of employment, rather than total number of employment spells in a quarter, in the
denominator of the rate calculation, as discussed in section 2.


                                                   1
to form a match upon meeting only if the value of the noisy signal exceeds some threshold.
Changes in the equilibrium value of this threshold influence the average quality of newly
formed matches, and thus influence the hazard rates of newly formed matches.
       Our model yields a simple three parameter stochastic process that summarizes the dy-
namics of employment spells in steady state. One of the parameters reflects the overall
turnover rate in the labor market, i.e., a constant rate at which matches exogenously break
up. This captures both the job creation/destruction process and the rate at which workers
separate to pursue other options. The other two parameters characterize the quality of
newly formed matches and the speed with which true match quality is revealed. We show
that this simple three parameter process can capture the salient empirical properties of the
employment spell distribution in the late 1990s. We then use this representation to infer
what changes in these three parameters are required to account for the observed changes
in worker turnover that occurred in the subsequent two decades; in particular, the large
changes in the hazard rates of low-tenure employment spells. While we find the largest
source of the observed drop in turnover is a decrease in the parameter reflecting the overall
level of turnover in the economy, we find that it accounts for only 60% of the observed drop,
with most of the remaining 40% accounted for by the parameter that captures the average
quality of newly formed matches.
       We then use a calibrated version of our model to examine what changes in primitives
can empirically account for the change in observed match quality of newly formed matches
in a reasonable way. Our model suggests three intuitive mechanisms that can lead to this.
First, if the search process that brings workers and firms together becomes more efficient,
then workers and firms will be more discriminating when deciding which matches to form.
Second, an increase in training or start-up costs incurred after a match is formed will also
lead workers and firms to become more selective, as they will want to avoid paying these
costs for matches that later turn out to be unprofitable. Lastly, if the initial signal about
match quality is of higher quality (less noisy), then firms and workers will be more able to
weed out unprofitable matches ex ante.
       While improvements in search efficiency or increases in training or start-up costs as-
sociated with hiring can both lead to a higher threshold for match formation, and hence
a higher quality of newly formed matches, we find that each of these explanations would
also imply changes in the job-finding rate and unemployment rate that are so large as to
render these explanations empirically implausible.3 In contrast, we show that a decrease
in the variance of the noisy signal, i.e. an increase in the accuracy of the initial signal, can
   3
     Two other possible sources of an increase in the threshold are an increase in worker dismissal costs or
a decrease in firm recruiting costs. An increase in dismissal costs has implications that are similar to those
of an increase in start-up costs, and a decrease in recruiting costs is very similar to an increase in match
efficiency.



                                                      2
account for the improvement in average quality of newly formed matches with empirically
reasonable effects on both the worker job-finding rate and the unemployment rate.
   Our finding of an important role for a more efficient screening process for new hires is
consistent with several studies that looked at changes in the ways that firms screen and hire
workers. Advances in information technology and data analytics have allowed employers to
rely more heavily on "workforce analytics" and worker screening tests to identify workers
better suited for particular jobs, or to identify potential worker shortcomings before making
a hire. For example, Autor and Scarborough (2008) explore the increased utilization of test-
based worker screening by examining data from a large national retail chain that adopted an
electronic application that incorporated a computer-administered personality test. Of note,
the short-lived jobs emphasized in the present paper are common at this retail chain, with
median and mean job durations of 99 and 174 days, respectively. Autor and Scarborough
(2008) find that the introduction of the worker screens increased the mean and median
durations by between 10 and 12%. Hoffman, Kahn and Li (2017) similarly examine worker
turnover among a sample of service sector firms that rely on worker analytics screening
tests that make hiring recommendations based on "a large battery of questions, including
those on computer/technical skills, personality, cognitive skills, fit for the job, and various
job scenarios." They find that the utilization of these methods increases job tenures by just
over 25%.
   Our analysis suggests a nuanced perspective on the decline in worker turnover may be
required. Whereas the literature has tended to ask whether this decline reflects negative or
benign influences, our analysis suggests that the overall effect may well reflect a combination
of effects that may differ in their effect on welfare. Improvements in information technology
may have led to more efficient hiring decisions as modelled here, at the same time that other
factors have decreased the diffusion of technological innovation, as suggested by Akcigit and
Ates (2019).
   The model studied in this paper is closely related to the model we developed in Pries
and Rogerson (2005). The key difference is that here we explicitly model the information
received at the time of a meeting and how this affects the distribution of priors regarding
match quality. Our analysis is also related to complementary work in Mercan (2017). While
focusing on a different data sources, and more specifically on the observed decline job-to-
job transitions, Mercan (2017) also argues that more precise initial information about the
quality of job matches is an important factor in accounting for the reduction in labor market
flows over the last two decades.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section documents the key facts
about the decline in worker turnover and the role of short duration employment spells in
accounting for this change. Section 3 considers several possible explanations for the decline


                                              3
in short duration employment spells. Section 4 presents our general equilibrium model
of match formation and derives the three parameter process that fully characterizes the
distribution of employment spells in steady state. Section 5 uses this reduced form process
to shed light on what changes in those parameters are needed to account for the decline in
worker turnover patterns in the US between 1999 and 2015. Section 6 then uses a calibrated
version of our model to assess what primitives are best able to generate the needed increase
in the quality of newly formed matches. Section 7 concludes.


2     Evidence on Changes in Labor Market Turnover
In this section we use data from the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI) to document
several changes in the nature of labor market turnover during the last two decades.

2.1    Data
The QWI is a publicly available database that provides information on employment flows
based on microdata in the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) database.
The LEHD in turn uses quarterly state unemployment insurance (UI) records to identify
worker-firm employment spells.
    The data utilized here covers 30 states for a period of 17 years, from the first quarter
of 1999 to the second quarter of 2015. These 30 states account for about 65% of national
employment; incorporating data prior to 1999Q1 would require that our data coverage be
limited to a smaller number of states. The QWI provides state-level information on various
measures of employment, hires, and separations that can be disaggregated by worker char-
acteristics (age, sex, educational attainment, race, and ethnicity) and firm characteristics
(industry, firm age, and firm size). Greater detail on the data and on the construction of
the various measures of labor market turnover that are used in this section are given in the
data appendix.
    The QWI allows us to calculate two important measures of turnover. First, we can
measure the total number of new spells that begin within a given quarter. These are
worker-firm pairs that show earnings to the state UI agency in one quarter, but show no
such earnings in the preceding quarter. We will refer to this as the number of hires in period
t and denote it by Ht . Similarly, separations in period t, denoted as St , are identified as
worker-firm pairs that show earnings reported in quarter t, but not in quarter t + 1. If we
let Nt denote the total number of spells in quarter t, then we can calculate a separations
rate st = St /Nt and a hires rate ht = Ht /Nt .4
   4
     An alternative measure that could be used in the denominator would be the average of the beginning-
of-quarter employment and the end-of-quarter employment. By construction, this measure will be less than


                                                   4
    Importantly for our purposes, the QWI also allows us to measure the incidence of spells
of different duration, as well as the hazard rates at which spells of different duration come
to an end. In particular, we can identify employment spells that belong to three different
(current) tenure categories: one quarter, two quarters, or three-plus quarters. While it
would be ideal if we could identify employment spells of all tenure levels, rather than
having to lump together all spells with three or more quarters of tenure, the information
that we do have is still sufficient to allow us to investigate the importance of the changing
incidence of employment spells of short duration, which is our primary focus.
    The counts for the number of worker-firm pairs in quarter t in the three tenure categories
are denoted by Nit , for i = 1, 2, 3. Note that N1t = Ht . The number of employment spells
in the second tenure category, N2t , are worker-firm pairs with earnings reported for quarters
t and t - 1, but not for t - 2. The number of spells in the last tenure category, N3t , (in this
instance the 3 in the notation denotes three-plus quarters of tenure) consists of all other
worker-firm pairs.
    Whereas the Nit counts tell us the number of employments spells with a particular
current tenure level, we can also identify the number of spells in period t whose final tenure
is either one, two, or three-plus quarters. That is, among the spells that are in their first
quarter of tenure, N1t , we can identify the spells that also end during that first quarter as
those spells in N1t that do not report any earnings in period t + 1. We let Q1t denote the
number of these spells that last just one quarter. In a similar manner, among the N2t spells
that are in their second quarter, we identify those that end in the quarter as the worker-firm
pairs that do not report earnings in period t + 1, and we let Q2t denote the number of these
spells. Finally, we let Q3t denote employment spells with three or more quarters of tenure
that come to an end in period t.
    For the one quarter and two quarter categories, we can use these counts to calculate
two different rates of interest. First, we can calculate incidence rates. That is, we let
q1t denote the fraction of total spells in period t that are one quarter spells: q1t = Q1t /Nt .
Similarly, q2t = Q2t /Nt is the incidence rate of spells that last just two quarters (with period
t being their last quarter). These incidence rates tell us what share of overall employment
is accounted for by short duration spells.
    Second, we can calculate hazard rates for the tenure categories (i.e. the rates at which
spells of different tenure levels come to an end). We let 1t denote this hazard rate for one
quarter spells, and it is calculated as the fraction of spells currently in their first quarter
that also end in that first quarter: Q1t /N1t . Similarly, 2t = Q2t /N2t and 3t = Q3t /N3t
denote the hazard rate for two quarter and three-plus quarter spells.
the total number of employment spells, since it excludes spells that begin and end in the same quarter.
While the difference between the two measures affects the level of the various calculated rates, it does not
affect the trend, which is the primary focus of this paper.


                                                     5
   Note that the three tenure categories that we utilize refer to how many boundaries
(between measurement quarters) a spell crosses and not the actual duration of the spell.
According to our definitions, a spell that begins in the last week of one quarter and ends
in the first week of the subsequent quarter will count as a two quarter spell even though
its duration is less than one quarter. It follows that our measure of one quarter spells
is a downward biased estimate of the number of spells that last less than one quarter of
calendar time, and similarly, that our measure of three-plus quarter spells is an upward
biased measure of the number of spells that last at least three quarters of calendar time.
Because we will focus on how these measures have changed over time, we do not feel that
this is a first order issue. In the theoretical analysis later in the paper, we solve the model
at a weekly frequency and measure the three categories of spells in a way that parallels how
they are measured in the data.

2.2     Four Facts
In this subsection we utilize the QWI data to document four pertinent facts regarding
changes in the nature of labor market turnover that have occurred over the period 1999 to
2015. They are:


  1. Labor market turnover, as measured by either the hires rate ht or the separations rate
     st , has decreased significantly. Changing composition of worker and firm characteris-
     tics accounts for only a small fraction of this aggregate decline.

  2. A reduction in short-duration (one and two quarters) employment spells accounts
     for a very large fraction of the reduction in turnover. The decline in short-duration
     employment spells is pervasive. It has occurred across all age-sex groups, industries,
     and firm size categories.

  3. The decline in the incidence of the shortest employment spells--ones that last less
     than a quarter--can be broken down into two components: a declining hires rate ht
     and a declining hazard rate for first-quarter spells, 1t . The two components each
     account for about half of the decline in the incidence of one quarter spells.

  4. The hazard rates of employment spells of short tenure, 1t and 2t , have declined by
     much more than the hazard rates of employment spells with longer tenure, 3t .

   In the remainder of this subsection, we provide the evidence on each of these findings.

2.2.1    The Decline in Labor Market Turnover

The first fact that we document is a large decline in worker turnover. This fact has been
documented elsewhere, often using other data sources (see, for example, Davis and Halti-


                                              6
                                                                           ht




                      .22
                                                                           st




                      .2
                      .18
                      .16
                      .14



                            2000        2005           2010         2015
                                                Year




   Figure 1: The hires rate and separations rate have declined significantly since 1999.



wanger (2014) and Hyatt and Spletzer (2013)). We document it here as it is important to
have internally consistent measures from our data set.
   Figure 1 displays the time series for both the hires rate, ht , and the separations rate, st .
It is clear from the figure that there has been a significant downward trend in labor market
turnover over the sample period covered. The declines were greatest during the 2001 and
2007-8 recessions, and in each case there was minimal recovery of the two turnover measures
subsequent to the recession. Comparing the rates in 2015 with the rates in 1999 (two "full
employment" years), we see that both have declined by about 25%.
   It is well known that turnover rates vary with worker and firm characteristics, and
this period has seen significant changes in the distributions of those characteristics. While
the changing distributions of worker and firm characteristics can account for some of the
aggregate decline just noted, it is important to note that the decline is observed even when
controlling for these characteristics. Figure 2 shows the beginning of period (1999) and
end of period (2015) hires rates, conditioning on different characteristics. In each of the
plots, the various sub-groups consistently lie beneath the 45-degree line, indicating that the
decline in hires rates has been pervasive (workers aged 14-18 are the one exception). The
plots look very similar for separations rates and so are not shown.

2.2.2   The Importance of Short-duration Employment Spells

In order to assess the importance of separations among short-lived spells in the overall
decline of the separations rate, we decompose the separations rate into the components
accounted for by our three tenure categories.
   Note that Q1t , Q2t , and Q3t give the contribution of one quarter, two quarter, and


                                               7
                                                                                                            14-18




                                                                                                                                      .5
          .5
                                                                                                  14-18




                                                                                                                                      .4
          .4
                                                                                                 19-21                                                                                                                       Agric

                                                                                        19-21
 2015 Hires rate (h)




                                                                                                                             2015 Hires rate (h)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Admin




                                                                                                                                          .3
          .3




                                                                          22-24                                                                                                                        AccomRest
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Arts
                                                                     22-24                                                                                                                         Const




                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                         Other
                                                                                                                                                                                          Retail
                                                                                                                                                                               InforEduc
                                                                                                                                                                                  Transport
          .2




                                                         25-34                                                                                                                         RealEst
                                                                                                                                                                                     ProfServ
                                                        25-34                                                                                                                 Health
                                                                                                                                                                             Wholesale




                                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                                                                                                                         Manag
                                                                                                                                                                      Mining
                                                                                                                                                                        Manuf
                                                                                                                                                                         FIRE
                                             35-44
                                             35-44
                                     45-54                                                                                                               Utilities
                                     45-54            65-99
          .1




                                    55-64            65-99
                                   55-64




                                                                                                                                      0
                        .1               .2                     .3                       .4                         .5                              0          .1                  .2             .3               .4                .5
                                                        1999 Hires rates (h)                                                                                                      1999 Hires rate (h)
          .3




                                                                                                                                      .3
                  .25




                                                                                                                                              .25
 2015 Hires rate (h)




                                                                                                                             2015 Hires rate (h)
                                                                                                     0-19



                                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                  WANC
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MT
   .2




                                                                                          20-49                                                                                       ND       IDTNGANM NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                         LA
                                                                                                                                                                                             IN SC TX      FL
                                                                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                 WV       MO
                                                                                                                                                                                          SD     KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                    IL ME     VA                        MD
                                                                                                                                      .15
                                                                                                                                                                                     RI MN
                                                                                        50-249
                                                                                                                                                               HI            CT PA
                                                                                           250-499
          .15




                                                                   500+
                                                                                                                                      .1




                             .15                       .2                         .25                               .3                              .1               .15              .2                 .25                  .3
                                                        1999 Hires rate (h)                                                                                                       1999 Hires rate (h)



                              Figure 2: The panels in this figure plot, for various groupings of the data, the value of
                              ht at the end of the sample (2015) against the value of ht at the beginning of the sample
                              (1999). The upper left panel shows different age-sex groups, with the red dots representing
                              females, and blue dots representing males. The other three panels break the data down
                              by industry, by firm size, and by state.



three-plus quarter spells to overall separations, St . We can divide them by Nt to get
their contributions to the separations rate, st . Figure 3 shows the time series for the three
components. It is clear that declining separations among one quarter spells accounts for the
biggest part of the overall decline in the separations rate, followed by the contribution of two
quarter spells. Declining separations among spells with three-plus quarters has contributed
very little. Using the four-quarter average from 1999 as the initial value, and the four-
quarter average from 2014Q3 to 2015Q2 (which we refer to as 2015) as the final value, st
declined by 26.9% from the beginning to the end of our sample. Of that overall decline,
separations among one quarter spells accounted for 61.6%, two quarter spells accounted
for 24.4%, and spells of three-plus quarters accounted for the remaining 14.0%. Clearly,
short-lived spells account for a very large fraction of the overall decline in turnover.
                   As with the overall decline in turnover, it is natural to ask whether the decline in


                                                                                                                         8
                       .25
                                                                 One quarter
                                                                 Two quarters
                                                                 Three or more




                       .2
                       .15
                       .1
                       .05



                             2000          2005          2010              2015
                                                  date



        Figure 3: Decomposition of the separations rate st into the parts accounted for by
        employment spells with one quarter, two quarter, and three-plus quarters of tenure.



short-duration employment spells is pervasive, or whether it is concentrated among workers
or firms with particular characteristics. The answer is that the decline is pervasive: it has
occurred among all types of workers and all types of firms. We demonstrate this by focusing
on q1t , though the same patterns are also seen in q2t . Figure 4 plots, for various worker-level
and firm-level groupings of the data, the value of q1t at the end of the sample (2015) against
its value at the beginning of the sample (1999). It is apparent from the upper-left plot of
the figure that younger workers, and to a slightly lesser extent females, generally exhibit
a higher q1t . More significantly, all of the age-sex groups lie well below the 45-degree line,
indicating that the decline in q1t occurred among all types of workers. It is also worth
noting that the declines were roughly proportional, i.e. they were greater for the groups
that initially had higher levels.
   Hyatt and Spletzer (2017) show that the declines in q1t experienced by different types
of workers and different types of firms, as seen in the figures here, account for almost all of
the overall decline in q1t ; very little can be accounted for by composition effects (increases
in worker types or firm types that have lower values of q1t ).

2.2.3   Decomposing the Decline in q1t

While our focus is on the decline of short-duration employment spells generally, we have seen
that the decline of one quarter spells has been particularly pronounced. All one quarter
employment spells in quarter t satisfy two conditions: they must have been initiated in
quarter t and must have been terminated during the same quarter. It follows that changes
in the incidence of one quarter spells can be decomposed into changes in the hires rate and



                                                  9
                  .3




                                                                                                                                           .3
 2015 One quarter incidence rate (q1)




                                                                                                                          2015 One quarter incidence rate (q1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Agric
                         .2




                                                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Admin
        .1




                                                                                                                                 .1
                                                                                                19-21
                                                                                  22-24 19-21    14-18                                                                                                             AccomRest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Const
                                                                             22-24         14-18                                                                                                           Arts
                                                                    25-34                                                                                                                   Infor
                                                                  25-34                                                                                                                            Other
                                                              35-44                                                                                                                               Retail
                                                                                                                                                                                               Educ
                                                                                                                                                                                              Transport
                                                           35-44
                                                         45-54      65-99                                                                                                                   ProfServ
                                                                                                                                                                                                RealEst
                                                        45-54
                                                         55-64       65-99                                                                                                             Mining
                                                                                                                                                                                        Health
                                                                                                                                                                                        Wholesale
                                                       55-64                                                                                                                          Manuf
                                                                                                                                                                                     Manag
                                                                                                                                                                                    FIRE
                                                                                                                                                                            Utilities
                  0




                                                                                                                                           0
                                        0                        .1                       .2                   .3                                                0                                  .1                       .2                                .3
                                                             1999 One quarter incidence rate (q1)                                                                                               1999 One quarter incidence rate (q1)
                  .14




                                                                                                                                           .14
 2015 One quarter incidence rate (q1)




                                                                                                                          2015 One quarter incidence rate (q1)
                                .12




                                                                                                                                                         .12
                       .1




                                                                                                                                                .1
            .08




                                                                                                                                     .08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WA
   .06




                                                                                                                            .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CAIN MT      TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ID        GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TX NM                                 CO
                                                                                           0-19
                                                                                            20-49                                                                                               WV SD                   SC       FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  IL              MONJ KS
                                                                                               250-499
                                                                                              50-249                                                                                             ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                RI            VA         MD
                  .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                             MN
                                                                                                                                           .04




                                                                                                                                                                                           PA
                                                                               500+                                                                                    HI           CT

                                        .04            .06          .08              .1                  .12   .14                                               .04                     .06           .08              .1                      .12            .14
                                                             1999 One quarter incidence rate (q1)                                                                                               1999 One quarter incidence rate (q1)



                                              Figure 4: The panels in this figure plot, for various groupings of the data, the value of
                                              q1t at the end of the sample (2015) against the value of q1t at the beginning of the sample
                                              (1999). The upper left panel shows different age-sex groups, with the red dots representing
                                              females, and blue dots representing males. The upper right panel breaks the data down
                                              by industry, the lower left panel breaks it down by firm size, and the lower right panel by
                                              state.



changes in the hazard rate that a new hire does not survive into the next quarter. That is,
                                            Q 1t       Q1t N1t
q1t =                                       Nt     =   N1t Nt           = 1t ht .
                                  Figure 5 shows the time series for each of these two determinants of q1t . Again using
the four-quarter averages for 1999 and 2014Q3-2015Q2 as the beginning and end periods to
calculate the percentage declines in these two rates, the one quarter hazard rate declined
by 19.1% (0.3901 to 0.3158) and the hires rate declined by 26.4% (0.2234 to 0.1644). As
such, the decline in the one quarter hazard rate accounted for a bit less than half of the
overall decline in the incidence of one quarter spells.




                                                                                                                     10
                                                              .4
   .22




                                                              .38
   .2




                                                             .36
                                                            1t
    ht
 .18




                                                              .34
   .16




                                                              .32
   .14




         2000         2005             2010     2015                2000   2005          2010         2015
                             Year                                                 Year



           Figure 5: The left panel shows the hires rate, ht , and the right panel shows the first-
           quarter hazard rate, 1t .



2.2.4      Hazard Rates and Employment Spell Duration

The previous subsection showed that the hazard rate for new employment spells has fallen
considerably in the last two decades. This will obviously generate a decline in the overall
separations rate, holding all else constant. It is of interest to know to what extent the
hazard rates of two quarter and three-plus quarter spells have also declined.
       The time series for the three hazard rates are displayed in Figure 6. The hazard rates
for employment spells with one or two quarters of tenure are very similar to each other and
are considerably higher than for employment spells with longer tenure. Moreover, between
1999 and 2015 the one quarter hazard rate and two quarter hazard rate declined by 0.0743
(0.3901 to 0.3158) and 0.0480 (0.3833 to 0.3353), both of which are considerably greater
than the decline in the three-plus quarter hazard rate, which was 0.0241 (0.1155 to 0.0914).5

2.2.5      Summary

The evidence presented here leads to a simple message. Any explanation for the large
decline in worker turnover must involve an explanation for the large decline in the incidence
of short-duration employment spells, and in particular the large decrease in the hazard rates
of low-tenure spells.
   5
    The percentage drop in the hazards are more similar, but as we will see later when we present our model,
the level differences are informative about asymmetric effects across the tenure distribution.




                                                       11
                       .4
                       .3
                                                                         1t
                                                                         2t




                       .2
                                                                         3t




                       .1



                            2000          2005           2010           2015
                                                 Year



       Figure 6: This figure shows the hazard rates for employment spells with one, two, and
       three-plus quarters of tenure.



3     Potential Explanations
Many potential explanations come to mind when trying to account for these features of the
data. One possibility is that the manner in which firms fill vacant positions has changed
over time, leading them to hire workers that are better matched and hence create matches
that are more likely to persist. We will explore this possibility quantitatively in the model
below. However, there are other plausible explanations as well. In this section we note four
alternative potential explanations and argue that each of them seems unlikely or incomplete
as an explanation for the observed changes.

3.1   Decline in Seasonal Employment
Seasonal employment naturally leads to short-duration employment spells. It follows that
one natural hypothesis for the decreased incidence of short-duration employment spells is
that the nature of seasonal changes in employment--summer jobs by young people, retail
jobs around the holiday shopping season--have changed over time. While the data clearly
show those seasonal elements--e.g. short-duration employment spells are especially common
in the fourth quarter of the year--there does not appear to be any significant trend decline
in these seasonal elements. Figure 7 shows time series for q1t and q2t , both seasonally
adjusted and not seasonally adjusted. The seasonal component of q2t is especially high
in the third quarter, as one would expect for summer jobs that begin in June and end in
August. In both panels of the figure, we see that the seasonal element remains important
throughout the entire period, and sits on top of an underlying downward trend in short-
duration employment spells.


                                                 12
 .1
                                          q1t                                                               q2t




                                                                          .06
                                          q1t, seasonally adjusted                                          q2t, seasonally adjusted




                                                                          .05
 .08




                                                                          .04
 .06




                                                                          .03
 .04




                                                                          .02
        2000         2005          2010                    2015                 2000   2005          2010                    2015
                            Year                                                              Year



           Figure 7: The left panel shows the seasonally adjusted and non-seasonally adjusted q1t .
           The right panel shows the adjusted and unadjusted q2t .



       We conclude that a shrinking seasonal element does not explain the decline in short-
duration employment spells.

3.2       Decline in Temporary Layoffs and Recalls
A second possible explanation is that the layoff/recall behavior of firms has changed. If
firms hire workers for short periods, lay them off, and then subsequently recall them, this
could generate short-duration employment spells. Moreover, if this sort of layoff/recall
behavior declined between 1999 and 2015, then it could account for the observed decline in
short-duration employment spells.
       It is possible to assess this hypothesis with the QWI data. Specifically, the data allows us
to condition on worker-employer matches which had no previous match within the last four
quarters; conditioning in this way allows us to exclude most instances of the layoff/recall
behavior (only recalls from matches that had existed more than four quarters prior would
remain). In figure 8, we compare the hires rate among "new" matches (no employment in
previous 4 quarters) with the overall hires rate (given the need for employment information
from the previous 4 quarters, states whose coverage begins in 1999 do not have data for the
conditional hires rate until 2000, thus both series are shown here for the period beginning
in 2000). If much of the decline in short-duration spells could be attributed to a decline
in layoff/recall behavior, then one would expect that the hires rate among "new" matches,
which excludes these recalls, would not have declined by much. However, as figure 8 shows,
the trend in the hires rate that conditions on the absence of earnings in the previous four
quarters looks very much like the trend in the overall hires rate. As such, we conclude that
changes in layoff/recall behavior by firms do not account for the declining labor market



                                                                     13
                                                                             ht




                          .22
                                                                               new
                                                                             ht




                          .2
                          .18
                          .16
                          .14
                          .12



                                2000        2005             2010             2015
                                                     Year



           Figure 8: This figure compares the hires rate with a measure of the "new" hires rate
           that conditions on the absence of any earnings in the previous four quarters.



turnover that we observe.6

3.3      Increased Outsourcing to Temp Agencies
A third possibility is that firms have increasingly outsourced more of their short-term labor
needs to temp agencies. That is, perhaps firms that used to bring on workers for short-
duration employment spells to address brief spikes in labor demand have shifted toward
utilizing temp agencies, and the workers at those temp agencies show up as continually
employed by the temp agency, even though in reality they are stringing together brief stints
at various firms.
       If increasing reliance on temp agencies has displaced a significant number of short-term
employment spells, we would expect to see that employment in temp agencies has risen
over the 1999-2015 period. However, according to the ASA Staffing, Employment and Sales
Survey American Staffing Association (2018), temporary and contracting staffing was 3.09
million in 1999, and 3.22 million in 2015. We conclude that outsourcing to temp agencies
does not seem to explain the decline in short duration employment spells.

3.4      Short-term Job Creation vs. Worker Churn
A common element among each of the last three potential explanations is that they all
reflect situations in which firms have temporary increases in labor demand. That is, they
   6
    While the QWI data do not allow us to calculate the incidence of one quarter spells conditional on
no earnings in the previous four quarters, it is nevertheless possible to calculate the incidence of one or
two quarters spells conditional on no earnings in the previous four quarters. This measure of short-term
employment spells also shows no difference in trends between the conditional and unconditional series.


                                                    14
all describe situations in which short-duration employment spells reflect short-duration jobs.
   While we have argued that none of the previous three explanations seems to provide a
promising explanation for the decline in short-duration employment spells, it is still never-
theless possible that firms have reduced their tendency to create short duration jobs (in ways
unrelated to seasonal hiring, recalls, or temp agencies) as a way to deal with temporary
spikes in labor demand. That is, short-duration employment spells occur either because
firms churn through workers in existing jobs or because firms create short-duration jobs,
and we want to assess whether the decline in short-duration employment spells is associated
with a decline in short-duration job creation, or whether it is more related to a decrease in
worker churn within existing jobs.
   Identifying the extent to which the decline in short-duration employment spells has
resulted from a reduction in worker churn within existing jobs versus a decline in short-
duration job creation is an important diagnostic to help us better understand the forces re-
sponsible for the decline in short-duration employment spells. If a decline in short-duration
job creation is a dominant source of the overall decline, it suggests either that firms now
face fewer short-term fluctuations in demand or that they have moved away from an em-
ployment strategy which deals with short-term fluctuations in their labor needs by adding
and reducing workers, toward one by which they would deal with the short-terms labor
needs by some other means--longer hours, increased worker effort, etc. On the other hand,
if reduced worker churn within existing jobs has been a dominant source of the decline, it
suggests that firms have improved their ability to recruit workers who the firm will want
to, and be able to, retain.
   The QWI provides data on job creation and job destruction, defined in the standard way
as changes in firm-level employment, aggregated over firms that are growing (job creation)
and over firms that are shrinking (job destruction). In order to determine whether firm
employment has grown or declined, one must compare employment at two points in time--
the end of one quarter relative to the end of the previous quarter. A worker is considered
employed at the end of a quarter if he or she receives earnings in that quarter and in
the subsequent quarter. A worker's employment can therefore only contribute to the QWI
job creation measures if that worker receives earnings in two consecutive quarters. As
a result, one quarter employment spells as we have defined them--earnings in the initial
quarter of employment, but not in the subsequent quarter of employment--by construction
cannot show up in the job creation measures. Nevertheless, we can still gain insight into
the reduction in short-duration employment spells by focusing on the spells that last two
quarters, and examining whether they have tended to decline more in the same places that
job creation has declined.
   Workers who are hired into employment spells that last through the end of the initial


                                             15
quarter can be divided into (1) hires that constitute job creation (hired into a new job
at an expanding firm) and (2) hires that constitute "worker churn" (hired to replace a
departed worker, either at a growing firm or at a shrinking firm). Ideally, we would observe
this breakdown on a firm-by-firm basis, so that we could assess whether the short-duration
employment spells (and their decline over time) are more associated with short-term job
creation, or with worker churn.
    While this is not possible with the QWI public use data, which aggregates over firms,
we can still examine the question at the various subcategories of aggregation that are
available in the QWI. We do that here, using industry-state cells as the unit of observation.
Importantly, there is substantial variation across these industry-state cells in the magnitude
of the decline in short-duration employment spells. Looking across the 570 industry-state
combinations (30 state, 19 industries), we then examine the extent to which the declines in
short-duration employment spells are more closely related with declines in job creation or
with declines in worker churn.
    To begin, we show that short-duration employment spells are indeed much more preva-
lent in industry-state cells where either job creation is high or where worker churn is high.7
Figure 9 shows the relationship between the incidence of two quarter employment spells and
worker churn in the top two plots and between the incidence of two quarter employment
spells and the job creation rate (job creation divided by total employment spells) in the
middle two plots, for 19 industries in 30 states. The bottom two plots show the relationship
between worker churn and job creation. The plots on the left show the beginning of the
sample (1999) and the plots on the right show the end of the sample (2015).
    It is clear that short-duration spells are more prevalent in the industry-state cells where
worker churn is higher and where job creation is higher (positive slopes in the upper and
middle panels). It is also notable that the slopes of the relationships in figure 9 change
minimally between the beginning of the sample and the end of the sample. Thus, the
reductions in labor market turnover that occurred between the beginning of the sample
and the end of the sample took the form of a downward/leftward shift in the figures, along
relatively stable slope-lines.
    Of course, it is not surprising that two quarter employment spells would be more common
in industry-state cells where worker churn was higher and where job creation was higher.
What is of greater interest, however, is to see whether the decline in two quarter employment
spells was more pronounced in industry-state cells where job creation declined by more, or
   7
     Again, we use employment spells that last two quarters, rather than one quarter employment spells, as
our measure of short-duration employment spells, given that the job creation and worker churn measures
only include employment spells that last through at least the end of their first quarter. Nevertheless, the
incidence of employment spells that last two quarters is highly correlated (across industry-state cells) with
the incidence of employment spells that last only one quarter.



                                                     16
           .15




                                                                                              .15
Two-quarter spells, 1999




                                                                                   Two-quarter spells, 2015
                                                                                                       .1
                    .1




                                                                                     .05
  .05




                                                                                              0
           0




                           0          .05            .1           .15    .2                                   0   .05           .1           .15   .2
                                             Worker churn, 1999                                                         Worker churn, 2015
           .15




                                                                                              .15
Two-quarter spells, 1999




                                                                                   Two-quarter spells, 2015
                    .1




                                                                                     .05               .1
  .05




                                                                                              0
           0




                           0          .05            .1           .15    .2                                   0   .05           .1           .15   .2
                                             Job creation, 1999                                                         Job creation, 2015
                                                                                              .12
           .12
Worker churn, 1999




                                                                                   Worker churn, 2015
                                                                                                   .1
                .1




                                                                                            .08
         .08




                                                                                     .06
  .06




                                                                                              .04
           .04




                                                                                              .02
           .02
           0




                                                                                              0




                           0          .05            .1           .15    .2                                   0   .05           .1           .15   .2
                                             Job creation, 1999                                                         Job creation, 2015



                               Figure 9: The top two plots show the relationship between the incidence of two quarter
                               spells, q2t , and worker churn, with the figure on the left showing the relationship at the
                               beginning of the sample, and the figure on the right showing the end of the sample. The
                               middle two plots show the relationship between the incidence of two quarter spells and
                               job creation rates, with the beginning of sample and end of sample on the left and right,
                               respectively. The bottom two plots show the relationship between worker churn and job
                               creation. The lines in the plots are regression lines.




                                                                              17
              .02




                                                                                                         .02
                            0




                                                                                                                       0
 Change in two-quarter spells




                                                                                            Change in two-quarter spells
                 -.02




                                                                                                            -.02
          -.04




                                                                                                     -.04
   -.06




                                                                                              -.06
              -.08




                                                                                                         -.08
                                -.15          -.1            -.05            0   .05                                       -.15   -.1           -.05             0   .05
                                                    Change in worker churn                                                              Change in job creation



                                       Figure 10: The left plot shows the relationship between the change in the incidence of
                                       two quarter spells, q2t , and the change in the rate of worker churn. The right plot shows
                                       the relationship between the change in q2t and the change in the rate of job creation.



in industry-state cells where worker churn declined more. That is, was the decline in short-
duration jobs more associated with a drop in worker churn, or with a drop in job creation?
                           Figure 10 helps to answer that question. It shows the relationship between the change
(from 1999 to 2015) in the incidence of two quarter spells and (1) the change in worker
churn (in the left plot) and (2) the change in the job creation rate (in the right plot). As
is clear from the figure (and the regression lines in each plot), changes in short-duration
spells was more correlated with changes in worker churn. Note that if all of the decline in
two quarter spells for a given industry-state cell resulted from a decline in short-term job
creation, we would observe no change in worker churn and a drop in two quarter spells for
that industry-state cell. Instead, we see in the left panel of the figure that reductions in
two quarter spells are closely linked to reductions in worker churn. On the other hand, if
all of the decline in two quarter spells resulted from a decline in worker churn, we would
see reductions in two quarter spells with no drops in job creation. In the right panel, we do
see some modest association of declining two quarter spells with declining job creation.
                           The cross-sectional relationships between (changes in) the rate of two quarter employ-
ment spells and (changes in) worker churn and job creation are shown in the regression
results in Table 1.8 A couple of observations deserve comment. First, changes in worker
churn are more strongly associated with changes in short-duration spells than are changes
in job creation, as indicated by the larger regression coefficient and the higher R2 . Sec-
ond, including job creation in the regression that already has worker churn in it does not
really change the coefficient on worker churn. This result occurs because the changes in job
   8
     If we use changes in the job destruction rate, rather than changes in the job creation rate, we get very
similar results. In the interest of parsimony, we just report the job creation results.



                                                                                       18
                     Table 1: Regression results for industry-state cross section

                                       Change in incidence of two quarter spells
                          constant      -0.0088   -0.0048         -0.0015
                                       (0.0005) (0.0005)         (0.0005)
                           jc            0.2265                    0.2477
                                       (0.0232)                  (0.0166)
                           churn                  0.6320           0.6551
                                                 (0.0333)        (0.0283)
                          R2             0.1441    0.3891         0.5609
            Notes: Regression results for a cross-section of 570 industry-state cells. Changes (between
            1999 and 2015) in the incidence of two quarter employment spells are regressed on changes
            in the job creation rate and changes in the worker churn rate. Standard errors appear in
            parenthesis.



creation and in worker churn are essentially uncorrelated. In a regression of the change in
worker churn on the change in job creation, the coefficient is -0.0319 and it is not statis-
tically significant. This result might seem somewhat surprising, as one might think that
there is always going to be some churn associated with filling newly created jobs, and as
a result worker churn would rise or fall proportionately with job creation. This does not
appear to be the case. Loosely speaking, high rates of job creation do not seem to give rise
to higher levels of worker churn associated with the newly created jobs.
        While not definitive, these results suggest that a large part of the decline in short-term
employment spells is associated with a decline in worker churn, and so motivate us to
consider a model that focuses on the role of hiring decisions in shaping subsequent worker
turnover.


4        A Model of Employment Spells
In this section, we describe the model that we will use to provide some insights into the
driving forces behind the patterns documented in the previous sections. The model in-
corporates learning about match quality into an otherwise standard Mortensen-Pissarides
(1994) framework.9 We show that in steady state equilibrium the model implies a simple
stochastic process for employment spell dynamics that is completely characterized by three
parameters. The model could be extended along various dimensions without affecting this
characterization of the process for employment spell dynamics, but we focus on the simplest
    9
    The model is similar to our model in Pries and Rogerson (2005), but our focus here is on understanding
changes in the U.S. labor market, whereas our focus in that paper was on cross-country differences. Relative
to Pries and Rogerson (2005), here we explicitly model how the initial perceived probability that a match is
good relates to the noisiness of the initial productivity signal.


                                                        19
version to facilitate exposition.

4.1    Model
Time is discrete. There are two types of agents: workers and entrepreneurs. There is a unit
measure of workers, each with preferences over consumption and leisure given by
                                               
                                                     t [ct - bht ]
                                              t=0

where 0 <  < 1 is the discount factor, b > 0 is the disutility associated with working,
ct  0 is consumption in period t, and ht  {0, 1} is time devoted to working in period
t. There is a much larger measure of entrepreneurs. Each entrepreneur has the ability to
costlessly create a production opportunity that can in turn produce output using exactly
one worker.10 After creating a production opportunity, an entrepreneur bears a recruiting
cost kr per period while searching for a worker, measured in units of utility. We follow
the literature in referring to the act of incurring the recruiting cost as "posting a vacancy."
Each entrepreneur has preferences given by:
                                              
                                                    t [ct - It
                                                             r
                                                               kr ]
                                             t=0

       r is an indicator function for whether the entrepreneur incurs a recruiting cost in
where It
period t. In what follows we will refer to an entrepreneur that has created a production
opportunity as a firm.
    Unemployed workers and firms are brought together by a standard constant-returns-to-
scale matching technology, with the number of meetings each period given by m(u, v ) where
u is the number of unemployed workers and v is the number of vacancies. The rate at which
workers meet firms is given by pw () = m(u, v )/u = m(1, ), where  is the v/u ratio. The
rate at which firms meet unemployed workers is given by pf () = m(u, v )/v = m(1/, 1).
    When an unemployed worker and a firm meet, they must decide whether to form an
employment relationship. The productivity of a match, y , can equal one of two values:
y  {yb , yg }, with yg > yb . However, y is not observed at the time of the meeting. Instead,
the worker and firm observe the same noisy "inspection" signal z , where z = y +                         and
   N (0,  ). The prior probability that the match is good (i.e. y = yg ) is given by 0 .
After observing z , the worker and firm each calculate the posterior probability that they
  10
     As is well known, this is without loss of generality in the current context. One can abstract from having
agents identified as entrepreneurs and instead assume a holding company makes all decisions about job
creation and vacancy posting, with ownership of the holding company distributed among the workers.




                                                       20
have a good match:
                                                   0 f (z - yg )
                                (z ) =
                                         0 f (z - yg ) + (1 - 0 )f (z - yb )
where f ( ) is the normal density. They base their match formation decision on this posterior
 (z ) (which, going forward, we denote simply by  since the value of z is of no independent
relevance). This noise structure implies a distribution for the posterior, whose cdf we denote
by H ( ). If the noise  is very small, so that a lot is learned from the initial signal, then
the density of this posterior will have a mass of approximately 1 - 0 that is bunched around
zero and another mass of approximately 0 that is bunched around 1. The greater the noise
( ), the more the density will concentrate around 0 . In order for the match type to be of
substantive importance, we will assume that yb is sufficiently low that matches known to
be bad will be dissolved, and that matches known to be good will not be dissolved.
       In what follows we will treat the value of  as an exogenous parameter and characterize
equilibrium taking its value as given. More generally, we think of this parameter as reflecting
a choice of the firm regarding its recruiting and screening practices. Although the firm would
prefer a lower value of  to a higher value, this requires a more costly screening process
and so the optimal choice of the firm reflects a trade-off of costs and benefits. Changes
in technology that affect the costs of achieving different values of  would then influence
the firm's optimal choice. Given this new value for  , we can use our model to assess the
consequences. Implicitly, there is a configuration of screening costs that make a particular
value of  the optimal choice. We treat the underlying costs as a latent variable and focus
purely on the effects of  .
       If the worker and the firm decide to form a match, a start-up cost kh is incurred in the
first period of the match. This cost includes the costs of training a new worker and/or the
administrative costs associated with getting a new worker set up. We assume for simplicity
that the cost is incurred only in the initial period. We could instead assume that the start-
up costs are paid for each of several periods at the beginning of the match without affecting
the key results.11
       At the beginning of each period after a match's initial period, the worker and firm learn
the match's type with probability . This "all-or-nothing" learning can be understood as the
outcome of another noisy signal, the noisy component of which is uniformly distributed, so
that sufficiently high signals reveal that the match is good, sufficiently low signals reveal that
the match is bad, and signals in between do not change the prior probability  that the match
is good. Alternatively, we could assume that the noise in subsequent signals is normally
  11
     We could also accommodate a dismissal cost that needs to be paid in the event that the match is dissolved
for any reason other than the worker choosing to separate for exogenous reasons. With Nash bargaining,
this acts similar to a start-up cost except that it is the discounted expected present value of the cost that
matters.



                                                     21
distributed just like the initial signal, so that the worker and firm would continuously update
their prior probabilities that the match is good, but we opt for the uniform distribution
because it allows for the simple characterization of employment spell dynamics that we
derive below.12
       In addition to allowing matches to endogenously dissolve when they are revealed to be
bad, we also allow for an exogenous source of separations. In particular, at the beginning
of each period, and independently of the underlying match quality, the match will dissolve
with probability .13
       The wage paid by a firm to a worker will be determined via Nash bargaining, with 
denoting the worker's bargaining power. This Nash wage will depend on the probability that
the match is good, as well as whether the match is new or continuing (new matches differ
from continuing matches because the cost kh is only incurred in the initial period). We will
denote the wage payments in new and continuing matches by wn ( ) and wc ( ), respectively.
Nash bargaining implies that workers and firms will always agree on match formation and
dissolution decisions. Because we assume that matches known to be good always produce
and matches known to bad will always be dissolved, match formation decisions will take
the form of a threshold rule. That is, only matches with a sufficiently high value of  will
not be formed.
       We close this section by noting one feature implicit in our model specification, which is
that we do not allow for on-the-job search. This assumption serves to simplify the analysis.
But more importantly, given our focus on short duration employment spells, we note that
Hyatt and Spletzer (2017) provide evidence that the dominant transitions for these short
duration spells are transitions into and out of unemployment as opposed to transitions from
job to job. Having said this, we note that in our empirical analysis we will assume that a
period corresponds to a week, and for standard time aggregation reasons it follows that we
would necessarily observe some job-to-job transitions at a monthly or quarterly frequency
of observation, so the absence of on-the-job search in the model is not equivalent to ruling
out what would appear to be job-to-job transitions in monthly or quarterly data.
  12
     We do not think that normally distributed noise would give rise to substantive differences. Qualitatively,
the biggest change is that match type would never be revealed with certainty, and separation rules for
continuing matches would involve a tenure specific threshold rule. This would have a small impact on the
match tenure distribution for higher tenure levels, but since our focus is on short tenure spells, we do not
think this would be significant for our quantitative results.
  13
     In principle, one could break this exogenous separation rate into two pieces, one reflecting exogenous job
destruction and the other reflecting exogenous worker separations. Because our analysis does not distinguish
between worker and job flows there is no need to distinguish between exogenous separations in which the
job is destroyed and separations in which the worker and firm separate but the firm hires a new worker into
the position.




                                                      22
4.2     Steady State Equilibrium
We study the steady state equilibrium for the model just described. In the steady state,
the unemployment rate is constant and so is the distribution of employment matches across
values of  , the prior probability that the match is good.
   We begin by developing the Bellman equations that describe the optimal decisions of
workers and firms. The value to a firm of having a new match opportunity that is good
with probability  is

      J n ( ) = max yg + (1 -  )yb - wn ( ) - kh

                    +  (1 - )[J c (1) + (1 -  )J c (0) + (1 - )J c ( )] + V, V            (1)

where V is the value of an unfilled vacancy and J c ( ) is the value to a firm of a continuing
match (which means the start-up cost kh has already been incurred). With probability 1 - ,
there is no exogenous separation, and with probability , the match's type is revealed. J c (1)
denotes that the value of a match that is known to have productivity yg , whereas J c (0) is
the value of a match that is known to have productivity yb .
   The Bellman equation for a continuing match is given by:

      J c ( ) = max yg + (1 -  )yb - wc ( )

                    +  (1 - )[J c (1) + (1 -  )J c (0) + (1 - )J c ( )] + V, V            (2)

   The firm's value from a vacancy satisfies
                                              1
                       V = -kr +  pf              J n ( )dH ( ) + (1 - pf )V              (3)
                                          0

   The value to a worker of a new match that is good with probability  is

 E n ( ) = max wn ( ) +  (1 - )[E c (1) + (1 -  )E c (0) + (1 - )E c ( )] + U, U . (4)

Similarly, the value to a worker of a continuing match that is good with probability  is

 E c ( ) = max wc ( ) +  (1 - )[E c (1) + (1 -  )E c (0) + (1 - )E c ( )] + U ), U . (5)

This only differs relative to E n ( ) due to the wage wc ( ), which will be higher than wn ( )
since the current net output is higher.




                                                   23
     The worker's value from being unemployed is
                                                  1
                        U = b +  pe                   E n ( )dH ( ) + (1 - pe )U          (6)
                                              0

where b is the flow utility of unemployment.
     Under Nash bargaining, the worker and firm choose to produce so long as the match
surplus is positive. Let the match surplus of a new match that is good with probability 
be given by S n ( ) = J n ( ) + E n ( ) - U - V , and the match surplus of a continuing match
be given by S c ( ) = J c ( ) + E c ( ) - U - V . Using the above equations to substitute into
these definitions, we have:

 S n ( ) = max yg + (1 -  )yb - kh +  (1 - )[S c (1) + (1 -  )S c (0) + (1 - )S c ( )]

                 +  (U + V ), U + V          -U -V

or

 S n ( ) = max yg + (1 -  )yb - kh +  (1 - )[S c (1) + (1 -  )S c (0) + (1 - )S c ( )]

                 - (1 -  )(U + V ), 0

Similarly,

     S c ( ) = max yg + (1 -  )yb +  (1 - )[S c (1) + (1 -  )S c (0) + (1 - )S c ( )]

                    - (1 -  )(U + V ), 0

     Free entry by firms ensures that in equilibrium V = 0. From (6), we also have

                                                                  1
                                 (1 -  )U = b + pe                    S n ( )dH ( )
                                                              0

Substituting these into the surplus equations, we have

S n ( ) = max yg + (1 -  )yb - b - kh +  (1 - )[S c (1) + (1 -  )S c (0) + (1 - )S c ( )]
                             1
                - pe             S n ( )dH ( ), 0                                         (7)
                         0




                                                         24
and

 S c ( ) = max yg + (1 -  )yb - b +  (1 - )[S c (1) + (1 -  )S c (0) + (1 - )S c ( )]
                               1
                  - pe             S n ( )dH ( ), 0                                              (8)
                           0

   The first arguments in the max operators of both S n ( ) and S c ( ) are linear and in-
creasing in  . Thus, because we assume that yb is low enough that matches known to be of
low productivity are not viable (i.e. S n (0) = 0), but yg is high enough that matches known
to be of high productivity are viable (S n (1) > 0), the match formation decision will take
the form of a threshold rule, with threshold value 0 <  n < 1 that satisfies S ( n ) = 0.
Moreover, because the first argument in the max operator of S c ( ) exceeds its counterpart
in the equation for S n ( ) by kh , it is apparent that the threshold value  c , defined by
S c ( c ) = 0, is less than  n (and  n =  c if kh = 0). Thus, once a match is formed, it
continues to produce until either the match is discovered to be low productivity, or there is
an exogenous separation.
   The Nash wages can be found by imposing the sharing conditions E c ( ) - U = S c ( )
and E n ( ) - U = S n ( ) and substituting the Bellman equations above. The resulting
wage equations are:

                        wn ( ) =b +  [yg + (1 -  )yb - kh - b + kr ]                             (9)
                        wc ( ) =b +  [yg + (1 -  )yb - b + kr ]                                 (10)

That is, the worker earns what he or she would earn while unemployed, b, plus the share 
of the match's flow surplus. Note that the wage of a new match wn ( ) is lowered by the
presence of kh as the worker effectively shares the burden of the start-up cost with the firm.
   We can now define an equilibrium of the model:

Definition 1. A stationary equilibrium is a set of values { n , U, V, u, } and a set of func-
tions {J c ( ), J n ( ), E c ( ), E n ( ), S c ( ), S n ( ), wc ( ), wn ( )} such that:

  1. Bellman equations: J n ( ), J c ( ), V , E n ( ), E c ( ), U , S n ( ), and S c ( ) satisfy (1),
     (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8).

  2. free entry:  achieves V = 0.

  3. Nash bargaining: wc ( ) and wn ( ) satisfy the Nash bargaining conditions E c ( ) - U =
     S c ( ) and E n ( ) - U = S n ( ).

  4. optimal match formation:  n satisfies S n ( n ) = 0.

  5. stationarity: The flows into and out of unemployment are equal.


                                                      25
       We note that solving for an equilibrium computationally is straightforward. Given an
initial guess for , the surplus functions can be found via value function iteration. One
can then solve for the value V given the surplus function. V can easily be shown to be
decreasing in , so the guess of  is adjusted appropriately depending upon whether V > 0
or V < 0, until V = 0. Given the equilibrium value of , the surplus function S n ( ) is used
to find the value  n that satisfies S n ( n ) = 0. The values for  n and pe () allow us to find
the steady state equilibrium unemployment rate u that satisfies the stationarity condition.
Finally, the wage functions are easily calculated from (9) and (10) given the equilibrium .

4.3      Reduced Form Implications for Employment Spell Dynamics
From the perspective of understanding the model's implications for the employment spell
statistics from the QWI that we documented earlier, it turns out that the only equilibrium
object that one needs to know is the threshold value  n .14 Given this value and the model
primitives, one can compute the probability that a match is good conditional on being
formed, which we denote by  g :15
                                                      1
                                            g =           dH ( )
                                                     n

Given  g , along with the learning parameter  and the exogenous separation rate , we can
solve for all of the statistics that we analyzed in section 2. When connecting model outcomes
to statistics derived from the QWI it is important to understand that the QWI involves a
certain amount of time aggregation. For example, the measure of total employment spells in
the QWI is not the number of spells at a point in time, but rather the total quantity of spells
over the course of an entire quarter. In what follows, we will interpret the period length in
the model to be one week, and describe how to compute the model implied counterparts
for the QWI statistics of interest, using only the three values for  g , , and .
       Let ej (a) be the fraction of a given cohort of entrants that is of type j  {g, b} and is
still employed through a periods.16 By construction, eb (1) = (1 -  g ), and eg (1) =  g . A
simple iterative procedure can be used to compute the ej (a) for a > 1. Specifically, because
good matches are only destroyed when the match dissolves exogenously, we have:

                                        eg (a + 1) = (1 - )eg (a)
  14
      To assess the model's implications for other labor market statistics, such as the job-finding rate or the
unemployment rate, one must also know the equilibrium value of .
   15
      This is of course distinct from the unconditional probability that a match is good, which we denoted by
  0
 .
   16
      Note that eg (a) and eb (a) are not the measures of matches that are known by the worker and firm to be
either good or bad, but rather the measure of matches that are actually good or bad (regardless of whether
their type is known yet).


                                                      26
In contrast, low quality matches remain intact only if the match does not dissolve exoge-
nously and the quality is not revealed:

                               eb (a + 1) = (1 - )(1 - )eb (a)

Define e(a) = eg (a) + eb (a). The essence of the model is that within a given cohort, each
type dissolves at constant but different rates, implying that the composition of ongoing
matches varies by tenure (i.e., the share of good matches rises with tenure).
      Given e(a), which depends only on , , and  g , we can easily calculate the five key
statistics that are of interest for our analysis: the one quarter hazard rate, the two quarter
hazard rate, the three-plus quarter hazard rate, the single quarter spell incidence rate, and
the hires rate. Let M  be the mass of new matches that are created every period in the
steady state equilibrium. As we will see below, M  is purely a scale factor and will disappear
from all of the statistics that we compute. Steady state employment in the model, denoted
by E  , is equal to the sum of matches across the age distribution, and hence can be written
as E  = e
        ^M  where e
                  ^ satisfies:
                                               
                                          e
                                          ^=         e(a).
                                               a=1

      The total number of employment spells observed in a quarter, denoted by N  , is equal
                                 ^M  , plus all of the new spells that will be created over
to the point-in-time employment, e
the additional twelve weeks of the quarter:

                                      N  = (^
                                            e + 12)M 

The number of new matches initiated within a quarter is simply equal to 13M  , since each
week there is a mass M  of new matches created. It follows that the steady state hires rate,
denoted by h , expressed as a fraction of total employment spells in the quarter, is given
by:
                                          13M       13
                                   h =       
                                               =
                                           N     (^
                                                  e + 12)
      Next we compute the mass of one quarter spells that will be observed in steady state.
In order to be a one quarter spell, the spell must start within the given quarter and not last
to the next quarter. There will be 13 types of matches that meet these criteria: matches
that start in the first week of the quarter and last at most 13 weeks, matches that start in
the second week of the quarter and last at most twelve weeks, matches that start in the
third week of the quarter and last at most 11 weeks, etc. The fraction of matches that last
more than 13 weeks is e(14), so the fraction of matches that start in the first week but do
not survive into the next quarter is simply 1 - e(14). Similarly, the fraction of matches that


                                               27
start in week 2 but do not last into the next quarter is 1 - e(13). Continuing in this fashion,
the total number of one quarter spells in steady state, denoted by Q1 , will be given by

                                                 14
                                      Q1     =         [1 - e(a)]M 
                                                 a=2

                                                 , is therefore:
and the one quarter incidence rate, denoted by q1

                                                         14
                                           Q1            a=2 [1- e(a)]
                                   q1 =       =
                                           N                e
                                                            ^ + 12

The first quarter hazard rate is the fraction of new spells within the quarter that do not
last until the next quarter. Since the number of new spells within the quarter is just equal
to 13M  , the one quarter hazard rate, denoted by 1
                                                   , is simply given by:


                                              14                         14
                                Q1            a=2 [1- e(a)]              a=2 e(a)
                         1 =        =                       =1-
                               13M                 13                        13

   The total mass of two quarter employment spells is given by spells that were created in
the previous quarter and do not survive into the next quarter. The total number of spells
that began in the previous quarter and still exist in the first period of the current quarter
              14       
is equal to   a=2 e(a)M .      In order to be counted as two quarter spells, these spells must
end in the current quarter. The total number of these spells that will still exist at the start
                          27        
of the next quarter is    a=15 e(a)M .       The mass of two quarter spells is thus:

                                        14                    27
                                 Q2 =         e(a)M  -              e(a)M 
                                        a=2                  a=15

The hazard rate for two quarter spells is therefore given by:
                                           14           27                          27
                         Q 2               a=2 e(a) -   a=15 e(a)                   a=15 e(a)
              2   =   14         =                14                     =1-        14
                                
                      a=2 e(a)M                   a=2 e(a)                          a=2 e(a)

   It remains to compute the hazard rate for matches that last three-plus quarters, for
which we can essentially use the same logic just used for the two quarter hazard rate,
yielding:
                                                         
                                                         a=28 e(a)
                                        3 =1-                      .
                                                         a=15 e(a)

   Because e(a) is the sum of eb (a) and eg (a), each of which exhibits geometric decay, it
follows that we have closed form expressions for all of these statistics of interest. Moreover,
they depend only on the three parameters that affect eb (a) and eg (a)--specifically,  g , ,


                                                       28
                    Table 2: Fit of the three parameter model to the 1999 data

                                                       1         2        3        q1        h
               Data 1999                             0.390     0.383    0.116    0.080     0.202
                g = 0.44,  = 0.158,  = 0.009         0.390     0.367    0.116    0.079     0.202



and .


5         Diagnosing the Causes of Decreased Dynamism
In this section, we use the reduced from representation of our model to shed light on
what types of changes (to the three parameters) can account for the changing patterns of
dynamics that we documented earlier in the paper. A key perspective of our analysis is
that the tenure structure of hazard rates is an important piece of information regarding the
driving forces behind the overall decrease in dynamism. For this reason our analysis will
focus on the three hazard rates that we can compute from the QWI: the one quarter hazard
rate, the two quarter hazard rate, and the three-plus quarter hazard rate.
         In this section we ask two specific questions. First, what configuration of the three
parameters , , and  g can account for the profile of hazard rates by tenure that existed in
the QWI data at the end of the 1990s? Second, what changes in the configuration of these
parameters is required in order to account for the subsequent observed changes in hazard
rates by tenure. Of particular interest is to assess the extent to which changes in , which
in our model capture changes in dynamism due to changes in separations that are uniform
across the tenure distribution (and which may reflect either job destruction or worker quits)
are sufficient to account for the changes observed in the data.
         We begin with the first question, looking for values of , , and  g such that the steady
state of our model can match the late 1990s values for the three hazard rates by tenure.17
Table 2 shows the results from setting  g = 0.44,  = 0.158, and  = 0.009. In addition
to the three targeted moments, the table also reports two other values from the data and
the model: the share of one quarter spells (q1 ) and the overall hires rate (h). The table
shows that our stylized model is quite successful in being able to account for the statistics
observed in the data. Although we are using three parameters to fit three moments we note
that the model imposes a lot of structure on the relationship between the various moments
    17
     Our analysis will focus on the steady state properties of our model, which means that we will implicitly
think of the late 1990s and mid-2010s as two different steady state outcomes of our model. In reality it could
be that model parameters are changing slowly throughout the entire time period, so that the economy is not
literally in steady state at any point. But as noted by Shimer (2005), the allocations during the transition
closely approximate the steady state allocations.


                                                     29
                       Table 3: Changes between 1999 and 2015 in the data

                                            1          2          3          q1         h
                Data 1999                 0.390      0.383      0.116      0.080      0.202
                Data 2015                 0.316      0.335      0.091      0.049      0.156
                Data, 1999-2015          -0.074     -0.048     -0.025     -0.031     -0.046



   Table 4: Accounting for the changes in the data with individual parameter changes

                                                   1           2          3          q1         h
       Data, 1999-2015                            -0.074     -0.048     -0.025      -0.031     -0.046
        g = 0.44,  = 0.016,  = 0.009              -0.275     -0.167      0.040      -0.061     -0.046
        g = 0.62,  = 0.158,  = 0.009              -0.106     -0.108     -0.003      -0.035     -0.046
        g = 0.44,  = 0.158,  = 0.00647            -0.009     -0.023     -0.031      -0.02      -0.046



and cannot generate arbitrary patterns in the three hazard rates.
      We now consider the second question: what configuration of changes in the three pa-
rameters would be required to account for the changes that we have observed in the data
in terms of these five statistics. We begin by reporting the observed changes in the data,
as shown in Table 3.
      As a first step it is useful to explore the individual impact that each of our three
parameters has on these statistics. As a way to normalize the changes across parameters,
and given that the overall change in dynamism is a key issue in the literature, for each
parameter we calibrate the change so as to match the entire reduction in the hires rate
observed in the data, and then examine the implied changes along the other dimensions.
Results from this exercise are presented in Table 4.
      We begin by summarizing the main effects of each change and providing some intuition
for the qualitative patterns. The first exercise is a decrease in . Learning in our model
is associated with separations, since all matches discovered to be bad will be dissolved. A
decrease in  slows down the pace of learning, thus delaying separations. Consistent with
this, we see in the second row of Table 4 that the hazard rate decreases for both one and
two quarter spells but increases for the three-plus quarter spells. Intuitively, the drop in
the first quarter hazard rate is larger than the drop in the second quarter hazard rate, since
learning is relatively more important at low tenure when the proportion of bad matches is
at its highest. Interestingly, this change results in the two quarter hazard rate being higher
than the one quarter hazard rate.18 Consistent with the drop in the one quarter hazard
 18
      While perhaps counterintuitive, this can occur because of the time aggregation implicit in the calcula-


                                                      30
rate, the fraction of one quarter spells also decreases. This effect is partly offset by the
higher hazard rates for the three-plus quarter category, since this serves to decrease the
number of spells that are more than one quarter.
    Next we consider an increase in  g , implying a higher proportion of newly created
matches are good. Intuitively, if there are relatively fewer bad matches this will decrease
the overall rate of separations, and this effect should be largest at low tenures where the
fraction of bad matches is highest. Consistent with this, the third row of Table 4 shows
decreases in the hazard rate at all three tenure categories, with the decrease being smallest
for the three-plus quarter spells. The decrease for one and two quarter spells is very similar.
Given that hazard rates are lower at all tenure categories, the tenure distribution is shifted
toward higher tenure levels and a smaller fraction of employment is one quarter spells.
Consistent with this, we see that q1 also decreases.
    Lastly, we consider a decrease in the exogenous separation rate, . Although  is
constant across the tenure distribution, the change in  affects the composition of matches
by tenure. This is because the rate of decay for eg (a), i.e., , decreases by more than the rate
of decay for eb (a), i.e.,  + (1 - ). This composition effect varies with tenure because it
accumulates over time. Nonetheless, although the change in hazard rates is smallest for one
quarter spells and largest for three-plus quarter spells, the net effect is a relatively uniform
change in hazard rates by tenure, especially relative to the other two parameter changes.
It might seem surprising that the fraction of one quarter spells decreases so much given the
very small drop in the one quarter hazard rate. This is explained by the fact that spells are
lasting longer, so that there is much more mass beyond the one quarter duration. That is,
as we noted when presenting the evidence in Section 2, a one quarter spell requires both a
new spell to be initiated and for the spell to not survive the current quarter. The decrease
in  serves to decrease the fraction of one quarter spells almost entirely by decreasing the
incidence of new spells (relative to the rest of the distribution), rather than by affecting the
hazard rate of those new spells.
    The key takeaway from these exercises for our purposes is that changes in only  or
only  are associated with implications that are qualitatively at odds with the observed
changes in the data. In particular, in the case of a lower value of , the hazard rate actually
increases for high tenure matches, in contrast to the decrease observed in the data. For a
decrease in , we see that the implication is a relatively uniform drop in hazard rates by
tenure, with the largest effect for three-plus quarter spells, which is also in contrast to what
we observed in the data. On the other hand, the increase in  g generates changes that are
tions. The one quarter hazard rate includes spells that are created near the end of the quarter and so are
only observed for a fraction of a quarter. They will appear to have a low hazard rate relative to spells created
at the beginning of the quarter. All two quarter spells are necessarily in existence at the beginning of their
second quarter and so the hazard for spells in their second quarter does not reflect a similar censoring.



                                                      31
  Table 5: Accounting for the changes in the data with changes in all three parameters

                                            1           2        3         q1        h
     Data                                  -0.074     -0.048    -0.025    -0.031    -0.046
      g = 0.50,  = 0.158,  = 0.00735       -0.042     -0.055    -0.021    -0.025    -0.046
      g = 0.50,  = 0.140,  = 0.00735       -0.061     -0.048    -0.020    -0.028    -0.046



             Table 6: Decomposing the contributions of the parameter changes

                                            1           2         3        q1        h
     g  = 0.44,  = 0.158,  = 0.00735       -0.006     -0.015    -0.020    -0.013    -0.030
      g = 0.50,  = 0.14,  = 0.009          -0.054     -0.032     0.001    -0.017    -.019



qualitatively in line with what we observed in the data.
   However, although the increase in  g seems to capture the key qualitative patterns in the
data, it still misses the data in terms of quantitative changes. In particular, the decrease in
the one and two quarters hazard rates are too large and the drop in the three-plus quarters
hazard rate is too small. This suggests that a combination of an increase in  g and a
decrease in  might better account for the observed changes. The second row of Table 5
shows the results from such a case, with  g increasing to 0.50 and  decreasing to 0.00735.
   This specification comes much closer to capturing the changes in hazard rates by tenure
while also accounting for the overall decline in the hire rate. Looking back at the effects in
Table 4, one might also conjecture that allowing for some change in  might improve the
fit a bit further, and the final row of Table 5 shows that this is indeed the case. Lowering 
from 0.158 to 0.140 serves to rotate the hazard rate profile, amplifying the decrease in the
hazard rate of one quarter spells while modestly dampening the decrease in the other two
rates.
   Having uncovered a change in the three parameters  g ,  and  that can account for
the changes observed in the data, our final exercise is to decompose the overall effects to
illustrate the contribution of changes in  relative to changes in  g and . Table 6 shows
this decomposition. The key message from this table is that the effect of changes in  and
 g on the hires rate are roughly two thirds as large as the effect of . That is, while it is true
that the change in  is the single biggest driving force behind the change in dynamics as
measured by the hires rate, roughly 40% of the overall change is accounted for by changes
in the parameters that are related to the learning process,  and  g . Moreover, the changes
in  and  g play a particularly important role in accounting for the changes in the hazard
rates.

                                               32
6         Quantitative Results
In the previous section we argued that changes in the equilibrium value of  g are an impor-
tant source of the observed changes in turnover, particularly among low-tenure employment
spells. In this section we return to our model to examine what changes in the model's
primitives seem best able to account for this change in  g without introducing additional
counterfactual predictions.
         The first step is to calibrate our model so as to be consistent with observations for the
late 1990s. We will then explore the extent to which various parameter value changes can
account for the observed changes that occurred between 1999 and 2015. Table 7 displays
the baseline parameter values used to simulate the model. As noted previously, we assume
that one model period corresponds to a week.19 The parameters near the top of the table
are set to values that are common in the literature. The value of  implies a 4% annual
discount rate. We assume a Cobb-Douglas meeting function: m(u, v ) = Au v 1- , and
set the elasticity of the meeting function with respect to unemployment,  , equal to the
workers' Nash bargaining share,  , with a value of 0.5.
         The productivity of bad and good matches are set at 0.4 and 1.0 respectively. The
productivity of good matches, yg , is a normalization. Given a value for yg , the value of yb
will influence the extent of wage gains with tenure that result from learning about match
quality. Our choice of yb = 0.4 results in average wage growth of 22% over the first 5 years.20
This is roughly in line with the approach that we took in Pries and Rogerson (2005), where
we conservatively targeted a quarter of the overall wage growth (including from sources
other than learning, such as human capital accumulation) documented in Topel and Ward
(1992). Given the two productivity parameters, we set the disutility of working, b equal to
yb , which guarantees that matches known to be bad will be dissolved.21
         Given the above values there are seven additional parameters that need to be calibrated--
, , A, kr , kh , 0 , and  . We set  = 0.158 and  = 0.009, in line with the values needed
to match the evidence on hazard rates and the hires rate, as detailed in section 5. The
parameters kr and A are most closely related to the meeting rates for workers and firms.
We set the parameter values to target a monthly job-finding rate of 0.474%, which is the
average value using data in Shimer (2012) for the six-year period surrounding our target
year of 1999, and a value for the average duration of a vacancy, 1/[pf (1 - H ( n ))], equal to
    19
     The short time period allows the model simulation to capture the high level of turnover that exists
within a quarter (the measurement time period in the QWI).
  20
     We calculate wage growth between the average wages in week two and at the end of year five. We use
week two, rather than week one, as the starting point because wages in the first period are temporarily
abnormally low due to the portion of the start-up costs that are borne by workers in the form of a reduced
wage.
  21
     While this is also the value used in Shimer (2005), we note that the interpretation is somewhat different
in our model, since the average productivity of matches in our model is not exactly equal to yg .


                                                     33
                                Table 7: Baseline parameter values

        Parameter                             Description                                 Value
                                        Weekly discount factor                           0.961/52
                        Elasticity of matching function w.r.t. unemployment                 0.5
                                   Workers' Nash bargaining share                           0.5
        yg                            Productivity of type g jobs                           1.0
        yb                            Productivity of type b jobs                           0.4
        b                             Workers' disutility of work                           0.4
                                  Exogenous weekly separation rate                        0.009
                                 Weekly rate of post-match learning                       0.158
        kr                           Firms' flow recruitment cost                          0.81
        kh                                  Start-up costs                                 5.72
        A                          Efficiency of matching function                        0.279
        0                          Probability that match is type g                        0.40
                                       Noisiness of initial signal                         1.07



20 days, which is the number reported in Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2013).
    Direct evidence on the appropriate value for the start-up or training cost, kh , is scarce.
Silva and Toledo (2009) calibrate a DMP model that includes training and separation costs,
and based on the survey evidence in Barron, Berger and Black (1997) specify a quarterly
training cost equal to 11% of the output of a fully trained worker, with an average training
period of 4 quarters.22 In our model, the start-up cost is incurred entirely in the first
quarter. Accordingly, to be consistent with the assumption in Silva and Toledo (2009),
namely that training costs amount to 11% of a year's output by a fully productive worker,
we set kh = 0.11 · 52 · y g . One issue with this is that some matches in our model will dissolve
before a significant amount of training can actually occur, so this would be an upper bound
on the magnitude of the expected training costs. In view of this issue, in the appendix we
conduct sensitivity analysis to examine how robust our results are to this baseline value
by considering a value that is 50% lower, and we find that there is little difference in the
quantitative nature of our results.
    The remaining two parameters 0 and  are closely linked to the probability that new
matches end up being good, which we denoted by  g in the preceding section. 0 is the
unconditional probability that a meeting between a worker and firm results in a good match,
so higher values of 0 will necessarily increase  g , which is the probability of a good match
  22
     Silva and Toledo (2009) actually assume the training cost is equal to 0.31 of the output of a fully
trained worker, but 0.20 of that reduction is due to lower actual productivity by workers who are training,
as opposed to actual training costs. Because our model does not have lower productivity by workers during
some training phase, we exclude that component of the cost and include only the 0.11 that is associated
with actual training costs (mostly in the form of time spent training rather than producing).


                                                    34
                 Table 8: Statistics of interest: data and calibrated model

                 1           2           3            q1        h         mjf r           u
 1999 data     0.390       0.383       0.116        0.080     0.202       0.474        0.0463
 Model         0.390       0.367       0.116        0.079     0.202       0.474         0.114



conditional on actually forming the match. Likewise, a higher value of  means the initial
signal has less information, so that more matches are likely to be accepted (in the limit,
as  gets large and the signal becomes completely uninformative, all matches are accepted
and  g  0 ). We choose values of 0 and  to target a value for  g of 0.44, in line
with the results of the previous section. There are many combinations of 0 and  that
can achieve this target. From the perspective of the statistics that we aimed to explain in
the previous section, all that matters is the value of  g , and not the values of 0 and  .
However, it is possible that the reaction of the model to changes in other parameters, which
we will explore below, will depend on the individual values of 0 and  and not just on their
implications for  g . For our benchmark calibration we set 0 = 0.4 and  = 1.07 and then,
in the appendix, we show that our main results are robust to an alternative specification
for 0 and  .
   Table 8 presents the 1999 empirical values for the various statistics of interest, as well
as the values from our calibrated model. In addition to the variables that we focused on in
section 5, we have also included two other statistics that will be of interest: the monthly
job-finding rate (mjf r) and the unemployment rate. Note that the model implied values
for 1 , 2 , 3 , q1 , and h are identical to those in the second row of Table 2 in the preceding
section, since we set/targeted the same values for , , and  g . While the monthly job-
finding rate was a targeted statistic, the unemployment rate was not. The model implied
value is substantially higher than its empirical counterpart (for the 1999 and 2015 values
of the unemployment rate, we use the averages for the six-year periods surrounding our
beginning and end dates, so as to reduce sensitivity to business cycle conditions in any one
year). This is not too surprising: in the model, all workers who separate from their jobs
must re-enter unemployment to find a new job, whereas in reality a non-trivial number
of workers experience a job-to-job transition with no intervening unemployment spell. In
what follows we will focus on the implications for the change in the level of unemployment.
Alternatively, we could have assumed that some fraction of the exogenous separators receive
new job offers immediately in order to generate a lower unemployment rate, but holding
this feature constant, the implications for the change in unemployment will be very similar.
   Table 9 focuses on changes that occurred between 1999 and 2015. The first row shows



                                               35
           Table 9: Understanding the changes that occurred between 1999 and 2015

                     1              2          3         q1         h        g       mjf r        u
 1999-2015         -0.074         -0.048    -0.025     -0.031    -0.046       --     -0.164    0.010
  = 0.00647        -0.009         -0.022    -0.031     -0.019    -0.046    -0.001     0.032    -0.034
  = 0.02           -0.267         -0.156     0.037     -0.060    -0.046     0.041    -0.130     0.009
  = 0.44           -0.107         -0.110    -0.003     -0.035    -0.046     0.183    -0.127     0.008
 kh = 33.5         -0.107         -0.110    -0.003     -0.035    -0.046     0.183    -0.461     0.694
 A=9               -0.107         -0.110    -0.003     -0.035    -0.046     0.183    0.526     -0.099
  = 0.14,  = 0.71, -0.061         -0.048    -0.020     -0.028    -0.046     0.060    -0.048    -0.017
    = 0.00735



the changes that occurred in the data.23 The changes in the hazard rates and the one
quarter incidence rate q1 are of course the same as what we previously analyzed in the
reduced from analysis in 5. We also include here the variable  g , even though have no data
on it, because its value is of central importance to the model's predictions for the statistics of
interest. Note also that while the decline in the job-finding rate and the decline in hazard
rates pull the unemployment rate in opposite directions, on net the unemployment rate
increased slightly over the period.
       The next rows in Table 9 show how the model's predictions for the steady state values
of these statistics change as we change various model parameters. Our objective with these
exercises is to see what changes in the model's parameters might be able to account for the
changes observed in the data. As a way of normalizing the changes that we consider, for
each parameter change we choose new values such that the new steady state equilibrium
exhibits a decline in the hires rate, h, that is on par with what is observed in the data (i.e.,
a decline of 0.046). This is the same normalization that we used earlier in section 5 and
seems like a natural normalization, given that the hires rate is one way of measuring the
labor market turnover whose decline we seek to understand.
       Based on our previous analysis, we know that achieving a good fit with the data will
require a substantial increase in  g . In our reduced form analysis we treated each of  g , ,
and  as exogenous. But in our model, the value of  g is endogenous, and in particular will
potentially respond to changes in either  or . With this in mind, we first ask whether
changes in  or  alone would generate sufficient variation in  g to account for the changes
found in the data.
       The second and third rows of Table 9 answer this question in the negative. The decrease
  23
    While the data in our source for the 1999 job-finding rate, i.e. Shimer (2012), ends in 2005, Engbom
(2018) uses the same method as Shimer (2012) to update the data through 2015, and gets a monthly
job-finding rate in 2015 of 0.31, implying a reduction of 0.164 since 1999.



                                                  36
in  has effectively no impact on the value of  g , so that this exercise produces results that
are virtually identical to those from the reduced form analysis. Not surprisingly, the two new
statistics that are added to this table show that a decrease in  does lead to a substantial
increase in the job-finding rate and a substantial decrease in the unemployment rate. These
predictions are exactly what a simple DMP model predicts. The main message is that while
this change has a large impact on the incentive for firms to post vacancies, it has virtually
no impact on the threshold for forming a match conditional on a meeting. To summarize,
a decline in , by itself, cannot explain the changes observed in the data. In particular, it
fails to account for the decline in hazard rates among low-tenure matches.
       When we consider a decline in the rate of learning, , we see that there is indeed a
positive impact on  g , indicating that the endogenous response moves in the right direction
to account for the data. Intuitively, the slower rate of learning makes it more costly to form
a match with low probability of success, and as a result the match formation threshold
increases. However, the size of the change in  g is quite small relative to what we found
was needed in the reduced form analysis, with the result being that a change in  alone
cannot explain the patterns in the data. We also note that this change does predict a
sizeable decrease in the job-finding rate, and a modest increase in the unemployment rate.
The slower learning decreases the incentive for firms to invest in vacancy posting, thereby
pushing down the job-finding rate. The effect on unemployment is partially offset by the
lower overall separation rate caused by the slower rate of learning.
       Next we consider changes in three primitives which intuitively will have a direct impact
on  g :  , kh , and A.24 If  decreases then the initial signal is more informative and there
will be fewer "mistakes" in terms of forming matches that are bad ( g will increase). If kh
increases then a bad match becomes more costly given that all matches must pay the cost
kh . If bad matches are more costly then the threshold for forming a match becomes higher
(again,  g will increase). Finally, if A increases, then it is easier for firms and workers to
meet, allowing them to be more discerning about which matches to form.
       The next three rows in Table 9 display the implications for each of these changes, once
again imposing in each case that the change is sufficiently large to generate the drop in the
hires rate that is observed in the data. Recall that 1 , 2 , 3 , q1 , and h all depend only on
,  and  g . Because we are holding  and  constant in these exercises, we are essentially
finding values for  , kh , and A that achieve a new value of  g that will match the observed
decline in h. Given that value of  g , the model also generates identical changes in 1 , 2 ,
3 , and q1 . But importantly, the three changes have very distinct implications for the job-
finding rate and the unemployment rate. The increase in A leads to a large increase in the
  24
    One could also consider a decrease in kr . Not surprisingly, this turns out to be quite similar to increases
in A and so we do not include it in the results shown.



                                                      37
job-finding rate and a large decrease in the unemployment rate, whereas an increase in kh
leads to a massive decrease in the job-finding rate and an equally massive increase in the
unemployment rate. Although each of these two changes has the desired effect on  g , the
size of the associated effects on the job-finding rate and the unemployment rate strongly
suggest that they cannot be quantitatively important sources of the change in  g .25
       In contrast, a decrease in  generates a decrease in the job-finding rate that is roughly
in line with the magnitude of the decline found in the data, as well as a slight increase in the
unemployment rate that accords with the data. Importantly, the significant decline in the
job-finding rate does not translate into a large increase in the unemployment rate because
the higher signal quality leads to fewer separations, thus creating an opposing effect on the
unemployment rate. We conclude that a decrease in  seems the most promising source of
the decrease in  g .
       Similar to what we did in the reduced form analysis, we can also consider changes in
several parameters at the same time. The last row of Table 9 considers this possibility. As
 and  are both exogenous parameters, we change those to the values that best fit the
data in Table 5 of Section 5, i.e.  = 0.00735 and  = 0.14. Next, because  seemed the
most promising cause of differences in  g , we lower  to the level that is needed to account
for the observed drop in the hires rate. The results in this last row of Table 9 mimic the
results in Table 5 of section 5 What is new relative to the reduced form analysis is that
we can now also trace out the implications for the job-finding rate and the unemployment
rate. The results in the last row show that the job-finding rate falls, though not as much as
in the data, and that the unemployment rate also falls modestly. We note that considering
additional changes that would account for the full drop in the job-finding rate would tend
to raise the unemployment rate, offsetting the modest decline reported in the table.
       Our results are also of interest in the context of a recent literature that seeks to esti-
mate changes in matching efficiency--see, for example, Hornstein and Kudlyak (2016) or
Hall and Schulhofer-Wohl (2018). Those papers conclude that there was a decline in match-
ing efficiency over the period 2000-2015, on the order of 15-20%. Our model provides an
alternative interpretation of the same underlying facts. In particular, those papers interpret
the matching function as providing a stable mapping between inputs (vacancies and unem-
ployed workers) and outputs (new matches that are formed). In our model, there is a stable
relationship between inputs into the matching function and meetings, but any parameters
that change the equilibrium threshold rule for match formation will affect the mapping
between inputs in the matching function and the formation of new matches. In particular,
  25
     Put somewhat differently, although changes in each of A and kh can lead to increases in  g , the elasticity
of these effects are sufficiently small that it takes very large changes in these variables to generate the changes
in  g required to account for the data, and these large changes produce counterfactually large effects on
other aspects of the equilibrium.



                                                        38
our model interprets the same observations as these papers as the results of workers and
firms being more selective when forming matches, as opposed to workers and firms having
a harder time finding partners. In fact, for the simulation in Table 9 that considers only
a decline in  , the equilibrium meeting rate between workers and firms actually increases,
but the fraction of meetings that result in new matches being formed goes down consider-
ably. The efficiency parameter that one would measure from the relationship between the
job-finding rate and the v/u ratio would decline, but this would be attributable to better
screening as opposed to lower efficiency in the matching process.


7    Conclusion
A growing literature has documented the declining "dynamism" of the US economy as
reflected by declines in various measures of worker, job, and firm turnover and sought
to understand the driving forces behind these declines. In this paper, we have argued
that a key aspect of the decline in worker turnover is accounted for by a decline in short
duration employment spells, and that this decline is pervasive across different types of
workers and firms. This suggests a need to focus on an explanation for lower turnover
that simultaneously predicts a large decrease in the share of short duration employment
spells. Our analysis of a standard DMP model extended to account for the salient facts
about hazard rates by employment spell tenure leads us to conclude that firms and workers
have become better able to identify low productivity matches ex ante, thereby increasing
the average quality of those matches that do get formed. This explanation is consistent
with recent empirical evidence on human resource practices. More generally, our analysis
suggests that better matching accounts for about 40% of the overall decline in the level of
worker turnover observed in the US over the last two decades. This implies that there is
not a singular explanation for the overall decline in worker turnover. Importantly, whereas
improved matching can be understood as a positive development, other factors at work
may reflect negative developments. A key message from our analysis is that explanations
for the changing dynamism of the US labor market need to pay attention to the changing
distribution of employment spells by tenure.




                                            39
            Figure 11: Various measures of employment changes in the QWI.



A     Data
We utilize the version of the 2018Q2 release of the QWI public use data that includes only
private sector employment. Our analysis focuses on 30 states, which together account for
over 65% total U.S. employment: CA, CO, CT, FL, GA, HI, ID, IL, IN, KS, LA, MD, ME,
MN, MO, MT, NC, ND, NJ, NM, NV, PA, RI, SC, SD, TN, TX, VA, WA, and WV. For
those 30 states, data for the variables that we utilize are available from 1999Q1 through
2015Q2. To broaden to a larger set of states would require that we shorten the coverage
period, as data for other states is not available until later dates.
    The QWI public use data give information on individual-level employment and employ-
ment changes, aggregated across individuals by worker categories that include sex, age, race,
and education, and firm categories that include industry, firm size, firm age, and state.
    Figure 11 displays the different measures of individual-level employment changes that
are available in the QWI public use data. From this information, we can identify the various
rates and measures utilized in the paper. The overall number of hires in period t, Ht is
given by "Hires All" (QWI variable name HirA). We can make this into a rate by dividing
by a measure of employment. There are two possible measures of employment: Emp, which
is the average of the beginning-of-period employment and the end-of-period employment,
or EmpTotal, which is the total number of employment spells in the period, Nt (and thus
includes spells that either end in the period, begin in the period, or both end and begin in
the period, in addition to the spells that continue through the entire period). Although,
EmpTotal always exceeds Emp and thus will result in a lower level for the rates that it is used
to calculate, the trends (which is the primary focus of the paper) that result from use of the
two measures of employment are very similar. Thus, using EmpTotal as the employment
measure, we calculate the hires rate ht as:

                                                HirAt
                                       ht =
                                              EmpTotalt



                                               40
In the paper, in section 3.2, we contrast ht with a hires rate that focuses on hires of
workers who had no employment with the hiring firm in the previous four quarters. For
that measure, we use "Hires new" (QWI variable name HirN) in the numerator.
   We can also calculate a rate of separations by dividing total separations St (QWI variable
name Sep) by EmpTotal:
                                                 Sept
                                        st =
                                               EmpTotalt
   Employment spells that last just one quarter in period t, Q1t , are identified as "Hires
All" (HirA) minus "All hires, end-of-quarter employed" (HirAEnd). This is made into an
incidence rate by dividing by EmpTotal:

                                         HirAt - HirAEndt
                                 q1t =
                                            EmpTotalt

Employment spells that last two periods can also be measured. The lag of HirAEnd tells us
the number of workers that began employment in period t - 1 and remained employed in
period t, and possibly longer. The variable "Hires All (stable)" (QWI variable name HirAS)
tells us the number of workers that began employment in period t - 1 and then continued
in that same job in periods t and t + 1. Thus, if we subtract HirAS from the lag of HirAEnd
we obtain the number of workers who were in their second period of employment in period
t, but did not remain employed in that same job in period t + 1. That is, we can identify
two quarter employment spells that end in period t, Q2t . We can similarly make this into
an incidence rate by dividing by the total number of employment spells, Nt , in that period:

                                        HirAEndt-1 - HirASt
                                q2t =
                                            EmpTotalt

   In addition to these incidence rates, we can also calculate a hazard rates for the three
tenure categories. For first-quarter employment spells the hazard rate is given by

                                         HirAt - HirAEndt
                                 1t =
                                               HirAt

and for second-quarter employment spells the hazard rate is:

                                        HirAEndt-1 - HirASt
                               2t =                         .
                                            HirAEndt-1

The hazard rate among employment spells with three-plus quarters of tenure is calculated by
subtracting one quarter spells and two quarters spells from total separations, and dividing




                                                41
                     Table 10: Alternative specification of 0 and 

                     1           2         3        q1        h       g      mjf r       u
 1999-2015         -0.074      -0.048   -0.025    -0.031   -0.046      --    -0.164   0.010
  = 0.00647        -0.008      -0.021   -0.031    -0.019   -0.046   -0.002    0.032   -0.034
  = 0.021          -0.265      -0.153    0.036    -0.059   -0.046    0.045   -0.135    0.011
  = 0.43           -0.107      -0.110   -0.003    -0.035   -0.046    0.183   -0.119   0.005
 kh = 32.5         -0.107      -0.110   -0.003    -0.035   -0.046    0.183   -0.452    0.606
 A = 7.1           -0.107      -0.110   -0.003    -0.035   -0.046    0.183    0.523   -0.096
  = 0.14,  = 0.68, -0.060      -0.046   -0.020    -0.027   -0.046    0.058   -0.041   -0.018
    = 0.00735



by the total number of employment spells with three-plus quarters of tenure:

                       Sept - (HirAt - HirAEndt ) - (HirAEndt-1 - HirASt )
                3t =
                                EmpTotalt - HirAt - HirAEndt-1

    We also utilize a measure of job creation--the change in firm-level employment, ag-
gregated across all firms whose employment grew in the quarter--which is given by the
QWI variable FrmJbGn. We express this as a rate by dividing by Nt , the total number of
employment spells in the period:
                                         FrmJbGnt
                                        EmpTotalt
    We seasonally adjust all variables in the paper by regressing on quarterly dummies and
removing those quarterly components. We directly seasonally adjust the variable of interest,
as opposed to seasonally adjusting each data component individually before constructing
the variable.


B     Robustness Exercises
We report here the results of two exercises that examine how robust our results are to
alternative parameter values. The first exercise concerns the fact that many different com-
binations of 0 and  could achieve the targeted value of  g in the baseline calibration.
Here we consider an alternative pair of values for 0 and  and assess whether our primary
findings are affected in a significant way. The second exercise concerns the calibration of
the training cost parameter kh .
    We begin with the choice of 0 and  . In our baseline calibration we set 0 = 0.40.
Here we set 0 = 0.38, which then requires that we reduce the noise of the initial signal to
 = 0.95 in order to hit the desired value of  g . That is, a smaller fraction of matches are


                                             42
                         Table 11: Alternative specification of kh

                     1           2         3        q1        h        g      mjf r       u
 1999-2015         -0.074      -0.048   -0.025    -0.031   -0.046       --    -0.164   0.010
  = 0.00647        -0.009      -0.022   -0.031    -0.020   -0.046    -0.000    0.021   -0.032
  = 0.02           -0.261      -0.149    0.034    -0.059   -0.046     0.059   -0.135    0.011
  = 0.376          -0.107      -0.110   -0.003    -0.035   -0.046     0.183   -0.123   0.006
 kh = 29.1         -0.107      -0.110   -0.003    -0.035   -0.046     0.183   -0.417    0.378
 A = 4.48          -0.107      -0.110   -0.003    -0.035   -0.046     0.183    0.525   -0.098
  = 0.14,  = 0.59, -0.060      -0.047   -0.020    -0.028   -0.046     0.059   -0.046   -0.017
    = 0.00735



of good quality, but the lower level of noise in the signal means that workers and firms can
better assess match quality. This combination again implies that  g = 0.44. Matching the
same targets as before requires that we also re-calibrate A and kr , which we change to 0.308
and 0.81 respectively, in order to achieve a monthly job-finding rate of 0.474 and an average
vacancy duration of 20 months. Because we match the same targets as in the baseline
calibration, the model delivers the same values for the calibrated steady state. Table 10
repeats the exercises from Table 9. The message from this exercise is that the key results
are effectively unchanged. In particular, we again conclude that changes in kh and A result
in implausible changes in the job-finding rate and unemployment rate, whereas a reduction
in  has the most promise in accounting for an increase in  g .
   Next we consider an alternative value of kh . We previously noted that assuming all of
the start-up cost was incurred in the first period might overestimate the extent of expected
start-up costs if they are actually incurred over several periods and matches found to be
bad were terminated. With this in mind we consider a specification with a much smaller
value for kh . In the baseline we assumed kh = 5.72, and here we consider half that amount,
kh = 2.86. We leave 0 = 0.4 as in the benchmark but  is now set to 0.83 in order to
match the target  g = 0.44. We once again recalibrate the values of A and kr to 0.266
and 0.917 respectively in order to hit the targeted monthly job-finding rate of 0.47 and the
average vacancy duration of 20 weeks.
   Table 11 repeats the exercises from Table 9. Once again, these results support the same
message as the baseline calibration. In particular, it remains the case that adjusting kh to
achieve the desired change in  g leads to implausibly large increases in the unemployment
rate and declines in the job-finding rate. We again conclude that changes in  are the most
promising source of changes in  g .




                                             43
References
Akcigit, Ufuk, and Sina Ates. 2019. "What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?"
  University of Chicago Working Paper.

American Staffing Association. 2018. "ASA Staffing Employment and Sales Sur-
  vey."      https://americanstaffing.net/staffing-research-data/asa-data-dashboard/asa-
  employment-sales/.

Autor, David, and David Scarborough. 2008. "Does Job Testing Harm Minority
  Workers? Evidence from Retail Establishments." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  123(1): 219­277.

Barron, John M., Mark C. Berger, and Dan A. Black. 1997. On-the-Job Training.
  Kalamazoo, MI:Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger. 2014. "Labor Market Fluidity and Economic
  Performance." National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 20479.

Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger. 2013. "The
  Establishment-Level Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring." The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 128(2): 581­622.

Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2017.
  "Declining Dynamism, Allocative Efficiency, and the Productivity Slowdown." American
  Economic Review, 107(5): 322­26.

Engbom, Niklas. 2018. "Firm and Worker Dynamics in an Aging Labor Market." Society
  for Economic Dynamics 2018 Meeting Papers 1009.

Hall, Robert E., and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. 2018. "Measuring Job-Finding Rates
  and Matching Efficiency with Heterogeneous Job-Seekers." American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 10(1): 1­32.

Hoffman, Mitchell, Lisa B Kahn, and Danielle Li. 2017. "Discretion in Hiring*." The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2): 765­800.

Hornstein, Andreas, and Marianna Kudlyak. 2016. "Estimating Matching Efficiency
  with Variable Search Effort." Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 16-13.

Hyatt, Henry, and James Spletzer. 2013. "The recent decline in employment dynam-
  ics." IZA Journal of Labor Economics, 2(1): 1­21.



                                          44
Hyatt, Henry R., and James R. Spletzer. 2017. "The recent decline of single quarter
  jobs." Labour Economics, 46(C): 166­176.

Mercan, A. Yusuf. 2017. "Fewer but Better: The Decline in Job Mobility and the Infor-
  mation Channel." University of Melbourne Working Paper.

Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, Riccardo Trezzi, and Abigail Wozniak.
  2016. "Understanding Declining Fluidity in the U.S. Labor Market." Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, 183­237.

Pries, Michael, and Richard Rogerson. 2005. "Hiring Policies, Labor Market Institu-
  tions, and Labor Market Flows." Journal of Political Economy, 113(4): 811­839.

Pugsley, Benjamin Wild, and Aysegul Sahin. 2018. "Grown-up Business Cycles." The
  Review of Financial Studies, 32(3): 1102­1147.

Shimer, Robert. 2005. "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Va-
  cancies." American Economic Review, 95(1): 25­49.

Shimer, Robert. 2012. "Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment." Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 15(2): 127­148.

Silva, Jos´
          e Ignacio, and Manuel Toledo. 2009. "Labor Turnover Costs And The Cycli-
  cal Behavior Of Vacancies And Unemployment." Macroeconomic Dynamics, 13(S1): 76­
  96.

Topel, Robert H., and Michael P. Ward. 1992. "Job Mobility and the Careers of
  Young Men." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2): 439­479.




                                           45
