                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        ACCOUNTING FOR INNOVATION IN CONSUMER DIGITAL SERVICES:
                           IT STILL MATTERS

                                         David Byrne
                                         Carol Corrado

                                      Working Paper 26010
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26010


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2019, Revised February 2020




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of
the Board of Governors, other members of its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Corresponding author (cac289@georgetown.edu) This paper was prepared for the
NBER/CRIW Conference, "Measuring Innovation in the 21st Century," Georgetown University,
Washington, D.C., March 10-11, 2017. We have benefited from presentations of this paper at the
5th IMF Statistical Forum in Washington, D.C.(November 2017), the ESCoE Measurement
Conference in London (May 2018) and the 5th World KLEMS Conference in Cambridge, Mass
(June 2018). We received no financial support for this paper.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by David Byrne and Carol Corrado. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Accounting for Innovation in Consumer Digital Services: IT Still Matters
David Byrne and Carol Corrado
NBER Working Paper No. 26010
June 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. E01,E21,E22,O31

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops a framework for measuring digital services in the face of ongoing
innovations in the delivery of content to consumers. We capture what Brynjolfsson and Saunders
(2009) call "free goods" as the capital services generated by connected consumers' stocks of IT
digital goods, a service flow that augments the existing measure of personal consumption in
GDP. Its value is determined by the intensity with which households use their IT capital to
consume content delivered over networks, and its volume depends on the quality of the IT capital.
Consumers pay for delivery services, however, and the complementarity between device use and
network use enables us to develop a quality-adjusted price measure for the access services
already included in GDP.

Our new estimates imply that accounting for innovations in consumer content delivery matters:
The innovations boost consumer surplus by nearly $2,000 (2017 dollars) per connected user per
year for the full period of this study (1987 to 2017) and contribute .6 percentage point per year to
US real GDP growth during the last ten. All told, our more complete accounting of innovations is
(conservatively) estimated to have moderated the post-2007 GDP growth slowdown by .3
percentage points per year.


David Byrne
Federal Reserve Board
20th & Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551
david.m.byrne@frb.gov

Carol Corrado
The Conference Board
845 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10022-6679
Carol.Corrado@conference-board.org
1        Introduction
Capturing the impact of innovations in consumer content delivery in conventional well-being measures,

e.g., GDP, presents significant challenges. It also seemingly requires a new approach because the

manifestation of these innovations in consumer welfare (e.g., time spent consuming high quality content

via networked IT devices) does not involve a market transaction at the time of consumption, which

is where price collectors/estimators look to pick up new goods as they appear. Figure 1 shows that

innovations in consumer content delivery have been very rapid since the turn of this century, suggesting

their impacts may be missed in existing GDP; indeed, they are clustered in the mid-2000's when the

slow down in the trend GDP growth emerged. Is it possible that the substitution of uncounted,

so-called free goods for purchased counterparts is a culprit in this much-discussed slowdown?

        This paper adapts a not-so-new approach--capitalization of consumer digital goods--to address

this question, but the standard approach is augmented with an accounting for how IT devices and

subscription network access services are used and consumed.1 To understand why a use-adjusted

version of an "old" approach is both (a) needed and (b) up to the task of capturing 21st century

innovations, consider first that it is consumer-owned devices with advanced processing technology--

computers, powerful smartphones, smart TVs, and video game consoles--that enable the consumption

of high quality content in many homes (and elsewhere), and these services currently are uncounted in

national accounts (though their paid-for predecessors often were). Consider next that the spread of

broadband since 2000 and rise of social media since 2004 suggests that the use of services that enable

the delivery of content to consumer has risen dramatically (see figure 2). The rise in use of network

services implies greater consumption volume (for a given number of subscriptions) because subscription

costs do not fully depend on use rates. All told, we translate the problem of capturing the innovations

shown in figure 1--including what Brynjolfsson and Saunders (2009) call "free goods"--into a quest

for comprehensive measurement of (a) consumer services derived from IT device use and (b) consumer

network service volumes in constant-quality terms. (a) involves an imputation to GDP for the missing

services and (b) involves creating a new price index for the paid-for services.

        Because consumers' IT capital use is inextricably tied to households' utilization of public broad-

band, wireless, and cable networks (including their take up of over-the-top (OTT) media and personal
    1
    The standard approach refers to the productivity literature that capitalizes consumer durables, originally due to
Christensen and Jorgenson (1969, 1973); see also Jorgenson and Landefeld (2006). The U.S. national accounts do not
capitalize consumer durables in headline GDP.
                      Figure 1: Timeline of Innovations in Consumer Content Delivery




   Source: Authors' adaption and extension of information in Total Audience Report, The Neilsen Company, December 3, 2014,
   available at http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/reports/2014/the-total-audience-report.html.



cloud services), its imputation must be linked to paid-for services. In other words, home services and

paid-for services exhibit demand complementarity2 , and a joint analysis of these two types of consumer

digital services is required. This aspect of the approach to capitalization of consumer digital capital is

novel with this paper. A related literature addresses the measurement of "free goods" using alterna-

tive methods and very different frameworks (Nakamura, Samuels, and Soloveichik, 2016; Nakamura,

Soloveichik, and Samuels, 2018; Brynjolfsson, Collis, and Eggers, 2019; Brynjolfsson, Collis, Diewert,

Eggers, and Fox, 2019); we compare our findings to these works later in this paper.

                                     Figure 2: Consumer Digital Capital Use




           (a) Broadband Use                       (b) Social Media Use                      (c) Mobile Device Use
   Source: Pew Center for the Internet


  2
      Thanks to Shane Greenstein for suggesting this interpretation.




                                                              2
      The roadmap of this paper is as follows. Section 2 sets out our framework for thinking about

how the standard framework for capitalizing consumer digital goods needs to be adjusted to take into

account the dramatic increase in household digital asset use shown in figure 2. Then we review the

relationship between device use rates and the volume of services that deliver content over networks,

which forms the basis for the quality-adjusted price index for network access services developed in this

paper. Section 4 summarizes our empirical findings in terms of impacts on real GDP and consumer

surplus. Section 5 concludes.

      Our new estimates imply that accounting for innovations in consumer content delivery matters:

The innovations boost consumer surplus by nearly $1,920 (2017 dollars) per connected user per year

for the full period of this study (1987 to 2017) and contribute .6 percentage point to US real GDP

growth during the last ten (2007 to 2017). All told, our more complete accounting of innovations

is (conservatively) estimated to have moderated the post-2007 US real GDP growth slowdown by

.3 percentage point per year. Because some of this GDP kick comes from an imputation (akin to the

imputation for services from owner-occupied housing), the measured slowdown in business productivity

growth is shaved by somewhat less, about .2 percentage point per year.



2      Framework: Demand Complementarity
Digital device services and network access services work together to deliver consumer content. This

section illustrates how their demand complementarity can be exploited to capture and account for

quality change in consumer digital services.


2.1     Definitions
Because consumer digital services reflect both households' use of digital devices and households' take

up of network access services, the value of total consumer digital (T) services, P ST ST , is expressed as

the sum of two components:

                                                  H          B
(1)                                  P ST ST = P ST ST
                                                     H
                                                       + P ST ST
                                                               B
                                                                     .


The components are nonmarket (or "home") and market (or "paid-for") services, respectively, where

superscripts on the component digital services volume indexes (the S 's) denote location of the capital

used to deliver each type service, i.e., business sector (B ) or household sector (H ).

                                                      3
                        H
      Home services, P ST ST
                           H , are generated via households' use of IT goods purposed for accessing digital

                                     B
networks.3 Paid-for services, P ST ST
                                    B , are derived from subscriptions to networks, e.g., payments for


internet access, cellular access, etc. Where are the seemingly "free" services provided by Google,

Facebook and other apps? Our answer is that they are embodied in both nonmarket and market

services in this framework. The demand for consumer IT capital is a derived demand induced by the

availability of search engines, social networks (and so forth) that push users to purchase higher quality

equipment for, e.g., streaming YouTube and Netflix videos. The intensity of use of network access

services is increased because the "free" services require that data--pictures, videos, search results--

need to be delivered from the cloud for configuration and display by browsers and/or apps on the

home device. It is tempting to associate the capture of "free goods" as solved by the imputation for

home services that we propose in this paper, but the derived demand dynamic underscores it is equally

important to use quality-adjusted price statistics for the purchased parts of content delivery systems,

as improvements in quality are also seemingly "free."

      Quality change is reflected in the price indexes of both components of (1). It stems from (a) the

quality of the equipment used to access content via networks (e.g., the storage capacity of smartphones,

etc.), (b) the quality of network services (e.g., download and upload speeds of broadband service,

channel variety in video service, etc.), and (c) the use intensity of the combined content delivery system

(i.e., the equipment plus the access service). After controlling for the quality of systems (equipment

cum access services) at the time of their purchase, the change in system use intensity reflects changes

in the system's performance, i.e., change in the marginal product of its combined net capital stocks

(just as ex post private capital income reflects changes in the return to capital). Not much of (b) and

none of (c) is in existing GDP, and while (a) is included to a significant degree, we improve its capture

in this paper.

      Network use intensity reflects how consumers use their IT devices and is revealed by the take up of

paid-for network access services. Denoting network use intensity by , and letting N be the number

of users on the network (i.e., consumer accounts, from the perspective of the service provider), then

average network use intensity is defined as:

                                                             B
                                                            ST
(2)                                                  =
                                                            N
  3
    IT goods used without network access produce uncounted services as well, such as personal computer used to work
on local files. This use is outside the scope of our analysis.


                                                        4
       B is the volume of paid-for access services consumed, per equation (1).  and N are most
where ST

easily understood from a producer perspective, i.e.,  is an intensive per customer use margin and

N is an extensive margin whose increases reflect customer growth, e.g., for broadband providers, the

number of "customers" N is households with broadband subscriptions. For cellular service providers,

N is individuals with cellular phone subscriptions.4

       There are other, largely demographically-driven, dimensions of use, e.g., the number of users per

household and the age of users, as this feeds into hours of use per connection. Note that per equation (2)

these distinctions in margins of use are implicit in  to the extent they are not counted in N .


2.2       Home services
Our starting point is the Christensen and Jorgenson (1969, 1973) framework, based on Jorgenson
                                                                                H denote the net
(1963), for imputing service flows from capitalized consumer durables. Letting KT
                                                           H
stock of digital goods held by consumers and P KT the per period rental price for use of a unit of those
                                                            H
stocks, then the value of their capital services P KT KT
                                                       H in the standard formulation would be given by:



                                                 H                       H
(3)                                          P KT KT
                                                   H       H
                                                     = ( + T )P IT KT
                                                                    H




                                                   H is a depreciation rate for household IT stocks,
where  is an ex ante real household discount rate, T
          H
and P IT is a quality-adjusted asset price index for new investments in those stocks.

                                                                              H
       Nominal home services for consumer digital goods, the P ST ST
                                                                   H term in equation (1), does not


correspond to equation (3) because (3) is essentially a capacity flow; i.e., (3) does not reflect actual

consumption.5 Demand complementarity suggests that incorporating the "connected" IT use dynamic

implied by figure 2 is necessary to capture the actual consumption of digital content over networks in
      H
P ST ST
      H.



       The IT device use dynamic is specific to each device type, which implies we need to define a use

rate a for each asset type a, e.g., for computers, for mobile phones, for TVs, etc. We thus have the
   4
     Although households have other modes of network service (e.g., cable, OTT) and all such services are considered in
our empirical analysis, for simplicity, the discussion in this section considers N as the number of subscriptions to a single
service, i.e., connected households.
   5
     Private industry capital income is generally understood to include a utilization effect when the rate of return is
calculated on an ex post basis as in Jorgenson and Griliches (1967). When consumer durables are capitalized, service
flows are imputed using an ex ante return as in (3), and therefore a utilization effect is not be "automatically" present.
See Hulten (2009) for a discussion.



                                                               5
following

                                                              Deva
(4)                                           a =
                                                               D

where Deva is the number of hours per day device type a is used to connect to networks, and D is

the potential number of hours per day any device can be used.

      We can then define an "effective" stock of network access equipment and software, K eH
                                                                                           T , that

accounts for how the use of a given stock of network access equipment and software expands, in which

case the value of nonmarket consumer digital services in equation (1) is given by:

                                          H                   H
(5a)                                    P ST ST
                                              H
                                                = P KT K eH
                                                          T
                                                                      H
(5b)                                              =  · P KT KT
                                                             H
                                                                              .


where  reflects the appropriately weighted aggregate of the individual a 's. A related issue is that

some consumer digital capital goods are not used for the consumption of content over networks, e.g.,

digital cameras, suggesting it is necessary to identify a relevant group of IT devices--call this network

access equipment (NAE)--for generating the relevant capital services flows. The relevant IT products

comprising NAE stocks will be identified in measurement; we thus proceed with the assumption that

only NAE products are included in the capital measures subscripted by "T ".

      Consider next how to measure the implicit volume of services whose value is given by 5b. Log
                                                        H constant, suggests that the growth of
differentiation of equations (5b) and (3), holding  and T
                        ·           ·             ·               ·                      ·       ·
                            H                         H                                      H       H
nominal free services P ST + ST
                              H is equal to P KT + K eH . This in turn implies that P ST = P IT , and
                                                      T
                                ·                                                 ·
                              H equals the growth of the effective stock K eH , or
that growth of real services ST                                             T


                                              ·           ·
                                            H
(6a)                                       ST     = K eH
                                                       T
                                                          ·           ·
                                                     H
(6b)                                              = KT +                  .



2.3     Paid-for services
Digital access services are typically sold as subscriptions, where households pay a monthly fee for a

"plan" in return for access to a range of services, e.g., broadband, smartphone, cable TV, subscription


                                                          6
video-on-demand. Each plan has a fixed set of characteristics, e.g., download speed, upload speed,

number/availability of videos or video channels, etc., for the services involved. Plan heterogeneity by

service type and service type characteristics is ignored (for now) for ease of exposition.
                                                                             B
      Producers offer digital access service plans at prices P OT . Offer prices are subscription contract

prices set at the outset of the period, and the average price each customer pays is expressed as

                                                             B
                                                 B
                                                OT     P OT OT
                                                             B
(7)                                         P        =
                                                          N

            B
where P OT OT
            B are producer revenues from consumer sales of N plans. Nominal consumer payments,

      B
P ST ST
      B of equation (1) equals this producer sales revenue. We assume that producers' capacity is


constrained in the short run (the period of the contract) and, after accounting for the usual issues

regarding peak load planning, that producers set offer prices based on a preferred rate of capacity

utilization determined by anticipated average customer usage, a .

                                    B is a planned quantity of delivered services and not necessarily
      These assumptions imply that OT
          B , the actual quantity of services consumed by users--unless of course actual usage  is
equal to ST
                                                                                 B
perfectly anticipated, i.e., a = . It follows that the offer price index P OT does not necessarily equal
                                   B
the consumption price index P ST of equation (1). Let u be an index of actual capacity utilization,

where u = 1 denotes the situation where a = . We then have  = a u, in which case the relationship

between real services consumption and real services offered, and between consumption prices and offer

prices is given by


                                                  B    B
(8)                                              ST = OT u.
                                                                 B
                                                     B   P OT
(9)                                             P ST =               .
                                                           u

                                                                     B
Equation (9) states that the consumption price index P ST is a utilization-adjusted contract price.

      Equations (8) and (9) are not very helpful for conventional, timely price measurement (as in

a monthly CPI) because producers' preferred utilization rate u is not readily observed. However,

substitution of (8) into (9) reveals that the consumption price may be alternatively written as:

                                                             B
                                                 B
                                                ST     P OT OT
                                                             B
(10)                                        P        =     B
                                                                         .
                                                         ST


                                                         7
which suggests that consumption prices for access services may be obtained by dividing producer
                                                                                 B  VOL where VOL is
revenue by a relevant, consistently-defined volume measure, i.e., that ideally, ST

such a measure.

      What might that volume measure be? We know that total consumption increases along with

the number of users and/or hours of use, but these are very coarse indicators that do not capture

consumption intensity or service quality. An ideal measure would capture consumers' use in terms of the

potential performance of communication networks and where utilized performance is a comprehensive

measure capable of being consistently defined in the face of rapid technical change, e.g., Internet

Protocol data traffic (IP) measured as optimally compressed megabytes/petabytes per year, i.e., that


                                            T
(11)                                       SB  VOL = IP            .


A range of services are delivered over networks, and dataflows/IP traffic may not always be the relevant

indicator of quality, but for internet access services via computers of mobile phones IP traffic would

appear to be a solid choice (e.g., see Abdirahman, Coyle, Heys, and Stewart, 2017). For video services,

quality is not so simple; cross-country studies have found that the quality dimension for video services is

captured by a range of controls, including the number of channels (HD and standard), and availability

of premium channels and 4K display resolution (Corrado and Ukhaneva, 2016, 2019; D´
                                                                                  iaz-Pin´
                                                                                         es and

Fanfalone, 2015).


2.4        Use intensity, 
With real services captured by a performance measure, the changes in network and device intensity of
       ·
use, , can be shown to reflect the difference between changes in the average price paid by users for a

plan and the price index for access services, i.e., it reflects changes in the quality of services consumed.

To see this, log differentiate (2):

                                              ·    ·       ·
                                                 B
(12)                                          = ST -N          .




                                                       8
                                                                                                               ·
                                                                                                               B
After adding and subtracting the nominal change in paid services, P OT OT
                                                                        B , and combining terms, we


obtain:

                                                           ·                                   ·
                                                           B                                   B
                                                 ·P OT OT
                                                        B   P OT OT
                                                                  B
(13)                                            =         -     B
                                                                                                       .
                                                     N        ST

Substitution of (7) and (10) for the first and second terms yields:

                                                                       ·               ·
                                                       ·                B
                                                                       OT               B
                                                                                       ST
(14)                                                   =P                      -P                  .

                                                           ·
In equation (13) the change in use intensity  reflects the difference between the rate of change in a per

user price and a unit volume price, or per equation (14), the difference between the rate of change in

the price index for access services and rate of change in the average price per plan, i.e., quality change.

                                                                                                                   B
        Statistical agencies generate price indexes in terms of offer prices P OT , not consumption prices
        B                                                              ·
P ST . Consider now the relationship between  and the quality change in official price indexes for

network access service (based on offer prices), e.g., quality change that might be captured using hedonic

techniques that account for improvements in speeds and other capabilities in subscription telecom
                                                                                                           ·
                                                                                                               B
service plans.6 Noting first that the change in the offer price index, P OT , also can be decomposed into
                                                                   ·
the rate of change in quality of offered plans,  , and the rate of change in the average price per plan,
    ·               ·          ·
     B
    OT                  B       B
                               OT     ·
P           , i.e., P OT = P        -  . Next, from log differentiation of (9), after subtracting the result from (14)
                                                                       ·               ·
and combining terms, the relationship between  and  is readily shown as

                                                               ·           ·       ·
(15)                                                       =+u                             ,


which says that the quality change in real network access services consumption is equal to the quality

change in offered plans (at offered prices) plus the unanticipated change in network service provider

utilization.


2.5          Network utilization, u
Consider now how one might measure u. We do not need to measure u to measure prices for consumer

digital services, but knowing u helps us interpret and analyze them. For example, knowing the direction
    6
        As done, e.g., at the BLS (see Williams, 2008).


                                                                               9
of change in u helps to understand how little change in measured quality change in contract prices
                                                                                                              B
( ) might coexist with notable declines in consumption prices for network access services (P ST ); per

equation (15), this situation occurs when there are notable increases in both household use intensity

() and network utilization (u).7
       As previously indicated, private industry capital income is generally understood to include a utiliza-

tion effect, and previous work has considered how to extract a measure of network capital utilization

from productivity data for internet service providers, or ISPs (Corrado, 2011; Corrado and J¨
                                                                                            ager, 2014;

see also Corrado and van Ark, 2016). The basic idea in these works is that when an ex ante approach is

used to determine an industry's return, a utilization factor can be calculated so as to exhaust observed

capital income--provided that the industry's aggregate net stock of capital is not particularly sensitive

to composition differences in asset use, i.e., it acts more or less as a single capital good (Berndt and

Fuss, 1986; Hulten, 1986). This is arguably the case for network services providers in the United States,

whose capital stock is a physical network whose parts largely operate as a single good. Employing this

assumption, Corrado (2011) found a substantial difference between the U.S. ISP industry's ex post

calculated nominal rate of return and the market interest rates typically used in ex ante productivity

analysis; the difference was able to be interpreted as network utilization.
       The network services-providing industry's ex post gross return is defined as


(16)                                      ISP = (rISP +  ISP -  ISP )


where rISP is an ex post nominal net return determined residually (e.g., as in Jorgenson and Griliches,

1967), given depreciation  ISP and revaluation of the industry's capital stock  ISP . Now define the

industry's ex ante gross return as


                                               ISP
(17)                                                 = (r +  ISP -  ISP )


where r is an ex ante nominal rate of interest. Let uISP be the industry's capital utilization rate. As

shown in Appendix section A1, this utilization rate is given by

                                                                ISP
(18)                                                 uISP =        ISP
                                                                
   7
    On the other hand, quality-adjusted contract prices are likely mis-measured when there is little change in u in the
face of increases in household use intensity.


                                                           10
which suggests that the underlying relationship between the ex post and ex ante net rate of return,

i.e., r versus r, for an industry or sector is an indicator of its capital utilization.8


2.6     Summary
To summarize, changes in the quantities and prices of consumer digital services as set out in equation (1)

are as follows:

                                                    ·          ·     ·
                                                  H    H
(19a)                                            ST = KT +
                                                    ·          ·
                                                     H
                                                    ST
(19b)                                           P           = P IT
                                                                 H

                                                    ·          ·
                                                  B
(19c)                                            ST = V ol
                                                    ·          ·
                                                                         ·
                                                        B      OB
(19d)                                           P ST = P        T    -       .


                                     I              H
where  and  were defined above, and PT                  is a quality-adjusted asset price index for network access

equipment.



3       Measurement
This section summarizes how the prices and quantities of the previous section are measured and

presents some key results. We begin with the new network access services price index, describing how
                                                                                                       ·
this index may be built using alternative volume measures. We then present results for  and for our
                                                               ·
calculations of utilization from the business side, u. A second subsection sets out how our consumer

digital capital stocks, their connectivity use rates, and digital capital services are obtained.


3.1     Access prices, household use intensity, and network utilization
We calculate a price index for four types of IT services provided to households by the business sector--

cable, internet, mobile, and video streaming services­by dividing nominal spending for each service

type (j ) by a measure that reflects the quality-adjusted time spent using the service, i.e., an appropriate

V OL for each j . The quality-adjusted price indexes by service type are aggregated to create an overall

access price index that, when used to deflate total spending on access services, captures real access

services consumption.
    8
    In models that introduce imperfect competition in an otherwise standard neoclassical growth framework (e.g., Rotem-
berg and Woodford, 1995), utilization is absorbed in a more general inefficiency wedge capturing, among other things,
the ability of firms to maintain a price markup.


                                                               11
       For exposition and analysis, we consider price indexes constructed using four alternative measures

of quantity: the number of households subscribed to the service, the number of individual users, time

spent on the service, and time spent adjusted for quality (our ultimate measure). The four alternative

price and volume concepts will be indexed by k . Thus four alternative price indexes for each service

type are calculated by dividing revenue for the service type by the four alternative volume measures,

yielding prices paid per household (k = H ), per individual (k = I ), per unit of time (k = D), and per
                                                                       SB   SB      SB         SB
unit of constant-quality time (k = Q), i.e., we have PHT , PI T , PDT , and PQT for each service type j .

(Note: D is the notation used for time, i.e., as in hours per Day).

                                                                                         B
       The alternative price indexes are calculated as follows: Let (P OT OT
                                                                           B ) be payments for service
                                                                              j
                                       B
                                   B . Price change for price index concept k covering all J types of
type j within total payments P OT OT

services is then

                                      J                   B
                                SB                      P OT OT
                                                              B
(20)                   lnPk T =             wj ln                           where     k = H, I, D, Q ,
                                                         VOLk      j
                                     j =1


wj is a Divisia payments share for digital access service type j , and VOLk,j is service type j 's volume
measure corresponding to price index concept k . In terms of the framework set out in section 2, we thus have
the following:

                                                 B              SB
(21)                                        lnP ST = lnPQT
                                                    ·
                                                                     SB          SB
(22)                                              = -(lnPQT - lnPHT )


Note that the suite of indexes constructed along margins of use enables changes in the quality-adjusted price
index to be decomposed into contributions from I , T , and Q--i.e., into contributions from growth in individuals
per household using the service, time spent on the service per individual user, and the quality of an hour of use
of the service, respectively. Appendix section A2 documents the data sources for each price concept for each
access service price index, including reporting the time series for prices by access service type and aggregate
                                                                                              B
prices for each alternative measure of volume. Note that the contract price P OT , the price observed by the
consumer, is not needed for the calculations (or analysis) in this paper.9
   9
    Depending on the contract arrangement, the price observed by the consumer may correspond to any of the four price
concepts we consider. For example, if a consumer pays a cable company a fixed amount to keep the household connected
                 B         SB
each month, P OT equals PHT . If a consumer pays an internet provider a fixed amount to have unlimited access each
            B         SB
month, P OT equals PI T . If the consumer has a prepaid plan for a certain number of hours of talk time on a feature
            B        SB                                                                                            B
phone, P OT equals PDT . And, if the consumer has a contract for smartphone use based on data traffic consumed, P OT




                                                              12
                  Figure 3: Network Access Services Price Change and Use Intensity




    The aggregate quality-adjusted price index for access service corresponding to equation (21), shown as the
solid gray line in figure 3, falls 12.4 percent per year (average annual rate) over the full period of this study.
                          ·
Household use intensity,  per equation (22) and also shown, increases 13.9 percent at an annual rate. Figure
3 also shows a price index for network access services constructed using components of BEA's PCE price index
                                                                                SB
and our per household price index (i.e., the average price per household, PHT ). Note first that our new access
services price index (the gray line) falls much faster than the implicit price index in existing GDP (the black
line); the growth implications of this finding will be reviewed in the next section of this paper. Note second that
changes in the BEA price index hovers about changes in our per household price from about 2000 on; if the
BEA index accurately represents changes in contract prices, the result implies that there is very little quality
                                                                 ·
change in measured offer prices from from 2000 to 2017, i.e.,  has shown essentially no change since 2000.

    Results for the overall price index by sub-periods are plotted in panel (a) of figure 4; spending shares for its
subcomponents by type are shown in panel (b) of the figure. As may be seen, the decline in the quality-adjusted
network access price index accelerates over time, first as internet service accounts for a rising share of spending
(1997 to 2007), then as smartphone access becomes more important (2007 to 2017).

    The trends in the aggregate network access price index also reflect large differences in the contributions by
access mode, shown in figure 5. Contributions to the overall volume price change by each intensity margin (i.e,
volume measure) show the following. First, there is little difference between changes in per individual user prices
relative to per household prices; as a result, only the contribution of changes in the price per household shows
        SB
equals PQT . This information is not needed to construct our price indexes, even though these details are required for
official prices based on contract arrangements.


                                                         13
                               Figure 4: Network Access Services Price Index




                                 (a) Contributions to Price Change by Volume Measure




                                  (b) Shares of Spending by Mode of Network Access



through in figure 4. Second, quality change contributes significantly to the overall decline in network access
prices in most sub-periods. Third, consumers' increase in time connected provides a substantial, additional kick
from 1997 to 2012; time connected is especially important in driving price change for mobile and SVOD services.

    Finally, given that both usage trends and technological change are major drivers of the drops in our network
access price index, we calculate values for producer network utilization u in light of the fact that figure 3 suggested
                                                                                                                     ·
there was very little (measured) quality change in official access prices since 2000. As previously discussed, 
will reflect trends in consumer usage as well as technological improvements in content delivery systems measured
on the basis of contract prices. Our calculation of u is detailed in Appendix section A1, and figure 6 shows
the result, which covers the period from 2000 to 2016. While the utilization measure bounces about year by
year, it rises more than 4-1/2 percent per year, on balance. This pattern is interesting for several reasons--but

                                                          14
                        Figure 5: Price Decompositions by Mode of Network Access




                           (a) Cable                                                    (b) Mobile




                         (c) Internet                                                    (d) SVOD



before we offer our interpretation, note that the measure in figure 6 pertains to the entire telecommunications
and broadcasting industry, i.e., it includes commercial and enterprise customers and thus does not solely reflect
the interaction between the demand and supply of consumer content delivery services as defined in this paper.
That said, per equation (15), the rather sharp rise in u supports our decomposition showing that a significant
                                              ·      ·
fraction of the large divergence between  and  after 2000 reflects increases in use rates. In terms of the model
of section 2,  consistently exceeded e and lowered the effective price paid by each consumer (holding per plan
quality constant).10




  10
    Seen from another perspective, the rise in u reflects strengthening industry profitability and pricing power. On a per
household basis, changes in households' average prices actually decelerated (or fell) after 2002 relative to earlier experience
(see again figure 4), suggesting that the rise in relative profitability reflected a prolonged positive demand shock, i.e.,
consistent with a situation in which  consistently exceeded e .


                                                              15
                                       Figure 6: Implied Network Utilization




3.2       Digital Net Stocks, Capital Services, and Asset Prices


                                         Table 1: PCE durable digital goods

                    Product class                                         Depreciation Groupa     NAE Groupb
                    (1)                                                            (2)                 (3)
               1.   Televisions                                                     A                   Y
               2.   Cameras                                                         B                   N
               3.   Other photographic equipment                                    A                   N
               4.   Other video equipment                                           A                   N
               5.   Audio equipment                                                 A                   N
               6.   Recording media                                                 A                   N
               7.   Computers                                                       B                   Y
               8.   Data storage equipment                                          B                   Y
               9.   Monitors                                                        B                   Y
              10.   Computer peripherals                                            B                   Y
              11.   Miscellaneous office equipment                                  A                   N
              12.   Software and accessories                                        B                   Y
              13.   Cell phones                                                     B                   Y
              14.   Other telephone and communications equipment                    A                   N
              Notes: a. A = 9 year service life, B = 5 year service life. b. NAE = Network Access Equipment.




In this section we set out our measures of consumer digital services based on "connected" IT capital stocks.
Table 1, column (1), lists the 14 product classes of durable goods considered to be consumer durable digital (or
IT) goods. This list ranges from TVs, to computers and software, to cell phones.11 Consumer spending for most
of these products may be developed from underlying detail in the U.S. national income and product accounts
(NIPAs); indeed, the first 12 product classes shown in the table directly correspond to categories of digital goods
  11
       Game consoles, which have embodied massive innovation in the period of this study, are not included for lack of data.




                                                              16
reported in the annual personal consumption expenditures (PCE) bridge table.12 For the analysis in this paper,
estimates of the retail value of consumer cell phone purchases are developed from industry sources; see Appendix
section A3 for further details on how this series and the other telephone equipment series are estimated.

       In terms of service lives, the products are grouped into two categories, those with a 9 year service life (A)
and those with a 5 year service life (B). These groupings are indicated in column (2) of the table, and are a
(slight) simplification of the service life categories used by BEA in their fixed asset accounts.13 To compute
net stocks we follow BEA and Hulten and Wykoff (1981a,b) and use a declining-balance rate of 1.65 for these
goods, which implies geometric rates of depreciation of .1833 and .3300 for groups A and B, respectively. An
end-of-year (EOY) net stock of each product class a in table 1 is calculated using the perpetual inventory method
with geometric depreciation, again following BEA (see page M-7 in U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of
Economic Analysis, 2003):

                                                         H
                                     H        H          a          H   H
(23)                                Ka,EOY = Ia,t (1 -     ) + (1 - a )Ka,EOY -1
                                                         2

       H
where Ia,t is annual real investment for each asset class a in year t.

       When considering the demand complementary of payments for digital access services with stocks of the
devices shown in table 1, only the equipment used for cable TV, subscription video, internet or mobile network
access is relevant. Column (3) of the table is an indicator of whether the asset class is included in the NAE stocks
                                                                                  H
relevant to the analysis in this paper, i.e., whether the stocks are included in KT . As may be seen, three types
of equipment require estimates of use intensity: televisions, computers, and cell phones. To obtain "effective"
NAE stocks, an estimate of their use intensity a = Deva /D per equation (4) is required. These equipment
use intensities allow us to identify the stock of IT capital that yields services corresponding to the unpriced
portion of households' consumption of digital content over networks. We first summarize the construction of
                                                                               H
a = Deva /D , and then we present our estimates of unpriced services P ST ST
                                                                           H
                                                                             per equation (5b).

       Our estimates of equipment use intensity begin with our time-based estimates of average household time
spent using each access service, panel (a) of figure 7. We then measure the share of households with at least
one of each device and the number of devices in use conditional on the household having such a device (panels
b and c). The total number of hours households spend on each device is calculated from these elements, which
also requires allocating time spent on accessing each digital service to the capital used for the access. The result
expressed as the share of the day each device type is in use (a ) is shown in panel (d). Additional details and
data sources for this calculation are spelled out in Appendix section A4.
  12
     BEA's annual PCE bridge table begins in 1998 and does not extend through the most recent NIPA year. Nine
categories of PCE spending on digital goods are reported on NIPA table 2.4.5U, however, and these data are used to
develop the more detailed, bridge table-based series from 1970 to 1997 and for the year 2017.
  13
     Compared BEA's methods, the major simplification we make is to use geometric depreciation for computers.


                                                          17
Figure 7: Time-based Equipment Use Intensity
 Share of day
 0.4

0.35

 0.3

0.25
                   Cable
 0.2               Internet

0.15               Mobile
                   SVOD
 0.1

0.05

  0
       1987        1992         1997      2002           2007   2012   2017

       Source.  Authors' calculations.
       Note.  Day excludes 10 hours for personal care.


                     (a) Access Service Use Intensity




                              (b) Device Penetration




                              (c) Device Multiplicity




                      (d) Device Use Intensity (a )

                                        18
                       H
       To calculate P ST ST
                          H
                            , we proceed as follows: The nominal value of the capacity flow of services from each
consumer digital asset is calculated via equation (3) with the gross ex ante rental rate formed using the 10-
year constant-maturity government bond rate, the relevant depreciation rate as described above, and actual
price change for each asset type.14 Then we (a) sum over all asset types to obtain an estimate of consumer
capital services based on total digital goods stocks and (b) sum over the asset types included in network access
equipment to obtain the subcomponent for services from total NAE stocks. Finally, we (c) adjust the capacity
NAE services for the extensive margin (i.e., we apply our estimates of a ) to obtain actual capital services
generated via households' use of IT goods purposed for accessing digital networks, i.e., capital services from the
effective NAE stocks. The results of (a), (b), and (c) are shown in figure 8, plotted relative to GDP adjusted to
include them.

       Our estimate of home-generated digital services relative to GDP, the solid black line in figure 8, rises steadily
over the thirty years shown in the figure, reflecting both the increase in relative importance of NAE stocks in all
digital stocks (the black dotted line versus the thin gray line) and the increased portion of NAE stocks connected
                                                                                                       H
to networks (the solid versus dashed black lines) that reflects the increase in  . The ratio of P ST ST
                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                        relative to
GDP stood at 1.04 percent of GDP in 2017, up from .48 percent ten years earlier. This trajectory is roughly
similar to estimates of free services prepared using a very different approach (the open dots in the figure).15

       The real investment used to develop net stock estimates via equation (23) is calculated by deflating nominal
spending on each product class using asset price indexes based on the sources documented in the appendix.
These prices are research indexes largely adapted from prior work (Byrne and Corrado, 2015a,b; Byrne, 2015;
Byrne and Corrado, 2017a,b). In new moves, we incorporate two quality-adjusted price indexes from Statistics
Japan and exploit work by Copeland (2013) on consumer game software in combination with results from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics producer price index for game software. Our price index for the 14 consumer digital
goods listed in table (1) falls 11.7 precent per year from 2007 to 2017, 2.6 percentage points faster than its official
counterpart (based on published PCE prices); see Appendix section A3 for further details.

       The implicit deflator for consumer digital assets depends on the weighting of the components in the effective
NAE aggregate. Figure 9 shows annual price for total NAE stocks versus effective NAE stocks. As may be
seen, the weighting of the underlying components produces very similar results for effective NAE stocks versus a
                                                                             H
simple aggregate of those stocks. Our price index for home services, P ST , is the Jorgensonian rental price index
for effective NAE stocks (the solid line in the figure), which is driven by the appropriately weighted asset price
(the dotted line). The effective NAE rental price fell 12.5 percent per year over the full period of our study and
dropped 17.2 percent from 2007 to 2017.
  14
     In the implementation of (3), mid-period stocks computed from EOY stocks are used.
  15
     Nakamura et al. (2018) estimate the costs of producing both professionally-created and user generated consumer
content. The black open dots in the figure are their estimates for the digital component of their professionally-created
free content plus their estimate of the value of user-generated free content.


                                                            19
                        Figure 8:
              Consumer Digital Capital Services,
                 Nominal Estimates from 1987 to 2017




                          Figure 9:
                 Consumer Digital Asset Prices,
                 Annual Price Change 1988 to 2017




Source: Elaboration of price indexes developed for this paper.




                                     20
3.3      Summary
Our new estimates of digital services consumption consist of two components, a paid-for network access services
component and an imputed connected IT capital services component. The price index for network access services
was reviewed in section 3.1. To obtain real spending, we delate nominal figures from the national accounts
published by Bureau of Economic Analysis, incorporating some additional detail as explained in Appendix
section A2.

      The imputed component was reviewed in section 3.2. The new nominal spending measure was developed as
a capital services flow derived from the effective NAE stocks shown in figure 8. The price deflator is then the
corresponding rental price, displayed in figure 9.



4      Results and Implications
This section reports the new real digital services consumption measures and discusses their implications for real
GDP and consumer surplus.


4.1      GDP
Our results for GDP are summarized in the table below. These results are calculated under the conservative
assumption that overall real GDP is unaffected by differences the PCE IT goods investment price indexes
developed in this paper and official prices used in GDP because these goods are primarily imported (whether
for "effective" investment or all IT goods spending); recall too that we are unable to include the rapid quality
change in game consoles in our price indexes.

      The key takeaways from table 2 are, first, as shown on line 2, column (1), real services from use of connected
digital systems grow very strongly, averaging 26.2 percent per year for the full period of the study. Second, our
new results for real access services (line 4) are also very strong; as shown in column (5), real growth averaged
nearly 34 percent per year during the Great Recession and its immediate aftermath (i.e., from 2007 to 2012).
Third, this paper's approach to accounting for innovation in consumer digital services shows that it is possible
to "see" digitalization in GDP. If our methods were to be incorporated in the national accounts of the United
States, the contribution of consumer digital services (both components) to real GDP growth would average .57
percentage points from 2007 to 2017 (line 7, column 4), and annual real GDP growth would be .46 percentage
points per year higher (line 7a, column 4).

      The GDP impacts shown in table 2 are substantial. As reported and analyzed elsewhere (Byrne and Corrado,
2020), the impacts of our new digital services price indexes on overall consumer/PCE price inflation also are
substantial.



                                                         21
                         Table 2: Changes in Consumer Digital Services, 1987 to 2017

                                                    1987 to      1987 to     1997 to      2007 to      2007 to      2012 to
                                                     2017         1997        2007         2017         2012         2017
           Percent change, annual rate                (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
           Capital services:
           1.   Nominal                               11.9         10.9        13.6        11.2          10.5         11.9
           2.   Real                                  26.2         18.1        29.5        31.2          33.7         28.8
           Access services:
           3.   Nominal                               11.5         15.1        13.3         6.2          7.7           4.7
           4.   Real                                  26.2         18.1        29.5        31.2          33.7         28.8
           Memos:
           Effective NAE investment:
           5.    Nominal                              12.2         10.5        15.6        10.5          11.2          9.8
           6.    Real                                 27.9         19.4        37.8        32.4          35.6         29.3
                            ·
           Contrib. to GDP a,b
           7.   Consumer digital services             .33           .09         .30         .57          .57           .59
           7a.       Net of existing                  .25           .05         .17         .46          .38           .54
           8.      Capital services                   .09           .02         .06         .17          .15           .19
           9.      Access servicesb                   .24           .07         .24         .40          .40           .40
           9a.       Net of existing                  .16           .03         .11         .29          .23           .34
           Notes: a. Percentage points. c. GDP contributions are calculated assuming that differences between PCE digital
          goods investments and their price indexes and their official counterparts have no impact on existing GDP because they
          are largely imported.



      With regard to changes in the trend rate of real GDP growth, the impact of using our framework for
measuring consumer digital services boosts the rate of real GDP growth from 2007 to 2017 relative to ten
years earlier (1997 to 2007) by .29 percentage point (line 7a, column 4 less column 3)--a notable acceleration.
Both the GDP boundary expansion (adding imputed real digital capital services) and the adoption of a quality-
adjusted consumption price index for network access services contribute to this acceleration, with about 60
percent stemming from the net contribution of the new access services price index (.16 percentage point). The
latter contribution also boosts business productivity growth; as with services from owner-occupied housing, the
imputation for self-generated digital capital services is not factored into conventional measures of productivity
change.


4.2     Consumer Surplus
The consumer surplus stemming from innovations in consumer content delivery can be calculated using an
index number approach if the quality-adjusted price indexes used in the analysis fully capture the benefits of
the changes in question. Assuming our price indexes are up to the task, we compute consumer surplus as the




                                                                  22
macroececonomic gain from the relevant continuing commodities following (Diewert and Fox, 2017) as:

                                     H                    B                   eH
(24)                         .5 ST ST
                                    H
                                      + .5 ST ST
                                               B
                                                 + .5 IT IT
                                                          eH


where  is a long difference, and the 's are changes in the relative prices, i.e.,
                                          H                         B                     eH
                                H     P ST            B        P ST            eH     P IT
(25)                         ST =              ,   ST =                 and   IT =              ,
                                     P P CE                   P P CE                  P P CE

where P P CE is the overall price index for consumer spending.

       In the textbook exposition of consumer surplus, the price drop from the Hicksian reservation price to the
transaction price of the new good or service is the welfare gain stemming from the innovation in question. To
fully capture this gain, benefits of individual innovations are quantified using techniques that rely on estimates
of demand elasticities or estimated parameters of utility functions in conjunction with transactions prices and
revenue data, e.g., Petrin (2002) and Greenwood and Kopecky (2013). There are many individual innovations
underlying our price indexes, however, and for this reason alone, eschewing a parametric approach and using (24)
has many advantages. Using (24) views innovations in digital content delivery as serial Schumpterian change
where individual innovations are launched, gain market share, and then lose market share as another innovation
is introduced. We believe this process is well captured by our quality-adjusted price indexes even though
they do not explicitly incorporate Hicksian reservation prices. Our comprehensive accounting of use intensity
captures the benefits of ubiquitous connectivity/networks cum powerful equipment in our estimates. Many of
the products that undergird these estimates experience constant change via incremental quality improvements
and introduction of new forms and varieties, and we are able to incorporate these changes, e.g., enhancements to
personal computing via new forms (tablets and cell phones) and improvements in performance (speed, storage)
are incorporated in our estimates.16

       The results of computing (24) are presented in table 3. Changes from the beginning of our sample (1987,
arguably also the beginning of the Internet) to the beginning of social media and mobile broadband (taken as
2004) are assessed, as are changes from this point to 2017, the last year of our estimates. As may be seen on
row 1, the consumer surplus due to innovations in digital content delivery from 1987 to 2004 (18 years) was
nearly $900 billion in 2017 dollars (column 1) and $5.8 trillion over the next 14 years (column 2). These are
substantial amounts. On a per user basis, rows 5 through 8, the gain hovered at or slightly below $30,000 (in
  16
     Note further that even for an innovation as significant as the iPhone, the impact of the omission of Hicksian reservation
prices on a price index is very small because the revenue weight on the unobserved initial price drop is likely to be so
tiny that ignoring this change has very little impact GDP or consumer surplus. As reported in Apple's financials, total
iPhone revenue in the quarter of introduction in 2007 was $8 million ($32 million at an annual rate). GDP was $14,452
billion and our digital services series was $278,334 million in that year. One half of the revenue gain from the iPhone
in its introductory quarter at an annual rate was then .11×10-5 relative to GDP and .057×10-3 relative to our series
for connected digital capital services. Consider now the following thought experiment: Assume the change from the
reservation price to the actual price of the iPhone was a ginormous -1000 percent in the quarter of introduction. Then
our price index would be off 5.7 percentage points in the initial quarter (1.4 percentage points for the year) but GDP
would be essentially unaffected.


                                                               23
                                    Table 3: Consumer Surplus from Innovations in
                                              Content Delivery Systems

                                                                             1987 to 2004       2004 to 2017
                                                                                 (1)                (2)
                           Surplus, in billions of 2017 dollars:
                           1.    Digital goods and services, total                 892              5,841
                           2.      Capital investment                              262              1,287
                           3.      Capital services                                311              2,301
                           4.      Access services                                 319              2,254
                           Surplus, in thousands of $ per usera :
                           5.    Digital goods and services, total               27,320            30,294
                           6.      Capital investment                             8,031             6,672
                           7.      Capital services                               9,510            11,933
                           8.      Access services                                9,779            11,689
                           Annual surplus per user:
                            9.   Digital goods and services, total               1,607              2,330
                           10.     Capital investment                              472               513
                           11.     Capital services                               559                918
                           12.     Access services                                575                889
                          Note: All figures are in 2017 dollars.
                         a. The per user figure is obtained by dividing the results on rows 1 to 4 by the average
                         number of connected users during the period indicated.


2017 dollars). While these numbers seem very large (implying a per user gain in economic welfare of more
than $2,000 per year, on average, during the latter period), they are in the same neighborhood as estimates of
consumer surplus obtained by Brynjolfsson et al. (2019) using massive online choice experiments. The sum of
their median willingness-to-pay estimates for the items included in their surveys (search engines, email, maps,
video, e-commerce, social media, messaging, and music) was $32,232 in 2017 (Brynjolfsson et al., 2019, table 7,
sum of items in column 2).

         We compare our long difference estimates with the single-point-in-time survey results of Brynjolfsson et al.
(2019) based on a conjecture that respondents in their massive online experiments are thinking about what they
would have to pay to "return" to life before social media, smart phones, and mobile broadband. Brynjolfsson
et al. (2019) also report median willingness-to-pay estimates for a survey conducted in 2016, and these values
sum to $26,150, expressed in 2017 dollars.17 Using (24) with a long difference from 2004 to 2016 (i.e., dropping
the last year, and dividing by a slightly lower number for the average number of users) yields an estimate of the
consumer surplus of $24,676 per user--again in the same ballpark and, we believe, strengthening our conjecture.


5         Conclusion
The household is an important locus of the digital revolution and one of its most visible since smartphones and
social media became widespread. Entertainment, communication, and work from home have been supercharged
    17
         The simple sum of their figures is $25,697.


                                                                    24
by advances in hardware, software, and communication. Hardware innovation has proceeded at an especially
blistering pace as the major household platforms--smartphones, tablets, televisions, gaming consoles and all the
apps that run on them--have become extraordinarily powerful (and cheap) and as datacenter innovation (i.e. the
cloud) has charged ahead in the background. Faster communication speeds--both wireline and wireless--have
been essential of course; for example, nearly one-third of all IP traffic in 2016 was accounted for by Netflix alone,
a usage volume not possible one or two years earlier.

    The highly visible innovations in consumer content delivery raises the question of whether existing national
accounts are missing consequential growth in output and income associated with content delivered to consumers
via their use of digital platforms. The changing production border for digital content delivery suggests that GDP
(as well as other macroeconomic measures, such as PCE prices) need to account for the substitution away from
market-based digital services consumption. How and whether to address distortion to the production boundary
created by the substitution between market activity and household activity is an old issue in national accounting,
an issue that is often dismissed as second-order except for the case of owner-occupied housing.

    We believe the digitization of consumer content delivery presents a first-order distortion to the production
boundary of national accounts--and that an imputation for the omitted services from connected IT capital needs
to be made to avoid imparting a bias to GDP. The case for imputing services from owner-occupied housing is
based on the size of the omitted services and the importance of accounting for them in international comparisons.
The case for imputing services from connected IT capital is based on the astonishingly fast relative growth of
the omitted services in both real and nominal terms. As shown in the analysis of the contribution of business
IT goods and services to real GDP growth set out in Byrne and Corrado, 2017b, even as the extensive aspects
(e.g., hours per day) driving consumer digital services growth runs its course, access services and services from
connected IT capital will continue to provide an extra kick to real GDP growth due their declining relative price.

    All told, we estimate that consumer welfare due to growth in digital content consumption has been enhanced
to the tune of $1,775 per connected user per year from 2004 to 2017 (2017 dollars). And when the demand
complementarity framework set out in this paper is incorporated into existing GDP, we find that real consumer
digital services contributes nearly .6 percentage points per year to U.S. economic growth from 2007 to 2017,
about 1/4 percent per year faster than its contribution from 1997 to 2007.




                                                         25
References
Abdirahman, M., D. Coyle, R. Heys, and W. Stewart (2017). A comparison of approaches to deflating telecoms
  services output. Technical Report Discussion Paper 2017-04, ESCoE and ONS.

Aizcorbe, A., D. M. Byrne, and D. E. Sichel (2019). Getting smart about phones: New price indexes and the
  allocation of spending between devices and services plans in personal consumption expenditures. Working
  Paper No. 25645, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Berndt, E. R. and M. A. Fuss (1986). Productivity measurement with adjustments for variations in capacity
  utilization and other forms of temporary equilibrium. Journal of Econometrics 33 (1), 7­29.

Brynjolfsson, E., A. Collis, W. E. Diewert, F. Eggers, and K. J. Fox (2019). GDP-B: Accounting for the value of
  new and free goods in the digital economy. Working Paper No. 25695 (March), National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Brynjolfsson, E., A. Collis, and F. Eggers (2019). Using massive online choice experiments to measure changes
  in well-being. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 (15), 7250­7255.

Brynjolfsson, E. and A. Saunders (2009). Wired for innovation: How information technology is reshaping the
  economy. MIT Press.

Byrne, D. M. (2015). Prices for data storage equipment and the state of IT innovation. FEDS Notes (July 15),
  Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.

Byrne, D. M. and C. A. Corrado (2015a). Prices for communications equipment: Rewriting the record. Finance
  and Economics Discussion Series 2015-069 (September), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
  Washington, D.C.

Byrne, D. M. and C. A. Corrado (2015b). Recent trends in communications equipment prices. FEDS Notes
  (September 29), Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.

Byrne, D. M. and C. A. Corrado (2017a). ICT asset prices: Marshalling evidence into new measures. Finance
  and Economics Discussion Series 2017-016 (February), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
  Washington.

Byrne, D. M. and C. A. Corrado (2017b). ICT Services and their Prices: What do they tell us about Productivity
  and Technology? International Productivity Monitor (33), 150­181.

Byrne, D. M. and C. A. Corrado (2020). The Increasing Deflationary Influence of Consumer Digital Services,
  Technical report (forthcoming).

Christensen, L. R. and D. W. Jorgenson (1969). The measurement of US real capital input, 1929­1967. Review
  of Income and Wealth 15 (4), 293­320.

Christensen, L. R. and D. W. Jorgenson (1973). Measuring economic performance in the private sector. In
  M. Moss (Ed.), The Measurement of Economic and Social Performance, pp. 233­351. NBER.

Copeland, A. (2013). Seasonality, consumer heterogeneity and price indexes: the case of prepackaged software.
  Journal of Productivity Analysis 39, 47­59.

Corrado, C. (2011). Communication capital, Metcalfe's law, and U.S. productivity growth. Economics Program
  Working Paper 11-01, The Conference Board, Inc., New York. Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
  papers.cfm?abstract_id=2117784.

Corrado, C. and K. J¨
                    ager (2014). Communication networks, ICT, and productivity growth in Europe. Economics
  Program Working Paper 14-04, The Conference Board, Inc., New York.

Corrado, C. and O. Ukhaneva (2016). Hedonic Prices for Fixed Broadband Services: Estimation across OECD
  Countries. Technical report, OECD/STI Working Paper.


                                                      26
Corrado, C. and O. Ukhaneva (2019). Hedonic Price Measures for Fixed Broadband Services: Estimation across
  OECD Countries, Phase II. Technical report, OECD/DSTI/CDEP Report to CISP and MADE, revised.

Corrado, C. A. and B. van Ark (2016). The Internet and productivity. In J. M. Bauer and M. Latzer (Eds.),
  Handbook on the Economics of the Internet, pp. 120­145. Northamption, Mass.: Edward Elgar Publishing,
  Inc.

D´
 iaz-Pin´
        es, A. and A. G. Fanfalone (2015). The role of triple- and quadruple-play bundles: Hedonic price
  analysis and industry performance in France, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Paper presented
  at 43rd research conference on commmunications, information and internet policy, George Mason University
  School of Law, Arlington, VA.

Diewert, W. E. and K. Fox (2017). The digital economy, GDP and consumer welfare, paper presented at the
  CRIW workshop, NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge MA (July 17­18).

Gordon, R. J. (1990). The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Greenwood, J. and K. A. Kopecky (2013). Measuring the welfare gain from personal computers. Economic
  Inquiry 51 (1), 336­347.

Hulten, C. (1986). Productivity change, capacity utilization, and the sources of efficiency growth. Journal of
  Econometrics 33, 31­50.

Hulten, C. (2009). Growth accounting. Working paper, NBER Working Paper 15341 (September).

Hulten, C. R. and F. C. Wykoff (1981a). The estimation of economic depreciation using vintage asset prices.
  Journal of Econometrics 15, 367­396.

Hulten, C. R. and F. C. Wykoff (1981b). The measurement of economic depreciation. In C. R. Hulten (Ed.),
  Depreciation, Inflation & the Taxation of Income from Capital, pp. 81­125. The Urban Institute.

Jorgenson, D. W. (1963). Capital theory and investment behavior. American Economic Review 53 (2), 247­259.

Jorgenson, D. W. and Z. Griliches (1967). The explanation of productivity change. The Review of Economic
  Studies 34 (3), 249­283.

Jorgenson, D. W. and J. S. Landefeld (2006). Blueprint for expanded and integrated U.S. accounts: Review,
  assessment, and next steps. In D. W. Jorgenson, J. S. Landefeld, and W. D. Nordhaus (Eds.), A New
  Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts, Volume 66 of NBER Studies in Income and Wealth, pp. 13­112.
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Available at http://www.nber.org/chapters/c0133.pdf.

Nakamura, L., J. Samuels, and R. Soloveichik (2016). Valuing `free' media in GDP: An experminental approach.
  Technical report, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Nakamura, L., R. Soloveichik, and J. Samuels (2018). "Free" Internet Content: Web 1.0, Web 2.0, and the sources
  of economic growth. Technical Report Research Paper WP 18-17, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Petrin, A. (2002). Quantifying the benefits of new products: The case of the minivan. Journal of Political
  Economy 110 (4), 705­729.

Rotemberg, J. J. and M. Woodford (1995). Dynamic general equilibrium models with imperfectly competitive
  product markets. In T. F. Cooley (Ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, pp. 243­293. Princeton
  University Press.

U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of Economic Analysis (2003). Fixed Assets and Consumer Durables
  Goods in the United States, 1925­99. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Williams, B. (2008). A hedonic model for Internet access service in the Consumer Price Index. Monthly Labor
 Review (July), 33­48.


                                                      27
                                                  Appendixes


A1      Network utilization
This appendix provides a derivation of equation (18) in the main text, i.e., we set out how to extract a measure
of network capital utilization from productivity data and documents the calculations reported in section 3.1.
A1.1     Derivation
What follows is based on the framework set out for analyzing communication networks and network externalities
in Corrado (2011), in which it is assumed there no markups due to imperfect competition or other inefficiency
wedges; see also Corrado and J¨  ager (2014) and Corrado and van Ark (2016).
    In sources-of-growth accounting, the contribution of private capital is expressed in terms of the services it
provides. Let the value of the relevant private stocks be denoted as P I K where the price of each unit of capital
P I is the investment price and the real stock K is a quantity obtained via the standard perpetual inventory
model. In our application, the value P I K represents the replacement value of network service provider capital in
terms of its capacity to deliver digital services (i.e., including in this application, the value of the "originals" for
the content the provider can diseminate). The value P K K represents the service flow provided by that capital.
    The price P K is an unobserved rental equivalence price, but which is related to the investment price by the
user cost formula, P K = P I (r +  -  )T , where r is an after-tax ex post rate of return,  the depreciation rate
used in the perpetual inventory calculation,  is capital gains, and T is the Hall-Jorgenson tax term. The rental
equivalence price is simplified by defining the gross return  = (r +  -  )T , so that when capital services P K K
are equated with observed capital income via the residual calculation of an ex post after-tax rate of return r, we
have

(A1)                                  observed capital income = P I K  

When capital services are computed on the basis of an ex ante financial rate of return r, the value for capital
income of network providers must be expressed differently. Defining the ex ante gross return  = (r +  -  )T
accordingly, network provider capital income is expressed as

(A2)                                observed capital income = P I KuISP  

where uISP is network capital utilization and, via Berndt and Fuss (1986), capital utilization uISP (rather than
r) exhausts capital income.
    Equating expressions (A1) and (A2)

                                              P I K   = P I KuISP  

and solving for uISP yields
                                                               
(A3)                                                uISP =        .
                                                               
This equation states that under the conditions set out in Berndt and Fuss (1986) the relationship between the
ex post and ex ante gross rate of return for an industry or sector reflects its capital utilization.
A1.2     Calculations
The implied network utilization calculating according to equation (A3) where r in the definition of  is calculated
following Jorgenson and Griliches (1967) as the ex post return for the combined Motion Picture, Sound Recording,
Telecommunications, and Broadcasting industries (NAICS 512,515,517) and where r in the definition of  is set
to Moody's AAA corporate bond rate.
     The ex post net return and the  and  components of  and  were calculated by the authors for the
combined sector using data from BEA's industry accounts (accessed October 2018). The results for u are shown
in text figure 6.

                                                          28
A2        Access Service Prices and Consumption
To calculate a price index for each of the network access services provided by the business sector--cable, internet,
mobile, and subscriptionvideo streaming--we begin with nominal spending and divide by a measure of aggregate
time spent using the service adjusted for quality. These individual price indexes are aggregated to create
an overall access price index used to deflate nominal spending on access services and produce a measure of
consumption.
     For exposition and analysis, we also consider price indexes constructed using four alternative measures of
quantity: the number of households subscribed to the service, the number of individual users, time spent on the
service, and time spent adjusted for quality (our preferred measure for deflation). Thus four alternative indexes
are calculated for each of the four services by dividing revenue by each of the alternative measures of quantity,
yielding prices paid per household, per individual, per unit of time, and per unit of constant-quality time: PH ,
PI , PD , and PQ .
       Data sources and calculation methods for service prices are summarized in table A-1.

A2.1       Nominal Spending
For nominal spending, we use figures from the national accounts published by Bureau of Economic Analysis,
table 2.4.5U, "Personal Consumption Expenditures by Type of Product." In the cases of mobile access and
video on demand, we developed additional detail as explained below.


Cable Spending is taken from table line 215, "Cable, satellite, and other live television services." We use
"cable" as shorthand for spending in this category, which includes spending on the services of multi-channel
video programming distributors (MVPDs) of all kinds, including in addition to cable television, programming
provided via telecommunications service provider, direct broadcast satellite, home satellite dish, wireless cable,
master antenna, and open video systems.


Internet    Spending is taken from table line 285, "Internet access." Spending on internet services includes
access via "dial-up" service and access via broadband whether obtained through a telecommunications service
provider, a cable system, or a satellite system. We extrapolate a spending figure for 1987 using the growth rate
of internet households.


Mobile Spending is taken from table line 281, "Cellular telephone services." Mobile services spending includes
access to broadband via smartphone as well as access to conventional features such as voice and text using
smartphone or feature phone. We split nominal access spending between smartphone service and feature phone
service, for which we construct distinct quantity measures, using the number of subscribers of each type (derived
as explained below) and a judgmental assumption that price paid for a smartphone contract is four times the
price paid for a feature phone contract. (At the time of writing, a casual review of prices on the Worldwide
Web showed basic plans with no data were $10-15 per month and common smartphone plans were $40-60 per
month.)


Video     Total video spending is taken from table line 220, "Video streaming and rental."18 We focus on
subscription video on demand (SVOD), which we use as an indicator for the broader category, due to data
limitations.19 In particular, we construct estimates of revenue for the three most prominent SVOD providers­
Netflix, Amazon Prime, and Hulu--based on company financial reports and press reports. Netflix reports revenue
per subscription beginning in 2012, which we extrapolate back to 2007 using the modest 2012-2013 growth rate.
Revenue per subscription for Amazon and Hulu are assumed to be their standard charges ($7.99 per month for
Hulu and $79 per year for Amazon Prime through 2013 and $99 per year afterward). These figures are multiplied
by the number of households for each service estimated as described below.
  18
     BEA also provides revenue for "Audio streaming and radio services (including satellite radio)". We did not develop
a price index for this category.
  19
     In addition to SVOD, video streaming and rental as defined in the NIPAs encompasses one-off video on demand,
such as sports events, and rental of DVDs, for which we do not have data.


                                                          29
A2.2     Households
Cable Periodic reports from the FCC, "Status of Competition in Markets for the Delivery of Video Program-
ming," provide household subscription figures for 1990 to 2015, citing reports by consulting firm SNL Kagan.
Earlier years were collected from Statistical Abstracts of the United States, which reports figures from Census of
Housing. Figures for 2016 and 2017 were extrapolated using available reports from cable, telecom, and satellite
service companies (Chartered, Comcast, AT&T, Verizon, DIRECTV, and DISH).


Internet    Periodic reports from the FCC, "Internet Access Services: Status," provide household figures for
broadband access for 1999-2016 and dial-up access for 2001-2009. Prior to 1999, we assume all access was
via dial-up service. Dial-up service figures for years not covered by FCC reports were available from financial
reports and press reports for America Online, Compuserve, Prodigy, Microsoft Network, AT&T Worldnet, and
Genie. The company series were judgmentally extrapolated to the year of introduction for each service. Dial-up
subscribers from 2010 onward were extrapolated using figures from America Online (AOL) through 2014 and
the 2011-2014 rate of AOL subscription decline for 2015-2017.


Mobile We do not have data on the number of households with cell phone service. We assume the share of
households with service equals the share of individuals in the adult population with service.


Video Netflix reports the number of paying members beginning in 2009, which we extrapolate back to 2007
using the 2009-2010 growth rate. Hulu and Amazon subscribers are collected from press reports, which typi-
cally cite estimates from eMarketer. Because eMarketer figures estimate the number of active users using an
assumption of 2.5 users per subscribing household, we multiply these reported user figures by 0.4 to estimate
the number of households, assuming one subscription per household.

A2.3     Individuals
Cable We scale cable household figures using the number of residents at least two years of age per TV household
reported by Nielsen for 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2010, interpolated and extrapolated.


Internet In 1998, 2000, 2001, 2003, 2007, 2009-2013, 2015, and 2017, the Current Population Survey supple-
mental survey on computer and internet use provided estimates of the share of people living in a household with
an internet connection and the share of individuals going online at home. We use this information to construct a
time series for the share of people who use the internet at home for 1998-2017 for adults and children separately.
We extrapolate these shares back to 1987 using the growth rate for 1998-2009. These shares are applied to the
average composition by age of U.S. households to derive the total number of home internet users by year.


Mobile Number of cellphone users (smartphone and feature phone collectively) is taken from Consumer
Telecommunications Industry Association (CTIA) estimates as reported in Statistical Abstracts of the United
States for 1987-2004. Estimates for 2005-2017 are from population shares reported by the Pew Research Cen-
ter (Pew) times the U.S. population. Pew also provides separate estimates for smartphone users, which are
subtracted from total cellphone users to get (solely) feature phone users.


Video    For each SVOD service, the number of users is estimated by multiplying the number of households
times the average household size reported by the U.S. Census for the year. That is, we assume all household
members make use of the service.

A2.4     Time Use
Cable The Nielsen Corporation (Nielsen) provides time spent per day on live and time-shifted television by
age group (2-11 years old, 12-17 years old, at least 18 years old) beginning in 1992, which we extrapolate to
1987 using the value for 1992. We weight these figures by the U.S. Census-reported share of the population at
least 2 years old for each age group to get an average hours per day for residents of households with cable access
which we multiply by total users to get total hours.

                                                       30
Internet Hours spent using the internet for 1992-2008 were used from Statistical Abstracts of the United States,
various years, reporting estimates published by Veronis, Suhler, Stevenson (VSS). For 2011-2017, Nielsen reports
of time spent accessing the internet on a computer were used. Estimates for 2009-2010 were interpolated and for
1987-1991 a growth rate of 50 percent per year was assumed, yielding a trivial level for 1987 in order to match
a report from VSS that hours were negligible prior to 1987.

Mobile Our measure of time use for feature phones is talk time. Minutes of talking is calculated as a three-
year centered moving average of estimates taken from FCC reports, citing CTIA surveys for 1993-2014 and
extrapolated. For smartphones, we use a three-year centered moving average of estimates from eMarketer
available for 2011-2017 of average time spent per day with smartphones for U.S. adults, which we extrapolate
back to 2005.

Video     To calculate hours spent on each SVOD service, we first estimate the data used in streaming using
the share of internet traffic for each service reported by Sandvine, Inc. multiplied by the quantity of fixed
internet traffic for the North American consumer market reported by Ciscos Visual Networking Index (VNI)
reports. Sandvine reports are available annually from 2010 to 2014 and for 2016; the shares for 2014 are linearly
interpolated and the share for each service for 2017 is set equal to its 2016 value. Then we divide by the number
of bytes required to stream an hour of video to get the number of hours. The estimate of bytes per hour used
is a weighted average of the number of bytes used for standard definition and high definition video streaming,
where the share is estimated using VNI reports. In particular, VNI provides a high-definition share for SVOD
of 0.59 for 2014. This estimate is extrapolated to 2010 using the growth reported in VNI for the high definition
share of global managed IP video-on-demand traffic. The share is extrapolated further back to 2007 using a 5
percent growth rate, and forward to 2017 using the VNI forecast published in 2014, the last VNI vintage where
Cisco provided data on the subject.

A2.5     Quality-Adjusted Hours
Cable To account for the increase in quality associated with the programming choices available to viewers,
we scale hours by the average number of channels per cable system reported by the FCC. We use a natural
log transformation, assuming for example that the additional quality obtained going from 100 to 200 channels
equals the increase in quality obtained going from 10 to 20 channels.

Internet     Our indicator for quality of internet service is the VNI estimate of IP traffic for consumer fixed
internet use for North America. We use North American traffic in the absence of information on the U.S. share,
essentially assuming that the U.S. share of North American traffic is unchanged over time. Direct measures of
the indicator is available for 2005-2016, along with a forecast for 2017 from the latest VNI reports, various years.
We extrapolate back to 1994 using overall fixed internet traffic estimates for North America, and back to 1990
using global fixed internet traffic from VNI reports. For 1987-1989 we use the 1990-1993 growth rate.

Mobile We assume the quality of talk time is unchanged over time, so no quality adjustment is necessary for
feature phones. For smartphones, we use the volume (petabytes) of consumer mobile IP traffic per month for
the North American market reported by VNI for 2005-2017, extrapolated to 2002 using the average growth rate
for 2005-2008.

Video Our quality-adjusted series is raw hours of viewing time scaled by a library quality indicator and
multiplied by high-definition video share. Our indicator for the quality of SVOD service is the natural log
of the size of the video library for each service measured in the number of equivalent feature films available
for streaming. FCC reports in 2013 and 2016 provide data on the number of films and the number of TV
seasons available on each service. Estimates from the press were found for 2010 and 2018. Netflix press releases
provide data for 2007 and 2008. Missing years are interpolated. We reweight TV seasons using the judgmental
assumption that two episodes of a television show are equivalent to one feature film and TV seasons have 15
episodes. The high-definition share adjustment employed to calculate hours of viewing time above is reverse to
produce the quality-adjusted hours indicator, implying that the quality of high-definition viewing is 1.67 times
the quality of standard-definition viewing, corresponding to the ratio of data transmission required for each type,
5 megabits per second and 3 megabits per second, respectively.

                                                        31
A2.5.1    Price Indexes

Table A-2 shows the quality-adjusted price index for each access service and price indexes for each concept of
quantity. Our aggregate quality-adjusted price index for access service, shown in the right-most column, falls
12.4 percent per year, on average, over the full period of this study. The price index decline accelerates over
time, first as internet service accounts for a rising share of spending, in the 1997-2007 period, then as mobile
and video on demand access become more important in the 2007-2017 period. (Decomposition of growth in the
final index into contributions from each margin is discussed in the paper.)




                                                      32
     Table A-1: Sources and Methods for Access Service Prices




33
                        (a) Cable and Internet
     Table A-1 (continued): Sources and Methods for Access Service Prices




34
                   (b) Feature Phone and Smartphone
     Table A-1 (continued): Sources and Methods for Access Service Prices




35
                    (c) Subscription Video on Demand
Table A-2: Price Indexes for Access Services




                     36
A3      Consumer IT Durable Prices and (Household) Investment
Data Sources and methods used for constructing nominal consumer durable spending and price indexes used for
deflation are summarized in table A-3.

A3.1     Nominal Spending
Nominal spending estimates were based on detailed personal consumption expenditures reported by BEA In
particular, detailed annual-frequency estimates of spending by product type were allocated to the more detailed
categories used in the paper based on the 2007 input-output tables. (The quinquennial "benchmark" input-
output table from 2007 provides not only detailed product spending information but also commodity codes
corresponding to the primary products of the industries of the North American Industry Classification System
(NAICS).) For example, the annual-frequency estimates of PCE detailed spending include a category for "video,
audio, photographic, and information processing equipment" with further detail provided for 8 commodity codes,
including "computer and electronic products." The 2007 input-output table provides for the 6-digit industry
of origin of the products within this category, allowing one to distinguish among personal computers, computer
monitors, televisions, and so forth.
    In the case of cellular phones and digital cameras, outside sources were used. Although these categories can
be derived using the method described, their share of expenditure has changed rapidly since 2007, rendering the
allocation process inaccurate. Expenditures on other products which share the relevant higher-level categories
are offset proportionally to accomodate the rising spending on cell phones and the rise and subsequent rapid fall
in spending on digital cameras.


Cell phones We use an estimate of cellular phone spending in the U.S. consumer market provided by IDC, Inc.,
rather than estimates reported in the NIPA PCE detail tables for several reasons. Cellular phone equipment
spending is not reported separately, appearing instead as part of a broader category, "telephone and related
communication equipment". And, as noted in Aizcorbe, Byrne, and Sichel (2019), this broader NIPA spending
line does not account for the substantial portion of the relevant acquisition of consumer stocks of cell phones
which takes place in conjunction with the purchase of cellular phone services. In contrast, the estimates for IDC
impute a value for cell phones acquired as part of a service contract using the price a consumer would pay for
the phone if acquired without a contract commitment. The IDC estimates thus provide a consistent estimate of
the retail value of all phones acquired over time, which serves the purpose of measuring the household capital
stock. As shown in figure A-1, the IDC estimate of consumer cell phone expenditures is substantially higher than
the NIPA estimate for the category containing cell phones. To corroborate the IDC estimate, we constructed an
alternative estimate using U.S. sales at wholesale prices, provided by Gartner through 2007, extrapolated by cell
phone imports which dominate the U.S. market reported by ITC, and inflated by 50 percent, a rough estimate of
the retail margin in the cell phone market. This coarse indicator, shown by the gray line, is quite close to the
IDC estimate.


Digital Cameras Unit sales of digital cameras for the Americas market provided by the Camera and Digital
Products Association are scaled by an average price series constructed by interpolating between estimates re-
ported in the press (falling from roughly $4,000 in 1987 to roughly $200 in 2007 and remaining stable since then).
A U.S. share of total Americas spending is constructed using the relevant line from the benchmark input-output
tables for 2007 for consumer spending on digital cameras, which yields a share of approximately 48 percent,
which we assume is constant in our period of study.

A3.2     Price Indexes
For equipment prices, we use either official estimates or substitutes drawn from the authors' research and in
some cases other national statistical agencies. Aggregate prices for three broad categories are shown in table
A-4: audio-visual equipment (televisions, digital cameras, photographic equipment excluding digital cameras,
other video equipment, audio equipment, and recording media), information processing equipment (personal
computers, data storage equipment, monitors, and peripherals), and communications equipment (cellular phones
and telephone equipment excluding cellular phones).



                                                       37
                       Figure A-1: Estimates of U.S. Consumer Cell Phone Spending


                  Billions of dollars
                 80
                 70
                                   Retail
                 60
                 50                Wholesale

                 40                Retail Alternative

                 30                PCE Category
                 20
                 10
                  0
                      1987        1992          1997         2002          2007         2012          2017
                      Source.  IDC Inc. (retail); authors' calculations (wholesale, retail alternative);
                      Bureau of Economic Analysis (PCE category).




Televisions     We use the BEA PCE deflator for televisions, which corresponds to the BLS CPI for televisions.


Digital cameras We use the CPI for cameras from Statistics Japan.

Photographic equipment excluding digital cameras We use the BEA PCE deflator for photographic
equipment, which corresponds to the BLS CPI for photographic equipment.


Other video equipment We use the CPI for video cameras from Statistics Japan, available from 1990
forward, extrapolated backward using the Japanese CPI for cameras.


Audio equipment We use the BEA PCE deflator for audio equipment, which corresponds to the BLS CPI
for audio equipment.


Recording media      We use the BEA PCE deflator for recording media, which corresponds to the BLS CPI for
video discs and other media.


Personal Computers      We use the price index from Byrne and Corrado (2017a) for personal computers through
2014, extrapolated by the BEA PCE price for computers and peripherals augmented by the average difference
between the growth rate of the BEA price index and the growth rate of the Byrne-Corrado price index for the
2009-2014 period.


Data storage equipment We use the price index published by the Federal Reserve Board for computer
storage equipment, which extends the price index developed in Byrne (2015).


Monitors      We use the BEA PCE deflator for televisions, which corresponds to the BLS CPI for televisions.

                                                             38
Computer peripherals      We use the price index from Byrne and Corrado (2017a) for peripherals through
2014, extrapolated by the BEA PCE price for computers and peripherals augmented by the average difference
between the growth rate of the BEA price index and the growth rate of the Byrne-Corrado price index for the
2009-2014 period.


Other information processing equipment We use the BEA PCE deflator for calculators, typewriters, and
other information processing equipment.


Software and accessories       We use the price index for prepackaged software from Byrne and Corrado (2017a)
for non-game PCE software, extrapolated for 2015-2017 using the 5-year average growth rate. For gaming PCE
software, we use the BLS producer price index for game software publishing, available for 1998-2009 and 2014-
2017, adjusted for the average difference between the PPI and Copeland (2013) over the 1998-2004 period. The
2010-2013 period is interpolated using the average growth rate in our index for the 2005-2009 period. For the
1987-1997 period, we use the BEA PCE price index for computer software and accessories.


Cell phones    We use the Byrne and Corrado (2015a) price index for cell phones for the 1987-2010 period and
the Aizcorbe et al. (2019) index for 2010-2017.


Telephone equipment excluding cellular phones         We use the Byrne and Corrado (2017a) price index for
telephones for the 1987-2014 period as extended and published by the Federal Reserve Board through 2017.




                                                     39
     Table A-3: Sources and Methods for Consumer Capital Spending and Prices




40
                      (a) Audio-Visual and Communications Equipment
     Table A-3 (continued): Sources and Methods for Consumer Capital Spending and Prices




41
                          (b) Information Processing Equipment
Table A-4: Price Indexes for ICT Durable Equipment Categories




                              42
A4        IT Equipment Use Intensity
We construct measures of use intensity for each type of capital employed to connect to the access services
discussed in the paper. These include personal computers and related capital (monitors, software, and data
storage equipment), televisions, and cell phones. These use intensity measures allow us to identify the effect on
IT capital services from users spending a greater share of their time on digital access services and consequently
the imprint that free and purchased services have on consumption.
     Mechanically, constructing use intensity for a particular type of capital requires allocating time spent on
accessing each digital service to the capital used for the access. For example, use intensity for personal computers
is proportional to the share of household time spent accessing fixed internet services plus the portion of time spent
using SVOD when viewing programming through the computer. Likewise, television use intensity is affected by
cable access and by a portion of SVOD viewing time as well. Using the ratio of aggregate time spent on each
access service to the number of each type of capital held by households, we construct intensity measures as the
share of the working day a given PC, TV, or cell phone is in use.
       The sources for the elements in our calculation of  are as follows.


Service adoption The adoption of access services by household is derived from the household figures cal-culated
in the previous section and was shown in figure 7a. Subscription video on demand penetration has also risen briskly
since appearing in 2007. The share of households with at least one of the major services reached 60 percent in 2017.
Time spent on each service is allocated by device as discussed below.


Computers Estimates of households with a personal computer are provided by U.S. Census Bureau for 1984,
1989, 1993, and roughly annually from 1989 forward in collaboration with the supplemental survey published by
Current Population Survey. The number of PCs per household is based on periodic reports from the Residential
Electricity Consumption Survey published by the Energy Information Agency. As was shown by the black line in
figure 7b, internet access among computer households was roughly 20 percent as of 1990 and was over 90 percent
by 2007. The number of PCs per computer-holding households rose nearly doubled (figure 7c). Dividing the total
number of hours on the computer by the number of devices, we find that the share of the working day the average
PC was in use for accessing the internet or SVOD rose from 18 percent in 1987 to roughly 29 percent in 2017
(figure 7d). 20


Televisions Estimates of households with a television are provided by Statistical Abstracts of the United States,
citing figures from Census of Housing. As was shown by the grey solid lines in figure 7, nearly all households had a
television at the beginning of our period of study and this share remained above 90 percent as of 2017. The number
of televisions per household is based on periodic reports from the Residential Electricity Consumption Survey
published by the Energy Information Agency. Televisions per TV-using household moved up from roughly 2 to
roughly 2-1/2 by 2005 and has eased down a touch since then. Dividing the total number of hours by the number of
TVs in use yields a share of the day that peaked in 2013 at roughly a third and has moved down noticeably since
then. The use intensity of PCs and TVs was roughly equal in 2017.


Cell phones Mobile phones (whether feature phones or smartphones) are assumed to be present whenever
individuals have service, so the issue of adoption of the service conditional on the presence of the equipment, does
not arise. However, figure 7 showed that mobile phone adoption rose rapidly from 2007 to 2015 and advanced more
slowly since then; cell phone adoption overall has stabilized at 90 percent. As noted above, we use individual
adoption rates as proxies for the household adoption rate in the case of cell phones. The share of households with
mobile phone service rose rapidly from essentially zero at the beginning of our period of study to over 90 percent as
of 2013 and was stable through 2017. The number of hours of use shot up with the advent of widespread
smartphone use, and the share of the working day phones are in use shot up as well and stood at 18 percent as of
2018.
  20
    Note that time spent using of the computer for other purposes, which averaged about 2-1/2 hours per day, is not
included in this figure.


                                                         43
