                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE IMPACT OF ABORTION ON CRIME AND CRIME-RELATED BEHAVIOR

                                      Randi Hjalmarsson
                                       Andreea Mitrut
                                     Cristian Pop-Eleches

                                     Working Paper 26024
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26024


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




This paper would not have been possible without financial support from Vetenskapsrådet (VR),
The Swedish Research Council, Grants for Distinguished Young Researchers (Hjalmarsson), VR
project 2017-01900 and Jan Wallanders and Tom Hedelius Foundation (Mitrut). We thank Anna
Bindler and seminar participants at the University of Gothenburg and Stockholm University
(SOFI) for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Randi Hjalmarsson, Andreea Mitrut, and Cristian Pop-Eleches. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Abortion on Crime and Crime-Related Behavior
Randi Hjalmarsson, Andreea Mitrut, and Cristian Pop-Eleches
NBER Working Paper No. 26024
June 2019
JEL No. J13,K42

                                           ABSTRACT

The 1966 abolition and 1989 legalization of abortion in Romania immediately doubled and
decreased by about a third the number of births per month, respectively. To isolate the link
between abortion access and crime while abstracting from cohort and general equilibrium effects,
we compare birth month cohorts on either side of the abortion regime. For both the abolition and
legalization of abortion, we find large and significant effects on the level of crime and risky-
behavior related hospitalization, but an insignificant effect on crime and hospitalization rates (i.e.
when normalizing by the size of the birth month cohort). In other words, the Romanian abortion
reforms did affect crime, but all of the effect appears to be driven by cohort size effects rather
than selection or unwantedness effects.

Randi Hjalmarsson                                 Cristian Pop-Eleches
University of Gothenburg                          The School of International and Public Affairs
Department of Economics                           Columbia University
PO Box 640                                        1401A International Affairs Building, MC 3308
405 30 Gothenburg                                 420 West 118th Street
Sweden                                            New York, NY 10027
randi.hjalmarsson@economics.gu.se                 and NBER
                                                  cp2124@columbia.edu
Andreea Mitrut
University of Gothenburg
Department of Economics
Box 640
405 30 Göteborg,
Sweden
andreea.mitrut@economics.gu.se
1. Introduction
Abortion policy is actively debated in both the United States and around the world today. With
the election of President Trump and recent conservative shift in the Supreme Court, many state
legislators are putting forward bills that make abortion policies more restrictive in the US. 1 This
contrasts many other countries around the world: a 2018 Guttmacher report indicates that 27
countries liberalized their abortion laws since 2000. 2 Most of this debate focuses on the moral,
religious, and constitutional legality of abortion, and pays little attention to the potential societal
(external) consequences of abortion laws. This paper contributes to this debate by studying the
impact of abortion laws in Romania on one such societal outcome: crime and crime-related
behaviors. 3
               Romania, which abolished abortion in October 1966 and legalized it again in
December 1989, provides a unique opportunity to study the effect of abortion on crime for a
number of reasons. First, given that abortion is the main form of birth control in Romania during
both reform periods, the magnitudes of the shocks are quite large. The number of births
between 1966 and 1967 approximately doubled with the 1966 ban and decreased by about a
third in the months after June 1990 as a result of the 1989 legalization. Thus, the Romanian
shocks are substantially larger than those studied in the U.S.; Levine et al. (1999) estimate the
impacts of abortion legalization on US fertility to be between 4% and 11%. Of course, this may
also imply that the marginal user of abortion is different in Romania than in the context of the
US studies. Second, we can study the effects of both the abolition and legalization of abortion,
which increases the external validity of the analysis. Specifically, do we reach the same
conclusions despite the fact that the reforms occurred in two very different time periods, with
different socio-economic-political environments? Do we find the same results despite the fact
that the effect on births of the abolition was three times as large as the legalization? Third,
national administrative prison and hospital registers, which include an individual's month of
birth, allow for an identification strategy that relies on the comparison of birth month cohorts
on either side of the abortion regime. Since birth months on only one side of the cutoff are
exposed to abortion legalization, but cohorts on both sides are exposed to similar crowding
effects resulting from changes in cohort sizes from these policies, we can isolate the link

1
     See https://www.vox.com/2018/3/22/17143454/trump-ohio-heartbeat-bill-abortion-ban-mississippi, last
accessed November 30, 2018, for a summary of recent US restrictions.
2
  https://www.guttmacher.org/report/abortion-worldwide-2017. Last accessed November 30, 2018.
3
  There is a larger literature looking at the effects of abortion policies on other socio-economic outcomes of
children, such as poverty, education, health or fertility. For the US, see for example, Gruber et al. (1999), Charles
and Stephens (2006), Joyce (1987) and Grossman and Joyce (1990). For Romania, see Pop-Eleches (2006), Mitrut
and Wolff (2011) and Malamud et al. (2016).

                                                                                                                   2
between abortion access and crime abstracting from such general equilibrium effects or any
other common shocks that affect children born within the same age cohort. The                          literature
studying the effect of abortion policy on crime dates back to Donohue and Levitt's (2001) well
known paper that puts forward the legalization of abortion as an explanation for up to 50% of
the drop in crimes in the US in the early 1990s. They hypothesize that this is consistent with
the timing of Roe v. Wade in 1973, which led to a substantial increase in abortions ­ especially
among poor, unmarried mothers, whose children would have been at an increased risk of crime.
Donohue and Levitt (2001) find that crime decreased 15-25 years later, as these more `wanted'
cohorts reached the peak crime ages. Moreover, Donohue and Levitt's (2019) recent evaluation
of the abortion-crime relationship using almost twenty additional years of data (1998-2014) re-
affirms the initial findings and predictions from their original work (Donohue and Levitt, 2001)
­ namely that there would be a further decline of about 20% in US crime.
       There are a number of different channels consistent with the Donohue and Levitt (2001)
hypothesis and finding that abortion legalization reduced crime. First, the most straight forward
channel is that there were substantial reductions in cohort size. Even if there is no change in the
compositional characteristics of cohorts, this would imply lower crime levels. But it would also
imply an unchanging crime rate. Second, one would expect a decrease in the number of
unwanted or unplanned children. This quantity reduction would be accompanied by an increase
in child quality (Becker, 1981). Moreover, abortion legalization could make the timing of
childbearing more optimal for mothers (especially in contexts where access to birth control is
difficult). In turn, mother's education and labor market outcomes may improve, and have
positive spill-overs onto children outcomes (Angrist and Evans, 1996). Involuntary parenthood
could also impact less tangible mother outcomes, like her physical and mental well-being,
which could influence the development of the child. One would expect that a decrease in
unwanted children (and improved child quality and childhood environments) affects not only
the number of crimes but also the crime rate, given the relationship between unwantedness and
crime seen in the literature. 4 A third potential channel is compositional changes in the socio-
economic characteristics of women who carry pregnancies to term. How this `selection' affects
crime is theoretically ambiguous, and depends on who the marginal users of abortion are (e.g.
those of low or high SES background). Finally, crowding effects (an example of a general
equilibrium effect) can occur if the fertility impact of abortion is particularly large: for instance,
the same amount of criminal justice resources (e.g. policing and prison capacity) will be

4
  For instance, Doyle (2008) finds that foster care placement in Illinois increased the arrest rate of the marginal
child by 200-300%.

                                                                                                                 3
dedicated to a much smaller population with legalized abortion. Abstracting from general
equilibrium effects, there are thus three main channels through which abortion policy can
impact crime ­ cohort size, unwantedness, and selection effects; though all three channels can
affect the level of crime, both the unwantedness and selection effects should also translate into
an effect on crime rates.
       Donohue and Levitt's (2001) controversial findings have been actively questioned in the
literature. Joyce (2004) suggests they are driven by not properly accounting for unmeasured
time effects such as changes in crack cocaine ­ a concern that is avoided in our context. Foote
and Goetz (2008) highlight sensitivity in the results to specification. Specifically, they argue
that the identification of the true effect of abortion on crime is most convincing when using
within-state variation. Though some of the Donohue and Levitt (2001) results were designed to
do this, there was a coding error in the initial analysis. More importantly perhaps, Foote and
Goetz (2008) point out that the Donohue and Levitt specification only looked at crime levels,
while per capita crime data is needed to assess whether there is a selection effect. Foote and
Goetz (2008) argue that when using such data, there is no evidence of a selection effect of
abortion on crime, and one cannot even conclude that there is evidence of a cohort size effect.
Foote and Goetz (2008) also highlight that one can even find a negative relationship between
the abortion rate (where the denominator is the number of births) and the number of arrests
when there is no selection of cohort size effects of abortion on crime; using an indicator of
abortion policy rather than the abortion rate helps to avoid this. Donohue and Levitt's (2008)
response highlights another challenge in this literature ­ identifying and measuring the extent
to which a birth cohort (measured yearly) is exposed to an abortion policy. 5
       Rather than re-examining this same context, the current paper sheds light on this
important and controversial question in a new context ­ the national reforms in Romania. We
do, however, carefully inform our research design with this debate in mind: (i) the national
nature of the Romanian reforms implies that we are using within-`state' variation, (ii) our use
of individual register data, including month of birth, allows us to explicitly (and cleanly)
measure abortion policy exposure, (iii) our main variable of interest is exposure to legalized
abortion or not (allowing for the measurement of cohort size effects on crime), and (iv) we look
at both crime levels and crime rates to disentangle cohort size effects from selection and
unwantedness effects.


5
 Donohue and Levitt (2004 and 2008) also argue the robustness of their results to these alternative specifications.
Other papers studying the effect of abortion on crime are Kahane, Patton and Simmons (2007) for the UK, Sen
(2007) for Canada and Pop-Eleches (2006) for Romania. See also the review of this literature by Joyce (2010).

                                                                                                                 4
         Our main measure of crime is convictions (broken down by crime category) that result in
a prison sentence. Given that prison sentences represent relatively serious offenses, we
complement our analysis with hospital admission data for mental health disorders and risky
behavior (including schizophrenia, substance abuse (drug and alcohol) and accidents); this is
consistent with a large criminology/sociology literature that documents a strong correlation
between physical and mental health and crime. 6 These secondary outcome variables are also
more equally distributed across the life-cycle and gender than crime.
         Consistent with the large decrease (increase) in the number of births with the 1989
legalization (1966 ban) of abortion, we observe large and significant decreases (increases) in
the level of each of our measures of crime and its risk factors: for total, property and violent
crime as well as hospitalization for mental health disorders, and hospitalization for risky
behavior, like drug abuse. But, all of these effects disappear when normalizing by the size of
the birth month cohort. That is, the crime rate does not change. This pattern of results
(significant large effects on levels but insignificant and precisely estimated zero effects on rates)
is readily visible from both simple graphs and more formal specifications that control for month
of birth dummies and a month time trend. Moreover, the same results are seen with both the
abolition and legalization of abortion.
         In addition, we demonstrate that the lack of an effect on crime or hospitalization rates is
unlikely to be driven by a lack of precision that may arise when aggregating crime and hospital
registers to the birth-month cohort level. That is, using the 2011 Romanian census, we conduct
an individual level analysis of the impact of abortion policy on the propensity (i) to be observed
in an institution or (ii) to report as not living in the household (for a reason other than education,
work or family reasons) for the last 12-months. We find the same pattern of results. When
aggregating the data, there is an effect of abortion policy on levels, but we find no effect on
aggregate rates or individual propensities.
         Our results can help reconcile the contradictory findings of the previous literature. As
argued by Donohue and Levitt (2001), we find strong evidence that abortion policy affects
crime. However, we also find that all of the effect is driven by cohort-size, and that there is no
evidence of selection or unwantedness effects of abortion on crime in Romania. This supports
Foote and Goetz's (2008) emphasis on the importance of using the crime rate to measure a
selection effect.




6
    See Piquero et al. (2014) for a review.

                                                                                                    5
       The latter result ­ no selection and unwantedness effects ­ is particularly surprising given
both the magnitude of the cohort size effect and the fact that previous research on the Romanian
context has found abortion policy to have some effect on other socioeconomic outcomes, like
education (Pop-Eleches (2006)). We conclude the paper with a discussion of potential
explanations for why we find no effect on crime rates. First, we emphasize the possibility that
the previously seen effects on outcomes like education are too small to translate into an effect
on crime, given the estimates in the education-crime literature. Secondly, we show that given
the large changes in fertility, our study should have been powered to detect the unwantedness
effects mentioned in the literature (Donohue and Levitt (2001), Rasanen et al. (1999)), which
implies as an alternative explanation that being unwanted at birth is less detrimental either in
our specific Romanian setting or more generally.


2. Institutional Background
Romania experienced two large shifts in abortion availability. In October 1966, the communist
government issued Decree 770 that abruptly moved from one of the most liberal policies in the
world to a restrictive and conservative policy that made abortion and family planning, e.g.
contraceptives, illegal. 7 The ban was applied starting with December 1st 1966 and it had an
instant effect raising the fertility rates from 1.9 to 3.9 children per woman in one year (Figure
1). This policy was in place with some minor changes until December 1989 when Ceausescu
was killed and his regime removed from power. The unexpected and immediate repeal of the
abortion ban on the day after the Romanian dictator's execution resulted in an instant decline
in the fertility rate: in 1990, Romania reached the highest rate of induced abortion ­ 200 per
1,000 women aged 15-44 ­ in the world (Serbanescu et al., 1995). Because this legalization
coincided with the transition from a communist regime, the sudden fertility decrease in 1990
may just represent changes in behavior and/or preferences for children, and not free abortion
access. However, for other countries from the former Communist Bloc, which also experienced
a dissolution of the communist regime in 1989 (but no changes in abortion availability), an
abrupt change in fertility in 1990 is not seen, but rather a gradual decrease (see Figure 1). 8 In
East Germany, Chevalier and Marie (2017) find a decrease in fertility that started in August


7
  The 1966 decree stipulated that abortion was allowed only for: women who already had four children, women
over age 45 whose lives were jeopardized by the pregnancy, and pregnancies that resulted from rape or incest.
8
  Pop-Eleches (2010) provides evidence that the drop in fertility is not explained by the repeal of other pronatalist
policies introduced during the Ceausescu regime or by changes in the use of modern contraceptives. (Modern
contraceptives were also banned during the Communist years and remained very uncommon in Romania several
years after 1990.)

                                                                                                                   6
1990, nine months after the fall of the Berlin Wall. However, as discussed in Malamud et al.
(2016), this decline was the result of selection into conceptions (as the time lag is nine months)
rather than being due to post-conception selection through abortion (which should have a six
month lag, as under the new policy abortion was legal only during the first trimester). In
Romania, Panel A of Figure 2 shows a large decrease in the number of children born starting in
July 1990, six months after December 1989. Similarly, a large increase in the monthly cohort
size can be seen with a 6-month lag after the abortion ban on December 1, 1966, i.e. in June
1967 (Panel A of Figure 3). Overall, this evidence suggests that abortion availability explains
Romania's sudden changes in fertility in 1967 and 1990.
       In addition to affecting cohort size, abortion availability can also affect the socio-
economic composition of birth cohorts if abortion is differentially utilized by mothers of
different backgrounds. There is no theoretical consensus on the direction of these changes. We
discuss the possible effects of these changes on our outcomes separately for the two reforms.
First, for the 1989 reform, Malamud et al. (2016) show that abortion access had little impact on
the characteristics of women giving birth before and after July 1990: if anything, abortion
legalization had a large influence on households from disadvantaged backgrounds (low
educated mothers from rural areas were less likely to give birth), but effects were small in
magnitude and not significant. 9 Though the Malamud et al. (2016) findings suggest that
compositional changes after the 1989 reform are unlikely to affect our results, we demonstrate
the robustness of our main findings to controlling for parental characteristics. 10 Second, and in
contrast, Pop-Eleches (2006) shows large compositional changes for the 1966 reform: children
born after the unexpected abortion ban were more likely to be born to highly educated mothers
living in urban areas, because these women were more likely to use abortion before the ban.
Since our crime registers cannot be linked with family background data in the 1960s, we are
limited in our ability to control for these potentially important effects. 11 However, to partially
address this concern, we demonstrate the robustness of our results to adding controls from the
1977 Census.


9
   Because the administrative data in Romania contains little information about the mothers' socio-economic
background, Malamud et al. (2016) use the 1992 Census when children were about two years old and still living
with their parents. Note that other characteristics (divorced, number of children) are more problematic due to
potentially high endogeneity concerns.
10
   Disadvantaged families were less likely to give birth after the abortion legalization so our results will be
downward biased due to the composition effect channel (we would expect less criminals).
11
   Because better off families give birth after June 1967, not controlling for the composition effects may result in
this case in estimating the opposite effects. Pop-Eleches (2006) finds that, before controlling for the compositional
effects, the unwanted children born after June 1967 were better-off in terms of education and labor market
outcomes. Controlling for the composition effects the pattern of his effects is reversed.

                                                                                                                   7
3. Data
The main data used in our analysis are the official crime registers from the Romanian National
Penitentiary Administration, which include all criminal convictions that result in time served in
prison from January 1997 to September 2017 and the stock of prisoners in January 1997 who
were released after this date. 12 Our analysis samples consist of all individuals born between
1964-1970 and 1987-1993. For the cohorts born around the 1989 reform, we also observe all
instances where individuals are held in preventative detention but not convicted. 13
       This data structure implies that crimes are observed at different ages for each cohort. For
the cohorts born around the 1989 reform, we observe crimes committed before age 24 for the
youngest cohort (1993) but before age 30 for the oldest (born in 1987). The unbalanced nature
of the data is similar for the 1966 reform. The key difference is that we can only observe crimes
for the 1964-1970 birth cohorts when they are relatively old: between approximate ages of 27
and 47 for those born in 1970 and 33 and 53 for the 1964 cohort. Figure 4 demonstrates this
unbalanced nature of the data as well as the fact that the Romanian age-crime profile is similar
to that of other countries, peaking in the early 20s and falling afterwards. We demonstrate that
the results are robust to such censoring by defining the outcome variables conditional on ages
observed for all cohorts in the analysis sample. 14
       Our crime measure is an indicator equal to one if a person born on either side of the
reforms has any conviction resulting in a prison sentence between 1997 and 2017. Each prison
sentence can have multiple charges associated with it. Descriptive statistics (see Tables 1 and
2) indicate that there are on average two convictions for each sentence. We also observe the
crime category associated with each conviction, from which we create two further (not mutually
exclusive) indicators for convictions of violent and property crimes, respectively. 15
       We will look at two sets of main dependent variables ­ levels and shares. The first is
simply the aggregate number of individuals with a conviction. Because the crime registers


12
   Those already in prison in January 1997 account for 8.4% of the prisoners born 1964-1970. Dropping these
individuals from the main regression does not affect the results. Note that this is only relevant for the 1966 reform
sample.
13
   About 24% (or 9,512) of the individuals born around the 1989 reform and sentenced to prison were held in
preventative detention and not convicted. The Romanian National Penitentiary Administration provided the data
in two separate batches (for the 1966 and 1989 reforms); for the 1966 reform, we were unable to get both gender
identifiers and the individuals in preventative detention.
14
   To the extent a linear trend in birth month captures the changing degree of censoring across birth cohorts, this
is included in the baseline.
15
   One individual is usually convicted of more than one crime type: e.g., one conviction is violent and two property
related. This individual will have violent =1 and property =1. Offense codes included in each category are listed
in the Table notes.

                                                                                                                   8
include month of birth, we collapse our outcome variables according to month and year of birth,
and compute the share of convicted individuals, which is our key outcome. 16 Note that these
levels and shares are based on an analysis sample that includes both men and women (despite
96% of the prison sentences around the 1989 reform being for men). This is because (i) the
denominator, or number of births, cannot be measured separately by gender and (ii) we do not
have the gender of the offenders for the 1966 reform. 17
       The above-described crime data constrain our ability to say something about the effects
of the Romanian abortion reforms on crime in two ways. First, as the majority of those
convicted of offenses resulting in prison are male, these data do not tell us much about females.
Second, we observe cohorts affected by the 1966 reform long after they pass the peak of the
age-crime profile. Third, one may question the appropriateness of using incarceration numbers
to measure changes in criminal behavior ­ e.g. if judges try to aim for specific capacity levels,
or prison authorities adjust capacity levels to reflect population size.
       We thus use the 2007-2017 National Inpatient Registers to complement our crime
outcomes and address these concerns. These registers contain individual-level data for each
stay in Romanian hospitals starting in January 1, 2007. This is an outcome that is more equally
distributed across genders, as about 29% and 47% of hospitalizations for cohorts born around
the 1989 and 1966 reforms, respectively, were male. Moreover, hospitalization is an outcome
that does not have the same age profile as crime. Based on over 7 million hospital entries for
our cohorts of interest, we calculate two indicators that take the value one if an individual spent
at least one night in hospital care because of: i) mental and behavioral disorders and ii) risky
behavior. 18 Similar to the crime registers, the hospitalization registers include month of birth,
which allow us to consider the same sets of main dependent variables ­ levels and shares. 19



16
   Because the prison register cannot be matched to an entire birth cohort register, we cannot look at an individual's
propensity to be incarcerated with this data source; rather, we must aggregate the data. We can look at an
incarcerated individual's propensity of having committed a specific offense type, but do not find any patterns of
significance.
17
   Note that our denominator - the cohort size at birth, by month and year of birth ­, which was retrieved from the
Romanian Demographic Yearbook (NIS, 2005), cannot be observed separately by gender. Therefore, in both the
numerator and denominator we keep both genders. Parent' preferences over sons or daughters and the
corresponding sex-selective abortion was not a common practice in Romania. Moreover, the use of ultrasound
technology was rarely available around the two reforms. Finally, there were no significant changes in the shares
of males in the total number of births when comparing aggregate numbers around the reforms.
18
   Specific ICD-10 codes included in the Mental and behavior disorder and Risky behavior indicators are listed in
the Table notes. The largest share (about 30% around each reform) for the former is F20-F29 (Schizophrenia,
schizotypal and delusional disorders) while the largest sub-category of Risky behavior is primarily transport
related accidents and injuries.
19
   We again look at males and females together. Results are similar, however, if we consider the share of female
(or male) hospitalizations relative to the full cohort.

                                                                                                                    9
4. Methodology and Results
4.1. Graphical Evidence ­ The Impact of Legalizing and Abolishing Abortion on Crime
We begin our analyses of the impact of abortion on crime with simple plots of the raw data.
Figures 2 and 3 present the results for the 1989 legalization and 1966 abolition, respectively.
The vertical line in each figure corresponds to July 1990 and June 1967: as highlighted in the
background section, individuals born in these months or later were exposed to the new abortion
regimes. Panel B of each figure presents the number of individuals in each birth month cohort
convicted of any charge (regardless of crime type) that resulted in a prison sentence. Panel C
normalizes this by the number of live births in that month; specifically, the y-axis presents the
share of individuals convicted (and incarcerated) per 1000 live births. Panels D and E,
respectively, present number and share of individuals convicted for both violent (grey, dashed
line) and property (solid, black line) crime offenses. Our main findings are, in fact, readily
visible in these simple graphs: there is a large decrease in crime levels but not an apparent
decrease around the cutoffs in crime rates when abortion is legalized in 1989. Likewise, there
is a large increase in crime levels but not crime rates when abortion is abolished in 1966. These
patterns are seen both overall and across crime categories.


4.2. Baseline Empirical Specification
The patterns that emerged in these raw data are striking. But, such an analysis also has its
limitations. First, as highlighted previously, given that crimes are only observed from 1997 to
2017, crimes are measured at different ages for each birth month cohort. While one would not
expect this to result in much of a bias when comparing cohorts on either side of the cutoff, it
becomes an increasing concern as we get further from the cutoff. For instance, individuals born
in 1987 are observed between the ages of 10 and 30 while those born between in 1993 are
observed between 4 and 24; the younger the cohort, the fewer peak crime months that are
observed. This explains the downward trend in the criminal behavior across birth month cohorts
seen in the figures. Second, these figures do not control for potential compositional effects of
the abortion reforms (highlighted in the background section).
      Thus, equation (1) presents a baseline empirical specification that allows us to assess
whether there is a significant effect of the abortion reforms on crime levels and crime rates,
over and above trends in the data (that could arise, for instance, from censoring).

   (1)                   = + +  +  + 



                                                                                              10
Specifically, we regress the outcome y (e.g. number of births, number convicted individuals,
share convicted) in birth month m and year t on a dummy indicating whether the birth cohort is
treated. This treatment variable turns on for individuals born in July 1990 and June 1967 for the
respective reforms. 20 The baseline specification includes month of birth fixed effects ( ) to
control for seasonality and a linear trend in birth month ( ) to allow for trends (like
that which arises from the censoring of the data). We interpret  as the causal effect of the
change in abortion regime on the outcome of interest. The baseline sample includes individuals
born within 18 months of the reform on either side; the further we get from the reform, the more
one should be concerned about potential differences across cohorts that could affect crime.
After presenting the baseline results, we conduct sensitivity analyses to (i) alternative
specifications, (ii) conditioning the outcome variable on age to deal with the potential censoring
bias, (iii) extending the sample, and (iv) controlling for compositional changes. 21



4.3. 1989 Legalization Results and Robustness
Table 3 presents the results of estimating the impact of the 1989 legalization of abortion on
crime. Columns (1)-(3) present the estimated treatment effect ( ) from the baseline
specification for the following outcomes: number of births, number of individuals with a
conviction resulting in incarceration, and share of convicted individuals. Panels A ­ C presents
the results for all crime categories, violent crimes, and property crimes respectively. Standard
errors are in parentheses and pre-treatment means of the dependent variable in italics. The
legalization of abortion resulted in an immediate decrease in the number of births by
approximately 7,700 (25% relative to the pre-treatment mean). Similarly, the number of
convicted individuals decreased by 22% for any offense, 20% for violent crimes, and 25% for
property crimes. Given the proportionate change in the number of births and number of
convictions, it is not surprising that we do not find a significant change in the share of convicted
individuals in column (3) ­ overall or by crime type. The point estimate itself is quite small,
even relative to the mean (1.3%). However, standard errors are such that the 95% confidence


20
   We have also assessed the robustness of our results to allowing the treatment to occur in June for the 1989
reform (as there is some evidence that births changed already in June). This does not change the results. Similarly,
we have chosen the cut-off to be July for the 1966 reform (as the policy came in effect in the beginning of
December 1966), but the results do not change if we use June as a cut-off point.
21
   We have also assessed the sensitivity of our results to normalizing the crime count by the number of live births.
Specifically, we have also taken into account selective mortality and external migration. The results are robust and
available upon request. One potential bias we cannot address are deaths in orphanages. To the extent that the
`unwanted' children suffered early death in these institutions, we cannot observe these deaths in our mortality
records (starting in the 1994) for the 1966 reform.

                                                                                                                 11
interval cannot rule out an effect of abortion legalization ranging from a 10% reduction to a
12% increase in the conviction rate for any offense.
       Columns (4) ­ (7) demonstrate the robustness of the main finding that legalizing abortion
did not have a significant effect on crime rates. Column (4) replaces the linear trend in birth
month with birth year dummies. Column (5) restricts the outcome variable to be age-specific
(convictions before age 26) to deal with the data censoring. Column (6) extends the sample to
a 7-year window (and restricts convictions to age 24 accordingly). This increase in sample size
comes with the tradeoff that the analysis cohorts are born up to seven years apart, and may have
different childhood experiences (such as education). We thus include linear birth of month
trends and year of birth fixed effects to flexibly control for these differences. 22 Column (7)
includes controls for potential compositional effects of the abolition of abortion, including
ethnicity, parents' education and parents' years of birth from the 1992 Census. 23
       One potential critique of the analysis so far is that we can only observe convictions that
result in incarceration, which arguably are the most serious crimes. How can we rule out that
there is no effect on more minor crimes? For the 1989 reform, we can actually expand the
definition of conviction to include those who were observed in the data because they were held
in preventative detention (and who were not sentenced to incarceration). Table 4 shows the
same pattern of results. The share of individuals in preventative detention or incarceration does
not change (though the level does). Moreover, in results available upon request, we do not find
any effect on other crime outcomes that we can measure and which can potentially proxy for
the severity of crime, including the average time served in days, the average age at arrest, and
the share of individuals who have recidivated (i.e. repeat offenders).


4.4. 1966 Abolition Results and Robustness
Table 5 presents the results for the 1966 abolition of abortion and is identical in format to Table
3. Columns (1) and (2) show that abolishing abortion immediately increased the number of
births by almost 32,355 (133% relative to the pre-treatment mean) and the number of
individuals convicted of an offense resulting in incarceration by 129% overall, 124% for violent

22
   There is no significant change in the share convicted when including just year of birth dummies or year of birth
dummies and a linear trend (as shown in the table). Small significant effects are seen, however, with just the linear
trend; this is not too surprising, as the further away from the cutoff we get, the less likely an assumption of linearity
is to hold.
23
   We include averages at the month and year of birth of the child for the following indicators: children's ethnicity:
Romanian (vs. the baseline non-Romanian), parent's education: gymnasium (grade 1-8), secondary (9-12) and
university (baseline is no education) and parents' year of birth. The results are also robust to including the county
of birth of the child, which is available in the crime registers (there are 42 counties; each county contains several
municipalities).

                                                                                                                      12
crimes, and 127% for property crimes. Yet, as seen for the legalization of abortion, column (3)
shows that abolishing abortion did not significantly affect the share of individuals with a
conviction; the associated point estimate represents an increase in the conviction rate of 1.5%.
The associated 95% confidence interval includes effects ranging from an 11% decrease to an
8.4% increase. This non-effect is again robust to the specification, age at which the outcome
variable is measured, sample window, and controlling for potential composition effects (see
columns (4) ­ (7) of Table 2). 24 And we again find no effects for the additional crime outcomes
of time served, age at arrest, and recidivism (available upon request). Of course, one limitation
of this analysis that is particular to the 1966 reform is that we can only observe crime
convictions for ages beyond the peak of the age crime profile (when the sample is in their 30s
and 40s). While we have no way of measuring serious criminal offenses at early ages for these
cohorts, the subsequent analysis of hospitalization records helps alleviate this concern.


5. Robustness Analysis: Additional Measures of Crime-Related Outcomes
    5.1. Mental Health and Risky Behavior Hospitalizations
The analyses thus far highlight that the (de)legalization of abortion had significant effects on
crime levels but not crime rates. Does this pattern extrapolate to offenses that do not result in
incarceration or to criminal behavior at different points in the age-crime profile? In the absence
of arrest data for offenses that do not result in detention, we complement our analysis with
hospitalization data (detailed below) for mental and behavioral disorders and risky behavior.
These variables are of interest because they are highly correlated with criminal behavior: they
are both known-risk factors of crime and potential consequences of crime and incarceration.
Piquero et al (2014) provides an overview of literature relating physical and mental health to
crime. One example is Sailas et al (2005), who find a seven times higher mortality rate among
young male offenders sentenced to prison than an age-matched population sample, as well as
an association with hospitalization for psychiatric disorders or substance abuse. 25
       Specifically, we look at the effect of the reforms on the number of hospitalizations and
rate of hospitalizations per birth cohort size. As stated above, we focus on two types of
hospitalizations: (i) mental and behavioral disorders and (ii) risky behavior. For the cohorts
around the 1966 reform, the first category captures hospitalizations due primarily to mood


24
   We account for composition effects using similar controls as for the 1989 reform but using the 1970 Census
(when children born around the 1966 reform were still living with their parents).
25
   While many studies in this literature try to control for pre-crime health/mental health, they generally cannot
disentangle causality due to the large selection into crime on these variables.

                                                                                                              13
disorders such as depression or bipolar disorder (30%), schizophrenia related disorders (30%),
and mental and behavioral disorders due the use of alcohol, drugs, or other substances (10%).
For the 1989 reform cohorts, schizophrenia and substance related disorders are of similar size
as the earlier cohorts, but mood disorders now represent only 14% of the hospitalizations and
mental retardation 19%. The largest shares in the Risky behavior category include injuries (over
74%), transport related accidents (15.5%), and poisoning, burns and toxic effects of substances
(5%). 26
       In addition, mental health and risky behavior hospitalizations occur with much greater
frequency than incarceration, implying that we are potentially capturing a different marginal
individual. Of course, some of these risky behaviors (e.g. drug use) are also crimes in and of
themselves. We can only observe these registers from 2007 to 2017. While this again implies,
for instance, that those born in 1967 are between the ages of 40 and 50, these outcomes are not
subject to the same age profile as crime.
       Table 6 presents the effect of the 1989 legalization in Panel A and the 1966 abolition in
Panel B on these crime-related outcomes. Specifically, columns (1) and (2) look at the level
and rate of hospitalizations for mental and behavioral disorders while (7) and (8) do the same
for risky behavior hospitalizations. The bottom line is that the same general story is seen. There
are large and significant effects on the number of hospitalizations for both mental disorders and
risky behaviors of both the legalization and abolition. But these do not translate into significant
effects on the rate of hospitalization. This non-effect is again robust to controlling for birth
years, extending the sample, and compositional controls.


     5.2. 2011 Romanian Census: Propensity to be `At-Risk' Analysis
One limitation of the previous analyses is that they are constrained to studying those individuals
observed in the prison system or admitted to the hospital. While we can normalize by the
number of individuals born in a cohort, we cannot conduct an individual level analysis of how
the abortion reforms affect the propensity to be incarcerated or hospitalized. That is, we do not
observe those without these events. The 2011 Romanian Census data allow us to overcome this
issue, though one cannot cleanly measure incarceration or hospitalization (especially by cause).
Rather, we can use two mutually exclusive proxies for being an individual `at risk' of being
part of this criminal population. The first (risk 1) is whether the individual is institutionalized


26
  The results are not sensitive when excluding the S00-T98 codes from the latter indicator. Because some of the
codes may not be related to risky behavior (e.g., Complications of surgical and medical care, not elsewhere
classified, T80-T88 (2%)).

                                                                                                            14
at the time of the census in an institution, including: prisons, pre-trial detention, child protection
institutions, emergency centers, night shelters, hospitals, asylums, and hospital homes. 27 The
second (risk 2) is an individual who is reported as not living in the household for at least the
last 12-months, for a reason other than education, working or family reasons. One example
reason is that the individual is detained. We combine both proxies to create an indicator for
each individual being `at risk', and also look at each measure separately. Another advantage of
this analysis and the large sample size, therefore, is that it allows us to assess whether the
previous non-results for incarceration and hospitalization rates were driven by a lack of
precision.
       Table 7 presents results separately for the 1989 and 1966 reforms in Panels A and B,
respectively. For our main outcome (an individual being "at risk" of being part of the criminal
population), we present two sets of results: (i) an individual level-analysis and (ii) aggregate
analyses of levels and rates that parallel the specifications used with the aggregated prison and
hospitalization registers.
       The individual level-analysis shows that the abortion policies in Romania had no
significant impact on the individual propensity to be at risk of being part of the criminal
population. Column (1) presents the baseline specification, which includes month of birth fixed
effects and a linear trend in birth month. Column (2) controls for compositional changes using
individual level controls (ethnicity, gender, county of birth dummies and whether the place of
birth was urban or rural); again, such individual level controls were not possible in the earlier
data sets, and allow for cleaner controls for compositional changes. Column (3) shows that our
results hold when restricting the sample to individuals born just one year on each side of the
reform. Columns (4) and (5) show the same specification as column (2) but separately for each
of the two proxies of being at risk (risk 1 and risk 2). We note that just like in Table 3, the point
estimates for our preferred specification (column 1) are small and, given our 95% confidence
intervals, we cannot rule out an effect of the lifting of the abortion ban ranging from a 14.6%
reduction to a 4.5% increase in the probability of being at risk of being in the criminal
population as previously defined.



27
  The largest category is "common spaces of living" (about 48% or 9200 individuals in our sample born three
years on each side of the two reforms) and includes prison, jail, pre-trial detention, penitentiaries, and correction
centers. The second and the third most important categories include asylums, sanatoriums, and hospital homes
(22.3%) and child protection institutions (18% or 3400 individuals). Other categories are school homes (8% or
1520 individuals), hospitals (3%) and emergency centers and night shelters (1.25%). Our results shown later are
not sensitive to excluding some categories.


                                                                                                                  15
      The aggregate analyses show that the lack of an effect for the individual-level analysis
above is not purely driven by the specific outcome being studied or a specific sample of the
population. For simplicity, we present here the baseline specifications (i.e. month of birth fixed
effects and birth month linear trend) in columns (6) and (7) for the level or number of at risk
individuals in each birth month cohort and share of at risk individuals, respectively. Column
(8) expands the share at risk specification to control for the composition effects in a similar
manner as our previous specifications. These results show, as was the case in the prison and
hospitalization register data, significant effects on the number of individuals "at risk" for both
the legalization and abolition of abortion, but no significant effects on the rates. Moreover, these
results taken together with the individual-level analysis suggests the lack of an effect on prison
and hospitalization rates is not simply driven by an aggregation of the data.


6. Discussion
Our main finding is that abortion policy in Romania has had a large and significant impact on
the number of crimes and hospitalizations for crime-related behaviors. But this impact is
proportionate to the change in the size of the population, such that there is no significant effect
on crime or hospitalization rates. Moreover, this pattern of significant level but insignificant
rate effects is seen across multiple crime outcomes and opposing reforms, increasing the
external validity of these results. Thus, we find evidence consistent with abortion policy having
large cohort size effects on crime but little evidence consistent with either a large unwantedness
or selection effect (though point estimates suggest changes in crime of about 1% due to the
selection effects of abortion policy, we cannot rule out changes of up to 10%).
      One must naturally ask how the Romanian context compares to that of other countries in
Western Europe and the US. The Romanian criminal justice system is not an outlier (see Aebi
et al., 2015); the number of inmates per 100,000 inhabitants in 2015 was about 145 in Romania
compared to an average of 133 in other European countries and as seen earlier, the age-crime
profile in Romania is also similar to other countries. In terms of offense types, drug offenses
are relatively low in Romania (4% vs. 20% in other Western European countries and the U.S.),
while other offenses are more comparable (e.g. the share of the homicides and other types of
thefts). Finally, similar to the US, Romanian prisons are overcrowded.
   Why do we not find evidence consistent with these changes in abortion legislation
impacting the crime rates of individuals directly affected by these reforms? The lack of such an
effect is arguably particularly puzzling because previous work studying the Romanian context
(Pop-Eleches (2006) and Mitrut and Wolff (2011)) has shown that abortion restrictions led to

                                                                                                 16
worse health at birth, education and labor market outcomes. 28 One explanation is that even
though there are significant effects of abortion policy on outcomes like education, the secondary
effect on crime (i.e. through the education channel) is not large enough to be detected. Going
back to the data used by Pop-Eleches (2006) for the 1966 abortion ban, the estimated impact of
the abortion ban on education is an increase of about 0.2 years of schooling, when not
accounting for selection and a decrease of 0.07 years of schooling when accounting for the
selection of parents who give births. When we scale these results using estimates from the
literature on the causal effect of education on crime from Sweden (Hjalmarsson et al., 2015),
accounting for parental selection changes education of children by about 0.27 years of
schooling, and this should be associated with roughly a 2% change in convictions, a 4% change
in incarceration and a 2.5% change in violent crimes. 29 The corresponding effects based on
estimates from the US by Lochner and Moretti (2004) imply changes in arrests of 2-3%. 30 We
interpret these back of the envelope calculations as providing suggestive evidence that the
implied impact on crime coming from the education channel is small. 31
     Next, we discuss possible explanations as to why we do not find evidence of an
unwantedness effect in crime outcomes in our Romanian context. Donohue and Levitt's (2001)
back of the envelope calculations imply that, in the US, 6% of the reduction in crimes could be
due to this unwantedness channel. These calculations are based on estimates by Rasanen et al.
(1999) that suggest that unwantedness at birth doubles an individual's likelihood of committing
a crime. If we use the same assumptions as Donohue and Levitt (2001), including that 75% of
unwanted births are aborted, the number of convicted individuals for violent crimes should have
decreased in Romania after 1990 by 86, rather than our estimates of 34.83 in Panel B of Table
3. Similarly, if we focus on crime rates, the implied decrease in crime should be 0.00125, rather
than the effect of 0.000296 estimated in Column 3 of Panel B of Table 2. For both of these
outcomes and given the size of our standard errors, we can reject that the expected and estimated
effects are the same.



28
   Mitrut and Wolff (2011) also show that the 1989 reform decreased the number of children abandoned, defined
as children institutionalized (in orphanages, home hospitals, boarding school for children with no family) in 1994
with no contact with their families. While this was an imperfect measure of unwantedness, the share of children in
state institutions in 1994 (abandoned and those institutionalized due to health problems) in the total births was not
significantly different from zero around the 1989 reform cut-offs.
29
   Hjalmarsson et al (2015) find that an additional year of schooling reduces the chance of conviction by 8%,
incarceration by 16% and a violent crime conviction by 10%.
30
   Lochner and Morretti (2004) estimate that, on average, a one year increase in high school education reduces the
incarceration rate by 10-15%.
31
   These results also help explain why controlling for observable compositional effects does not affect our crime
results.

                                                                                                                  17
   Since our study should have been powered to detect the unwantedness effects mentioned in
the literature, an alternative explanation could be that being unwanted at birth is less detrimental
in Romania. During the communist period, Romania was still a fairly traditional society with
the vast majority of children being born into intact families. As a result, the potential negative
consequences of unwantedness might be mitigated by these societal norms. While our analysis
does not allow us to rule out this possibility, a number of facts suggest that unwanted births
were extremely costly to both parents and children. We previously discussed earlier work of
the abortion ban on socio-economic outcomes (Pop-Eleches (2006) and Mitrut and Wolff
(2011)). In addition, Romania's maternal mortality rate was by far the highest in Europe in the
1980's and was reduced between 1989-1990 from 159 to 83 per 100,000 birth (Hord et al.,
1991), which suggests that in the absence of access to abortion and modern contraceptives,
many women exposed themselves to risky and costly illegal abortions. Finally, after the fall of
communism, the conditions of many of the unwanted children growing up in Romania's
orphanages shocked the world. For all these reasons, one might expect to find a relationship
between abortion and crime rates. That we do not find any effect is striking evidence to the
contrary.




                                                                                                 18
References

Aebi, M., M. Tiago, and C. Burkhardt (2015). Survey on Prison Populations (SPACE I ­ Prison
Populations Survey 2014) Survey 2014. Council of Europe Annual Penal Statistics.

Angrist, Joshua, and William N. Evans. 1999. "Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of
the 1970 State Abortion Reforms." In Research in Labor Economics, ed. Ronald Ehrenberg,
75­111. Westport, Conn.: JAI Press.

Charles, Kerwin K., and Melvin J. Stephens. 2006. "Abortion Legalization and Adolescent
Substance Use." J. Law and Econ. 49 (October).

Chevalier, A., & Marie, O. 2017. "Economic uncertainty, parental selection, and children's
educational outcomes." Journal of Political Economy, 125(2), 393-430.

Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt. 2001. "The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2):379-420.

Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt. 2004. "Further Evidence that Legalized Abortion Lowered
Crime: A Reply to Joyce." Journal of Human Resources. 39(1):29-49.

Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt. 2008. "Measurement Error, Legalized Abortion, and the
Decline in Crime: A Response to Foote and Goetz." Quarterly Journal of Economics.
123(1):425-440.

Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt. 2019. "The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime Over
the Last Two Decades." NBER Working Paper 25863.

Doyle, J.J. (2008) "Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using Investigator Assignment to
Estimate Causal Effects of Foster Care," Journal of Political Economy, 116(4): 746-770.

Foote, Christopher, and Christopher F. Goetz; The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime:
Comment, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 123, Issue 1, 1 February 2008, Pages
407­423,

Grossman, Michael, and Theodore J. Joyce. 1990. "Unobservables, Pregnancy Resolutions, and
Birth Weight Production Functions in New York City." J.P.E. 98, no. 5, pt. 1 (October): 983­
1007.

Gruber, Jonathan, Phillip B. Levine, and Douglas Staiger. 1999. "Abortion Legalization and
Child Living Circumstances: Who Is the `Marginal Child'?" Q.J.E. 114 (February): 263­91.

Hjalmarsson, Randi, Helena Holmlund, and Matthew Lindquist (2015) "The Effect of
Education on Criminal Convictions and Incarceration: Causal Evidence from Micro-data", The
Economic Journal, 125: 1290-1326.
Hord, Charlotte, Henry P. David, France Donnay, and Merrill Wolf. 1991. "Reproductive
Health in Romania: Reversing the Ceausescu Legacy." Studies in Family Planning 22(4):
231-40



                                                                                         19
Joyce, Theodore J. 1987. "The Impact of Induced Abortion on Black and White Birth Outcomes
in the U.S.," Demography, 24(2): 229-244.

Joyce, Theodore. 2004. "Did Legalized Abortion Lower Crime?" Journal of Human Resources.
39(1):1-28.

Joyce, Theodore, 2009. "A Simple Test of Abortion and Crime," The Review of Economics
and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 91(1), pages 112-123, 08.

Joyce, Ted. 2010. "Abortion and Crime: A Review. In The Handbook of the Economics of
Crime. Bruce Benson and Paul Zimmerman, eds. (New York: Edward Elgar) pp. 452-487.

Kahane, Leo, Paton, David, and Rob Simmons. 2008. "The Abortion-Crime Link: Evidence
from England and Wales." Economica 75(297):1-21.

Levine, Phillip, Douglas Staiger, Thomas Kane, and David Zimmerman (1999) "Roe v Wade
and American Fertility," American Journal of Public Health, 89: 199-203.

Lochner, Lance, and Enrico Moretti (2004) "The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
Prison Inmates, Arrests and Self-Reports", American Economic Review, 94(1): 155-189.
Machin, Stephen, Olivier Marie, and Suncica Vujic (2011) "The Crime Reducing Effect of
Education", The Economic Journal, 121(552): 463-484.
Malamud, Ofer, Cristian Pop-Eleches and Miguel Urquiola (2016) "Interactions Between
Family and School Environments: Evidence on Dynamic Complementarities?," NBER
Working Paper 22112

Mitrut, Andreea and François-Charles Wolff (2011) "The Impact of Legalized Abortion on
Child Health Outcomes and Abandonment. Evidence from Romania", Journal of Health
Economics, 30(6), 1219-1231.

National Institute of Statistics/NIS [Romania] (2005). Anuarul demografic al României
[Romanian demographic yearbook]. Bucharest: NIS.

Piquero, Alex R., David P. Farrington, Jonathan P. Shepherd, and Katherine Auty. 2014.
"Offending and Early Death in the Cambridge Study in Delinquent Development." Justice
Quarterly 3 1(3):445-72.

Pop-Eleches, Cristian. 2006. "The Impact of an Abortion Ban on Socioeconomic Outcomes of
Children: Evidence from Romania. Journal of Political Economy 114(4):744-773.

Pop-Eleches, Cristian. 2010. "The Supply of Birth Control Methods, Education and Fertility:
Evidence from Romania", Journal of Human Resources 45(4): 971-997

Rasanen, Pijkko, Hakko H, Isohanni M, Hodgins S, Järvelin MR, Tiihonen J. 1999. "Maternal
Smoking during Pregnancy and Risk of Criminal Behavior among Adult Male Offspring in the
Northern Finland 1966 Birth Cohort," American Journal of Psychiatry, CLVI, 857­862.

Sailas, Eila, Benjamin Feodoroff, Nina Lindberg, Matti Virkkunen, Reijo Sund, Kristian
Wahlbeck (2005) "The Mortality of young offenders sentenced to prison and its association

                                                                                            20
with psychiatric disorders: a register study" European Journal of Public Health, 16(2): 193-
197.

Sen, Anindya. 2007. "Does Increased Abortion Lead to Lower Crime? Evaluating the
Relationship between Crime, Abortion and Fertility." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis
& Policy 7(1):1-36.

Serbanescu, F., Morris, L., Stupp, P., Stanescu, A., 1995. "The impact of recent policy
changes on fertility, abortion and contraceptives in Romania." Studies in Family Planning 26
(2), 76-87.




                                                                                               21
Figure 1. Total Fertility Rates: Romania vs. other ex-communist countries


      4


  3,5

                                             Abortion                                   Abortion
      3                                      banned                                     legalized


  2,5
TFR




      2


  1,5


      1


  0,5


      0
          1960
          1961
          1962
          1963
          1964
          1965
          1966
          1967
          1968
          1969
          1970
          1971
          1972
          1973
          1974
          1975
          1976
          1977
          1978
          1979
          1980
          1981
          1982
          1983
          1984
          1985
          1986
          1987
          1988
          1989
          1990
          1991
          1992
          1993
          1994
          1995
          1996
          1997
          1998
                                                          year
                                Average (Hungary, Poland, Bulgaria, Russia)   Romania




Note: Total Fertility Rates (TFR) for Romania and the average of some of the countries in the Communist Bloc:
Hungary, Poland, Bulgaria and Russia. TFR is the average total number of children that would be born per woman
in her lifetime, assuming no mortality in the childbearing ages, calculated from the age distribution and age-
specific fertility rates of a specified group in a given reference period. Source: United Nations Statistics.




                                                                                                           22
Figure 2. The 1989 Legalization of Abortion: Number of Births, Crime Levels and Crime Shares by Crime Type
 Panel A. Monthly Number of Births                                  Panel B. Overall Crime Levels                              Panel C. Overall Crime Shares
                                                                    Panel D. Property and Violent Crime Levels                 Panel E. Property and Violent Crime Shares
Note: This figure shows the effect of the 1989 legalization of abortion on the monthly # of births (Panel A), # of convictions - overall (Panel B), share of convicted individuals
overall (Panel C), and # and share of convictions by crime type (Panels D and E). The solid black line is for property offenses and the dashed grey line for violent crimes. The
Y-axis indicates the # or the share convicted, while the X-axis indicates the month and year of birth for the individuals born between January 1987 and December 1993 (i.e. 3
and a half years on either side of the reform July 1990) and observed in the crime registers from 1997 to September 2017. No age restrictions are imposed on the crime
measures. Data sources: Statistics Romania (birth data) and the National Penitentiary Administration (crime registers).
                                                                                                                                                                               23
Figure 3. The 1966 Abolition of Abortion: Number of Births, Crime Levels and Crime Shares by Crime Type
 Panel A. Monthly Number of Births            Panel B. Overall Crime Levels                        Panel C. Overall Crime Shares
                                                          Panel D. Property and Violent Crime Levels                         Panel E. Property and Violent Crime Shares
Note: This figure shows the effect of the 1966 abortion ban on the monthly # of births (Panel A), # of convictions - overall (Panel B), share of convicted individuals overall
(Panel C), and # and share of convictions by crime type (Panels D and E). The Y-axis indicates the # or the share convicted, while the X-axis indicates the month and year of
birth for the individuals born between January 1964 and December 1970 (i.e. 3 and a half years on either side of the reform June 1967) and observed in the crime registers from
1997 to September 2017. No age restrictions are imposed on the crime measures. Property and violent crimes are defined in the text. Data sources: The Romanian Demographic
Year Book (2005) (birth data) and the National Penitentiary Administration (crime registers).
                                                                                                                                                                            24
Figure 4. Age Crime Profiles

 Panel A: Age-Crime Profile for Cohorts Surrounding 1989 Reform




 Panel B: Age-Crime Profile for Cohorts Surrounding 1966 Reform




Note ­ Age-crime profile for the cohorts born 1987-1993 (Panel A) and 1964-1970 (Panel B). The crime registers
include all individuals arrested and convicted between January 1997 and September 2017; this means that crimes
are observed at different ages for each of our cohort in an unbalanced way. In Panel A we show the share of total
crimes committed by each age; for these individuals we observe their criminal records before the age of 30 (more
precise before 29 years and 9 months) for the oldest cohort but we do observe the full age crime profile before the
ages of 23 and 9 months and 25 and 9 months, when we keep 3.5 and 1.5 years on either side of the reform,
respectively. Thus, for our main working cohorts (1989-1991) we observe the full profile before age 26. In Panel
B (for the 1966 reform) we observe the cohorts when they are older. For all individuals we observe convictions
between approximate ages of 33 and 47, while for the main analysis sample (1966-1968) we observe convictions
between approximate ages 31 and 49. Source: The National Penitentiary Administration (crime registers).




                                                                                                                25
Table 1. Summary Statistics 1989 Reform
                                                     Full sample: Individuals                Working sample: All
                                                         born 1987-1993                  individuals born 1989-1991
                                                      Mean           S.D.                   Mean             S.D.
 I. Imprisonment registers (1997-2017)
 # of charges per case                                  1.815            1.583              1.835                1.636
 Sentence length (in days)**                          2461.156         3202.989           2488.091             3200.297
 Age when convicted                                    21.976            3.461             21.878                3.143
 Age when arrested                                     21.915            3.473             21.820                3.154
 Juvenile arrested (<18)                                0.150            0.357             0.136                 0.343
 Recidivist                                             0.471            0.499             0.453                 0.497
    Violent                                             0.421            0.493             0.420                 0.493
    Property                                            0.484            0.499             0.482                 0.499
    Other                                               0.196            0.397             0.201                 0.400
 Male                                                   0.963            0.186             0.964                 0.184
 Total number of 'cases'**                             29,670                              12,456
 II. In-patient registers (2007-2017)
 Hospitalization length (in days)                       5.693           12.683              5.640               10.387
 Age when hopsitalized                                 21.867            3.799              21.662               3.354
 Cause of hospitalization:
     Mental and Behavioural Disorders                  0.043             0.203              0.041                0.197
     Risky behaviour                                   0.096             0.295              0.104                0.305
 Male                                                  0.288             0.453              0.285                0.451
 Total # of hospitalizations***                      2,726,620                            1,170,338
 III. 2011 Census
 `At Risk' for Crime                                 0.003397           0.05795            0.02241              0.05653
    Risk measure 1                                   0.002868           0.05347            0.00274              0.05228
    Risk measure 2                                   0.000502           0.02240            0.00047              0.02158
 Total # of individuals                              2,104,824                             999,862
Note ­ Panel I: The crime registers include all criminal convictions that result in time served in prison from January
1997 to September 2017. **The data is organized such each individual can have more than one case, and each case can
include multiple charges. Property and violent crimes are defined as follows. Violent crimes cover categories: 174-192
from the penal code (CP) and the new penal code (NCP/L286), 193-200 (NCP) and codes 233, 234, 236 (NCP), 267
(CP), 287 (NCP), 335, 336 (CP), 401, 402 (NCP), and 438-445 (NCP). The most common violent crimes were: robbery,
murder, rape, and premeditated murder. Property crimes include premeditated theft (CP209, 209CP) ­ with over 85% of
all property crimes for individuals born around both reforms, followed by trespassing (192CP), theft (208CP), and
stealing (229 NCP). Other refers to crimes that are not violent or property. Panel II: The inpatient registers include all
hospitalizations in Romania from January 2007 to December 2017. Mental and Behavioural Disorder hospitalizations
have the following ICD-10 codes: F30-F39 (Mood [affective] disorders including depressive episodes and bipolar
affective disorder), F20-F29 (Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders), F10-F19 (Mental and behavioural
disorders due to psychoactive substance use (alcohol, drugs, substances)), F00-F09 (Organic, including symptomatic,
mental disorders), and F70-F79 (Mental retardation). The Risky behavior indicator captures: ICD-10 code U50-Y98
"External causes of morbidity and mortality" ­ almost exclusively transport related accidents, "Injury, poisoning and
certain other consequences of external causes" (ICD-10 codes S00-T98) which is primarily (85%) Injuries (Codes S),
and Poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (T15-T98).***Same individual can have multiple
hospitalizations, but cannot be matched over time. Our main working sample consist of all individuals born between
1989-1991, while the full sample (used in some robustness) includes all individuals born 1987-1993. Panel III: Our risk
measure =1 if the individual is: (i) institutionalized at the time of the census in one of the following types of institutions:
prison, jail, juvenile detention centers, orphanages, asylum, sanatorium, hospital homes and hospitals, and emergency
centers and night shelters (risk 1 measure) or (ii) reported as not living in the household for at least the last 12-months
for a reason other than education, working or family reasons, e.g. being detained (risk 2 measure). Data sources: The
Romanian National Penitentiary Administration (Panel I), the Romanian National Inpatient Registers (Panel II) and the
2011 Romanian Census (Panel III).


                                                                                                                           26
Table 2. Summary Statistics 1966 Reform
                                                 Full sample: All individuals              Working sample: All
                                                       born 1964-1970                  individuals born 1966-1968
                                                    Mean             S.D.                 Mean            S.D.
I. Imprisonment registers
# of charges per case                                2.351             2.162               1.476              1.167
Sentence length (in days)**                        2174.263          3506.166            2187.882           3444.293
Age when convicted                                  34.700             6.074              35.094              5.923
Age when arrested                                   34.623             6.051              35.021              5.847
Recidivist                                           0.687             0.462               0.684              0.464
Type of crimes:
   Violent                                           0.243              0.429              0.242              0.428
   Property                                          0.531              0.499              0.523              0.499
   Other                                             0.281              0.451              0.292              0.454
Total # of 'cases'**                                57.616                                26.313

II. In-patient registers (2007-2017)
Hospitalization length (in days)          8.467                        35.772              8.449              33.589
Age when hopsitalized                    44.774                         3.810             44.670              3.345
Cause of hospitalization:
    Mental and Behavioural Disorders      0.111                         0.313             0.111               0.313
    Risky behaviour                       0.069                         0.254             0.069               0.255
Male                                      0.468                         0.499             0.472               0.499
Total # of hospitalizations***       2,726,620                                          1,170,338

III. 2011 Census
`At Risk' for Crime                               0.007559            0.08661            0.00757             0.08668
   Risk measure 1                                 0.006812            0.08225            0.00681             0.08225
   Risk measure 2                                 0.000774            0.02733            0.00076             0.02755
Total # of individuals****                        1,920,102                              840,180
Note ­ Panel I: The crime registers include all criminal convictions that result in time served in prison from January
1997 to September 2017. **The data is organized such each individual can have more than one case, and each case can
include multiple charges. Violent crimes cover categories: 174-192 from the penal code (CP) and the new penal code
(NCP/L286), 193-200 (NCP) and codes 233, 234, 236 (NCP), 267 (CP), 287 (NCP), 335, 336 (CP), 401, 402 (NCP),
and 438-445 (NCP). The most common violent crimes were: robbery, murder, rape, and premeditated murder. Property
crimes include premeditated theft (CP209, 209CP) ­ with over 85% of all property crimes for individuals born around
both reforms, followed by trespassing (192CP), theft (208CP), and stealing (229 NCP). Other refers to crimes that are
not violent or property. Gender information is not available. Panel II: The inpatient registers include all hospitalizations
in Romania from January 2007 to December 2017. Mental and Behavioural Disorder hospitalizations have the following
ICD-10 codes: F30-F39 (Mood [affective] disorders including depressive episodes and bipolar affective disorder), F20-
F29 (Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders), F10-F19 (Mental and behavioural disorders due to
psychoactive substance use (alcohol, drugs, substances)), F00-F09 (Organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders),
and F70-F79 (Mental retardation). The Risky behavior indicator captures: ICD-10 code U50-Y98 "External causes of
morbidity and mortality" ­ almost exclusively transport related accidents, "Injury, poisoning and certain other
consequences of external causes" (ICD-10 codes S00-T98) which is primarily (85%) Injuries (Codes S), and Poisoning
and certain other consequences of external causes (T15-T98).***Same individual can have multiple hospitalizations,
but cannot be matched over time. Our main working sample consist of all individuals born between 1966-1968, while
the full sample (used in some robustness) includes all individuals born1964-1970. Panel III: Our risk measure =1 if the
individual is: (i) institutionalized at the time of the census in one of the following types of institutions: prison, jail,
juvenile detention centers, orphanages, asylum, sanatorium, hospital homes and hospitals, and emergency centers and
night shelters (the risk 1 measure) or (ii) reported as not living in the household for at least the last 12-months for a
reason other than education, working or family reasons, e.g. being detained (the risk 2 measure). Data sources: The
Romanian National Penitentiary Administration (Panel I), the Romanian National Inpatient Registers (Panel II) and the
2011 Romanian Census (Panel III).


                                                                                                                        27
Table 3. The Impact of the 1989 Legalization of Abortion on Crime.
                                     (1)                  (2)                   (3)                (4)                    (5)                    (6)                   (7)
                                                                                             Dependent Variable:
                                                     # Convicted
                                   # births          Individuals                                               Share Convicted Individuals
Panel A. Any Crime
                                    -7,699              -91.33               0.000179            0.000179              0.000103               0.000135             0.000299
                                   (770.0)             (19.13)              (0.000746)          (0.000762)            (0.000675)             (0.000501)            (0.00133)
                                  30535.56            414.0556              0.0135721           0.0135721              0.011402              0.0092236             0.0135721
Panel B. Violent Crime
                                    -7,699              -34.83               0.000296            0.000296              0.000425               0.000312              0.000607
                                   (770.0)              (11.19)             (0.000493)          (0.000480)            (0.000476)             (0.000359)            (0.000782)
                                  30535.56             171.7778             0.0056295           0.0056295             0.0049472              0.0042213             0.0056295
Panel C. Property Crime
                                     -7,699             -50.42                -0.000217           -0.000217             -0.000355               0.000135             -0.000263
                                    (770.0)            (12.92)               (0.000471)          (0.000482)            (0.000435)              (0.000501)           (0.000834)
                                   30535.56           199.0556               0.0065288           0.0065288              0.005844                0.0092236           0.0065288
Month of Birth FE                     Yes                Yes                     Yes                 Yes                   Yes                     Yes                  Yes
Birth Month Linear Trend              Yes                Yes                     Yes                  No                   Yes                     Yes                  Yes
Birth Year Dummies                     No                 No                      No                 Yes                    No                     Yes                   No
Composition Controls                   No                 No                      No                  No                    No                     No                   Yes
Sample Birth Months            Jan '89 - Dec '91 Jan '89 - Dec '91        Jan '89 - Dec '91 Jan '89 - Dec '91       Jan '89 - Dec '91      Jan '87 - Dec '93     Jan '89 - Dec '91
Outcome restriction                    No                 No                      No                  No          conv. before age 26 conv. before age 24                No
Note -- This table estimates the effect of the 1989 legalization of abortion on the number of births, number of convictions (overall and by crime type) and share convicted.
The baseline results with birth month fixed effects and a month of birth linear trend are in columns (1) - (3), while robustness and sensitivity checks are presented for the main
variable of interest (the share convicted) in columns (4) - (7). Unless otherwise noted, the analysis sample is individuals born from January 1989 to December 1991, i.e.
individuals 1.5 years on either side of the reform. This is extended on both sides in column (6). The dependent variable is the number of convictions observed in the crime
register from 1997 to September 2017. Column (5) assesses the sensitivity of the results to censoring in this data, as the youngest cohorts are only observed until age 25.
Column (7) includes controls for potential compositional effects: averages of ethnicity and the parents' education (gymnasium, secondary, university) and years of birth
observed at the 1992 Census. Standard errors in parentheses. Property and violent crimes are defined in the text. Data sources: The Romanian Demographic Year Book (2005)
(birth data) and the National Penitentiary Administration (crime registers). Pre-treatment means in italics.
                                                                                                                                                                                28
Table 4. The Effect of the 1989 Reform on Preventative Detention
                                      (1)                  (2)                        (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)                (7)
                                                                                               Dependent Variable:
                                                     # preventative
                                    # births           detention                                                  Share in Preventative Detention
                                     -7,699              -41.08                   -0.000323             -0.000323             -0.000422             -0.000184         -0.0000725
                                    (770.0)             (8.273)                  (0.000308)            (0.000312)            (0.000247)             (0.000230)        (0.000259)
                                   30535.56            131.3333                   0.0042991             0.0042991            0.0035896              0.0027723         0.0042991
Month of Birth FE                     Yes                 Yes                        Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes
Birth Month Linear Trend              Yes                 Yes                        Yes                   No                    Yes                   Yes                Yes
Birth Year Dummies                    No                  No                          No                   Yes                   No                    Yes                No
Composition Controls                  No                  No                          No                   No                    No                    No                 Yes
Sample Birth Months              Jan '89 - Dec '91 Jan '89 - Dec '91           Jan '89 - Dec '91      Jan '89 - Dec '91   Jan '89 - Dec '91    Jan '87 - Dec '93 Jan '89 - Dec '91
                                                                                                                          conv. before age     conv. before age
Outcome restriction                     No                  No                        No                     No                  26                   24                  No
Note -- This table estimates the effect of the 1989 legalization of abortion on the number of births, number in preventative detention and share in preventative detention. The
baseline results with birth month fixed effects and a month of birth linear trend are in columns (1) - (3), while robustness and sensitivity checks are presented for the main
variable of interest (the share convicted) in columns (4) - (7). Unless otherwise noted, the analysis sample is individuals born 1989-1991, i.e. individuals 1.5 years on either side
of the reform. This is extended on both sides in column (6). The dependent variable is the number of individuals in preventative detention observed in the crime register from
1997 to September 2017. Column (5) assesses the sensitivity of the results to censoring in this data, as the youngest cohorts are only observed until age 26 (25 and 9 months).
Column (7) includes controls for potential compositional effects: averages of ethnicity and the parents' education (gymnasium, secondary, university) and years of birth observed
at the 1992 Census. Data sources: The Romanian Demographic Year Book (2005) (birth data) and the National Penitentiary Administration (crime registers). Standard errors in
parentheses. Pre-treatment means in italics.
                                                                                                                                                                                29
Table 5. The Impact of the 1966 Abortion Abolition on Crime
                                     (1)                 (2)                   (3)                (4)                     (5)                    (6)                 (7)
                                                                                            Dependent Variable:
                                                    # Convicted
                                  # births          Individuals                                                 Share Convicted Individuals
Panel A. Any Crime
                                  32,355                628                -0.000292           -0.000161               -0.000496               0.000099           -0.00560
                                  (4,625)             (83.54)             (0.000989)          (0.000936)              (0.000852)              (0.000552)         (0.00323)
                                 24161.59             484.58              0.0200384           0.0200384               0.0179155                0.012132          0.0200384
Panel B. Violent Crime
                                  32,355                148                -0.000111           -0.000219               -0.000120               -0.000151         -0.00151
                                  (4,625)             (20.60)             (0.000295)          (0.000252)              (0.000197)              (0.000166)        (0.000909)
                                 24161.59            119.4706             0.0049452           0.0049452               0.0038628               0.0026682         0.0049452
Panel C. Property Crime            32,355               315.3               -0.000600           -0.000633              -0.000659            0.0000734             -0.00362
                                   (4,625)             (47.54)             (0.000667)          (0.000667)             (0.000636)            (0.000326)           (0.00226)
                                 24161.59            248.0588              0.0102284           0.0102284               0.009542             0.0061365            0.0102284
Month of Birth FE                    Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Birth Month Linear Trend             Yes                 Yes                   Yes                  No                    Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Birth Year Dummies                   No                  No                     No                 Yes                     No                   Yes                  No
Composition Controls                 No                  No                     No                  No                     No                   No                   Yes
Sample Birth Months           Jan '66 - Dec '68   Jan '66 - Dec '68     Jan '66 - Dec '68   Jan '66 - Dec '68      Jan '66 - Dec '68     Jan '64 - Dec '70    Jan '66 - Dec '68
Outcome restriction                  No                  No                     No                  No            conv. from 31 to 49   conv. from 33 to 47          No
Note -- This table estimates the effect of the 1966 abolition of abortion on the number of births, number of convictions (overall and by crime type) and share convicted. The
baseline results with birth month fixed effects and a month of birth linear trend are in columns (1) - (3), while robustness and sensitivity checks are presented for the main
variable of interest (the share convicted) in columns (4) - (7). Unless otherwise noted, the analysis sample is individuals born from January 1966 to December 1968 i.e.
individuals 1.5 years on either side of the reform. This is extended on both sides in column (6). The dependent variable is the number of convictions observed in the crime
register from 1997 to September 2017. Column (5) assesses the sensitivity of the results to censoring in this data, as the youngest cohorts are only observed until age 48
Column (7) includes controls for potential compositional effects: averages of ethnicity and the parents' education (gymnasium, secondary, university) and years of birth
observed at the 1977 Census. Standard errors in parentheses. Property and violent crimes are defined in the text. Data sources: The Romanian Demographic Year Book (2005)
(birth data) and the National Penitentiary Administration (crime registers). Significance noted by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%. Pre-treatment means in italics.
                                                                                                                                                                             30
  Table 6. The Impact of the 1989 Legalization and 1966 Abolition of Abortion on Mental Health and Risky Behavior Hospitalizations
                      (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)             (7)             (8)           (9)          (10)        (11)              (12)
                                                        Dependent Variable: # and Share of hospitalizations for Mental Disorder and Risky Behavior
                   # mental                                                                               # risky
                   disorder                             Share mental disorder                            behavior                             Share risky behavior
Panel A. 1989 Legalization (Baseline sample months January 1989- December 1991)
                    -454.4        -0.003557    -0.00146     -0.000932 0.000945 -0.00686                     -847.3        -0.001684      -0.001684 0.00119           -0.0059      -0.00522
                   (105.4)       (0.003880) (0.00378)       (0.00296) (0.00132) (0.00647)                  (427.0)        (0.01336)     (0.007076) (0.0113)         (0.00220)     (0.0103)
                 1495.222        0.0490112    0.0490112 0.0333912 0.0165596 0.0490112                     4453.056        0.1457351     0.1457351 0.1134897         0.054038     0.1457351
Panel B. 1966 Abolition (Baseline sample months January 1966- December 1968
                    4,892          0.00476     0.00511      0.00545     0.00304           -0.00864          2,978          0.00166        0.00207      0.00148      0.000357      -0.00479
                   (702.1)        (0.00585)   (0.00567)    (0.00430) (0.00183)            (0.0141)         (413.0)        (0.00476)      (0.00511)    (0.00367)     (0.00160)     (0.0123)
                 2628.966         0.0962198 0.0962198      0.099211    0.061592           0.096219        2917.154        0.1054467      0.1054467    0.061046      0.0375453     0.105446
Birth Month FE        Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Birth Month
Linear Trend          Yes              Yes             No             Yes        Yes         Yes              Yes             Yes            No           Yes          Yes           Yes
Birth Year FE          No               No            Yes             No         Yes          No              No              No            Yes           No           Yes           No
Composition
Controls               No               No             No             No          No         Yes              No              No             No           No           No            Yes
Extended
                       No               No             No             No         Yes          No              No              No             No           No           Yes           No
Sample
                                                                   Panel A:    Panel A:                                                                 Panel A:     Panel A:
Age restrictions
                                                                    18-26       20-24                                                                    18-26        20-24
for outcome            No               No             No                                     No              No              No             No                                      No
                                                                   Panel B:    Panel B:                                                                 Panel B:     Panel B:
variable:
                                                                    41-49       43-47                                                                    41-49        43-47
Note -This table presents the effect of the 1989 legalization of abortion (Panel A) and the 1966 abolition of abortion (Panel B) on hospitalizations for mental disorders or risky behavior.
Mental disorders are defined to include all hospitalization with the ICD-10 codes F "Mental and Behavioral Health" and risky behaviors include "External causes of morbidity and mortality"
(ICD-10 codes U50-Y98) and "Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes" (ICD-10 codes S00-T98). The baseline results are in columns (1) - (2) and (7) - (8).
Columns (3) and (9) replace the linear month of birth trend with year dummies, columns (4) and (10) we restrict the sample to individuals during the same age of hospitalization , while
columns (5) and (11) extend the sample years from 1.5 around each reform in baseline to 3 years around each reform; finally, columns (6) and (12) assess robustness to controls for
compositional effects: averages of ethnicity and the parents' education (gymnasium, secondary, university) and years of birth observed at the 1977 and 1992 Census (for the 1966 and 1989
reforms, respectively). Data sources: the National Inpatient Registers. Standard errors in parentheses. Pre-treatment means in italics.
                                                                                                                                                                                31
Table 7. The Impact of the 1989 Legalization and 1966 Abolition on Individual's Probability of Being `At Risk' for Crime
                                    (1)            (2)              (3)                  (4)                (5)                  (6)                (7)             (8)
                                                            Dependent Variable:
                                                                                                                               # at risk       Share population at risk (at
                                       Propensity to be at risk of being part of the criminal population                     individuals         October 2011 Census)
Panel A. 1989 Legalization (Baseline sample months January 1989- December 1991)
                              -0.000382      -0.000396           0.00567            -0.000387        0.0000052               -59.25***           -0.000440      -0.000101
                             (0.000362)     (0.000355)          (0.00669)          (0.000320)       (0.000121)                 (9.253)          (0.000373)     (0.000430)
                             0.0075533      0.0075533           0.0074164          0.0067176        0. 0008357                195.8333          0.0064264       0.0064264
                              [840,180]      [840,180]          [562,684]           [840,180]        [840,180]
Panel B. 1966 Abolition (Baseline sample months January 1966- December 1968
                              -0.000194     -0.000176       -0.000128       -0.000153                   0.0000234             75.08***           -0.000114      -0.000075
                             (0.000286)    (0.000253)      (0.000152)      (0.000229)                   (0.000097)             (13.31)          (0.000241)     (0.000288)
                             0.0033292     0.0033292       0.0033457     0.0028701                      0.0004591                61             0.0025154      0.0025154
                              [999,862]     [999,862]       [691,217]       [999,862]                    [999,862]
Type of Analysis             Individual        Individual         Individual          Individual        Individual           Aggregate          Aggregate       Aggregate
Risk Measure (1, 2, or both)    Both              Both               Both                  1                 2                 Both               Both            Both
Month of Birth FE                Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes             Yes
Birth Month Linear Trend         Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes             Yes
Composition Controls             No                Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                 No                 No              Yes
Sample window                  3 years           3 years            2 years             3 years           3 years             3 years            3 years         3 years
Note -This table presents the effect of the 1989 legalization of abortion (Panel A) and the 1966 abolition of abortion (Panel B) on the individual propensity to be `at
risk' of being part of this criminal population (columns 1-5). Our risk measure is an indicator of whether the individual is: (i) institutionalized at the time of the census
in one of the following types of institutions: prison, jail, juvenile detention centers, orphanages, asylum, sanatorium, hospital homes and hospitals, and emergency
centers and night shelters (the risk 1 measure) or (ii) reported as not living in the household for at least the last 12-months (but living in Romania) for a reason other
than education, working or family reasons, e.g. being detained (the risk 2 measure). Composition controls in column (2) include exogenous variables such as gender,
ethnicity, 42 county of birth indicators and whether the person was born in a rural or urban area. Finally, we show aggregate level analysis similar to our previous
tables, for the number of individuals at risk in October 2011 (column 6) and share at risk, in the baseline specification with birth month fixed effects and a month of
birth linear trend (column 7) and with controls for potential compositional effects (averages of ethnicity, gender, place of birth and counties of birth as observed at
the October 2011 census). Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the county of birth in columns 1-5). Significance noted by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%. Pre-
treatment means in italics. Sample sizes in brackets for the individual level analyses.
                                                                                                                                                                                32
