                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     SKILL AND PROFIT IN ACTIVE MANAGEMENT

                                     Robert F. Stambaugh

                                      Working Paper 26027
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26027


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          June 2019, Revised November 2020




I am grateful for comments from anonymous referees as well as Jonathan Berk, Philip Bond,
Vincent Glode, Ron Kaniel, Lubos Pástor, Lasse Pedersen, participants at the LSE/FCA/SEBI
"Paying for Efficient and Effective Markets" conference, the meeting of the French Finance
Association, and seminars at Baruch College, Emory University, Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta, University of Kansas, University of Pennsylvania, and University of South Carolina. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Robert F. Stambaugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Skill and Pro t in Active Management
Robert F. Stambaugh
NBER Working Paper No. 26027
June 2019, Revised November 2020
JEL No. G12,G14,G23

                                          ABSTRACT

I analyze skill's role in active management under general equilibrium with many assets and costly
trading. More-skilled managers produce larger expected total investment profits, and their
portfolio weights correlate more highly with assets' future returns. Becoming more skilled,
however, can reduce a manager's expected profit if enough other managers also become more
skilled. The greater skill allows those managers to identify profit opportunities more accurately,
but active management in aggregate then corrects prices more, shrinking the profits those
opportunities offer. The latter effect can dominate in a setting consistent with numerous empirical
properties of active management and stock returns.


Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu
1.      Introduction

Active investment managers seek to outperform a passive benchmark by identifying and
trading securities likely to over- or under-perform. The ability to select such securities,
i.e., the ability to identify alphas, reflects a manager's skill. The total dollar amount of a
manager's outperformance, net of trading costs, is her investment profit. Should more-skilled
managers produce greater expected profit than less-skilled managers? If a manager becomes
more skilled, does she then produce greater expected profit?

     I explore such questions in the context of a general equilibrium model. A large cross-
section of managers with different amounts of skill select among many assets and incur
costs to trade them. The alphas that managers exploit arise from mispricing induced by
"noise" traders. In equilibrium, active management's aggregate asset demands correct the
mispricing, but not all of it, and managers produce positive expected investment profits.

     Within the cross-section of managers, the model implies that those with more skill pro-
duce greater expected profit. Suppose the cross-section shifts, so that some or all managers
become more skilled. Should a manager who becomes more skilled then produce greater
expected profit? Yes, but not if too many other managers also become more skilled. In
that case, becoming more skilled can result in lower expected profit due to the effects on
equilibrium asset prices. For example, the managers who become more skilled are more
likely to identify correctly a positive-alpha stock and to over-weight it in their portfolios.
This collective higher demand for the stock raises the equilibrium price all managers pay
for it, reducing the investment profit any manager makes from buying it. This latter effect
can dominate and thereby reduce profits even for the managers who become more skilled.
They more accurately identify a positive-alpha stock, but the magnitude of the alpha shrinks
due to greater price correction. Naturally these same opposing effects of increased skill also
apply to negative-alpha stocks, raising the chances such stocks are accurately identified but
reducing the investment profits earned by under-weighting or shorting them.

     A quantitative specification of the model captures numerous observed characteristics of
both the active management industry and asset returns. In that empirically relevant setting,
the model implies that if, say, 25% or 50% of managers become more skilled, they earn
greater expected profit as a result. Their greater accuracy in identifying alphas outweighs
these managers' stronger contribution to price correction. In contrast, if 90% of managers
become more skilled, then all managers earn lower expected profit, as the effect of greater
price correction then dominates. Of course, in all scenarios, the managers whose skill does


                                              1
not increase earn lower expected profit, because the effect of any increased price correction
is not mitigated by an increased ability to identify alphas accurately. What is the effect
on the total investment profit of the active management industry when skill increases for
some or all managers? Under the same quantitative specification, the model implies that
the industry's total expected profit falls even for the above cases in which expected profits
rise for the managers who become more skilled.

   A manager's investment profits are presumably the principal source of the fund's fee rev-
enue. In the model of Berk and Green (2004), for example, expected investment profit simply
equals total fee revenue, as the fund's investors earn zero net alpha in equilibrium. Under
the latter condition, therefore, all of the above statements about expected profit apply to fee
revenue. I do not impose the zero-alpha condition, but I do assume the manager's objective is
to maximize expected profit. No doubt this objective is more easily motivated, the stronger
is the manager's perceived association between average profits and fee revenue. Berk and
van Binsbergen (2015) document the strong empirical association across funds between total
fee revenue and average future investment profits. The authors define investment profit as
"value added," and I adopt that term as well later in the exposition. They also propose
value added as measuring skill, and the model presented here justifies that interpretation.

   The model implies that, within the cross-section of managers, expected profit is de-
termined by skill. A manager takes active (overweight and underweight) positions up to
an optimal point at which trading to take larger such positions becomes too costly. A
less-skilled manager takes less profitable active positions in reaching that optimum. Each
manager reaches such a point, because the cost of trading any asset is convex in the amount
of the asset the manager trades. A manager's maximized expected dollar profit does not de-
pend on the dollar amount of the fund's assets under management, AUM. Therefore, funds
exhibit decreasing returns to scale, with expected profit per dollar of AUM decreasing in
AUM. The assumption that a fund faces decreasing returns to scale with respect to its AUM
is central to the model of Berk and Green (2004). The model presented here provides a
micro-foundation for that property.

   Including trading costs in a model of the active management industry seems desirable,
given empirical evidence of such costs' economic importance. For example, Edelen, Evans,
and Kadlec (2007) conclude that trading costs present an important source of scale disec-
onomies for mutual funds. Edelen, Evans, and Kadlec (2013) find that mutual funds' trading
costs as a fraction of net asset value are comparable in magnitude to funds' expense ratios.
In this respect the model of active management here, with convex trading costs paid to


                                              2
intermediaries, differs from those of Garcia and Vanden (2009) and G^
                                                                    arleanu and Pedersen
(2018), for example, in which managers do not face such liquidity costs and the resulting
decreasing returns to scale.

     In addition to the above insights, the model delivers a number of empirical implications.
For example, it predicts a fund's expected profit equals its trading costs. If fee revenue
coincides with expected profit, than this prediction is largely consistent with the Edelen,
Evans, and Kadlec (2013) evidence that trading costs are similar in magnitude to expense
ratios (of which management fees are a substantial part). The model also predicts that,
other things equal, a fund charging a higher expense ratio has lower AUM and has portfolio
weights that depart more from benchmark weights. Both implications are consistent with
evidence reported by P´ astor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2020). An additional implication
for future empirical investigation is that a fund with higher average investment profit has
a higher correlation across assets between the fund's active weights and individual assets'
future returns.

     This study's contribution in the context of the previous literature is discussed further in
a later section. Included there is a parallel to Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), who identify
opposing effects of variance in the signal about the risky asset's payoff. Those opposing
effects are similar to the opposing effects of active managers' skill analyzed here.



2.      Model assumptions

The model considers a single investment period. Active managers identify and exploit oppor-
tunities to outperform the market benchmark by having their funds' weights on individual
assets, generally taken to be stocks, deviate from the weights in the market benchmark. The
number of active managers, M , is assumed to be large enough for each manager to take
stock prices as given in a competitive equilibrium. For active management in aggregate to
outperform the market benchmark, before costs and fees, other market participants must
underperform that benchmark (e.g., Sharpe (1991)). The latter participants comprise noise
traders whose exogenous asset demands are inconsistent with fair values. Black (1986), for
example, characterizes noise traders as trading to their own detriment. The noise traders
own fraction h of total stock-market wealth and invest in stocks directly. Investors own the
remaining fraction 1 - h of stock-market wealth. They invest in the stock market through
professionally managed funds, either active or passive. Passive managers offer zero-cost
market-index funds that invest any money the investors do not allocate to active managers.

                                                3
2.1.    Stocks and alphas

The stock market comprises N stocks, and the supply of each stock equals one share. Stock i
has share price pi at the beginning of the investment period and payoff (including dividends)
equal to xi at the end of the period. It is also useful to define a stock's beginning-of-period
"fair value" in order to introduce concepts such as mispricing and price correction. The fair
                               ¯i = (1/µ)E{xi |}, where  denotes the union across managers
value of stock i is defined as p
of all signals on which they condition their expectations about xi , and µ equals one plus
the fair-value discount rate, assumed to be exogenous and equal across stocks. There are N
                                                                    N
shares in the market portfolio, each with price pm = (1/N )         i=1   pi . Any individual stock's pi
can deviate from its p
                     ¯i , but the number of stocks, N , is assumed to be large, with deviations
between pi and p ¯i averaging out across stocks. That is, the overall stock market is assumed
to be fairly priced, so that pm is also equal to (1/N ) N  i=1 p
                                                               ¯i . In essence, this assumption
means active managers cannot profit from market timing.

   Define stock i's market-adjusted return as ri = Ri - Rm , where Ri is the realized rate of
return on stock i over the period, and Rm is the return on the market portfolio. Note from
the above assumptions that E{1+ Ri |} = (1/pi )E{xi |} = µ (¯
                                                            pi /pi ), and E{1+ Rm |} = µ.
Define the "alpha" on stock i as E{ri |}, which is then given by

                                                   pi - pi )/pi .
                                             i = µ(¯                                                (1)

That is, i is proportional to the fraction of stock i's price represented by mispricing.


2.2.    Trading costs

Active managers incur trading costs when taking positions that deviate from market bench-
mark weights. I treat each fund as already holding the benchmark when entering the model's
current period, having previously incurred the sunk cost of initially investing the fund's as-
sets under management (AUM). A manager who simply maintains that benchmark portfolio,
as would a passive manager, incurs no trading costs in the current period, whereas taking
active positions that depart from benchmark weights incurs trading costs. Define manager
j 's active weight in stock i as
                                                 (j )   (j )
                                             i = A,i - m,i ,                                        (2)
        (j )
where A,i is stock i's weight in manager j 's portfolio, and m,i is stock i's weight in the
                                   N      (j )
market portfolio. Note that        i=1   i = 0. The dollar amount of stock i traded by manager


                                                        4
j is assumed to be
                                                   (j )      (j )
                                               Di = i W (j ) ,                                                 (3)
with W (j ) denoting fund j 's dollar AUM.
             (j )
       The i 's reflect the discretionary active trades that managers make with their existing
AUM. Excluded are costs of investing or disinvesting any flows into or out of the fund. In
this respect, the single period is envisioned as one in the midst of many for an ongoing fund
with no significant flows in or out. In the model of Berk and Green (2004), for example,
flows to and from funds occur because investors update assessments of fund managers' skills.
One might thus view the current model as abstracting from investors' learning about skill,
essentially treating such learning as having already occurred. Any active manager's invest-
ment activity (excluding inflows and outflows) can be represented as placing the fund's total
AUM in a buy-and-hold long position in the market portfolio and then actively trading a
zero-investment portfolio of long and short positions in individual stocks.1 The trading costs
modeled here pertain to the latter portfolio and are incurred in any period that is viewed
as the model's single period. The one-time cost of establishing the buy-and-hold market
position is excluded, meaning that if a fund were to behave as an index fund, the model
would assign it zero trading costs.

       In the quantitative analysis presented later, a single period is taken as a year. In reality,
which is of course multiperiod, active positions can span periods. If, say, manager j gives
                      (j )
stock i positive i 's across two periods, then the fund's trade in the second period is less
        (j )
than Di in equation (3). Purely for tractability, I abstract from that multiperiod reality
when casting the model within a single period. The basic concept underlying equation (3)
is simply that active managers make bets each period, underweighting and overweighting
stocks relative to the market, and generally the managers trade to place those bets.

       I assume the trading costs faced by active managers are convex in the amount traded.
                                                                              (j )                              (j )
Specifically, for any manager j , the round-trip dollar cost Ci                      of trading dollar amount Di
of stock i is
                                                   (j )         (j )   (j )
                                               Ci         = cdi Di ,                                           (4)
                                            (j )
where c is a positive constant and di is the fraction of stock i's total market capitalization
                     (j )
represented by Di . That proportional costs increase with trade size is a familiar concept,
   1
     Note that this representation need not conflict with, say, being a long-only fund. A short position for
                                                             (j )
stock i in the zero-investment long-short portfolio, i.e., i < 0, does not imply the fund has an actual short
                                               (j )
position in the stock, which occurs when i < -m,i , where m,i is stock i's market-portfolio weight. The
latter case, if it occurs, is not treated differently here, again for tractability. In reality, taking actual short
positions can be costlier than taking long positions.

                                                            5
well supported by evidence, e.g., Keim and Madhavan (1997). The specification in equation
(4), which is also assumed by Stambaugh (2014) and P´
                                                    astor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2020),
has the proportional trading cost increase linearly with trade size. A linear function for a
stock's proportional trading cost is entertained, for example, by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016).
That study examines portfolio transition trades and concludes that a linear function fits the
data only slightly less well than a nonlinear square-root specification. A linear specification
is imposed here, again for tractability. With the proportional trading cost being linear
                             (j )                       (j )                   (j )
in the amount traded, Di , the total trading cost, Ci , is quadratic in Di . (Note that
 (j )    (j )
di = Di /pi in equation (4).) Quadratic trading costs are also assumed, for example, in
the models of Heaton and Lucas (1996), Grinold (2006), and G^
                                                            arleanu and Pedersen (2013).
                      (j )
    The trading cost Ci in equation (4) does not include the impact of the manager's demand
for the stock on the equilibrium price, pi . The aggregate demand for the stock across the
model's many managers impacts pi , but I assume a competitive equilibrium in which each
                                                                                           (j )
manager views pi as given, unaffected by her own relatively infinitesimal demand. The Ci 's
instead represent compensation to liquidity-providing intermediaries (broker-dealers) who
take short-lived positions that simply facilitate ultimate market clearing among funds and
noise traders. One can envision many intermediaries accessing different sources of liquidity or
acting at slightly different times, such that the above trading costs represent very transitory
price impacts, essentially brief excursions to effective bid or ask prices that accompany
the price-formation process at the start of the model's single period. These trading costs,
which constitute revenue to the intermediaries, might best be viewed as the traditional
inventory-related costs of market-making reflected in effective bid-ask spreads (e.g., Stoll
(1979) and Amihud and Mendelson (1980)). Intermediaries play no role in the model other
                     (j )
than to receive the Ci 's from managers in exchange for providing liquidity. A bid-ask
spread's adverse-selection component that provides zero expected profit to intermediaries
                                                                (j )
(e.g., Glosten and Milgrom (1985)), rather than being part of Ci , is better viewed as another
unmodeled element of market microstructure underlying the formation of the equilibrium
price, pi .


2.3.    Noise traders

Let H,i denote the weight on stock i in the aggregate portfolio of the noise traders, with
H,i assumed to be exogenous and non-negative (no short selling by the noise traders). The
price of stock i that would arise in an equilibrium with no active management, with prices



                                              6
thus determined solely by the asset demands of noise traders, is equal to2

                                               p
                                               ^i = N pm H,i .                                               (5)

I assume
                                                  p
                                                  ^i = vi p
                                                          ¯i ,                                               (6)

with vi ( 0) independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) across stocks (i), independent
of p
   ¯i , and with
                                                 E{vi } = 1.                                                 (7)

In essence, the "noise" in noise-trader demands would distort prices away from fair values,
and those relative distortions are i.i.d. across stocks and zero on average.


2.4.     Skill and forecasts

                                                                    (j )   (j )
The manager of fund j receives a set of N signals, s1 , . . . , sN , with
                                               (j )              (j )
                                              si = i + i ,                                                   (8)
         (j )                                                          2(j )                          (j )
where i has zero mean, is independent of i , and has variance equal to       . The i 's are
also independent across both stocks and funds.3 One interpretation of these signals is that
manager j has a team of analysts who supply her with payoff-relevant information about a
                           (j )
stock summarized by si . The analysts observe equilibrium prices, the pi 's, but nevertheless
assess the xi 's (and thus the p
                               ¯i 's and i 's) differently from other analysts. I do not specify the
mechanism underlying these differences. Banerjee (2011), for example, summarizes various
explanations for disagreement under both rational-expectations and difference-in-opinion
approaches. One possibility is simply that the analysts lack sufficient skill to extract all of
                                                                           (j )
the information embedded in equilibrium prices, so that the i 's reflect these limitations. In
this narrative, the fund manager relies on her analysts in the sense that she does not extract
                                                                           (j )
payoff-relevant information from prices beyond what is reflected in the si 's she receives.

   The fund manager does, however, have rational expectations about the usefulness of her
        (j )
team's si 's for predicting returns, presumably drawing on her experience. Specifically, she
   2
      Without active management, investors place all their stock-market wealth in an index fund, so their
portfolio's weight on stock i is S,i = m,i = pi /(N pm ). Combining the latter with the market-clearing
condition (1 - h)S,i + hH,i = m,i gives pi = N pm H,i , which is the right-hand side of equation (5).
    3      (j )
      The i 's cannot literally be independent across j and independent of i if the latter, as defined earlier,
                                                (1)          (M )
is the conditional expectation of ri given  = {si , . . . , si }, but this technicality seems reasonably ignored
when M is large, as in the model's quantitative applications later.


                                                       7
            (j )                   (j )            (j )
computes ~i         = E{ri |s1 , . . . , sN }, i = 1, . . . , N . Given the independence assumptions
             (j )                                                                                             (j )
about the i 's, the signal relevant to stock i is simply si . In addition, I assume the
manager conditions linearly on that signal, thereby computing the forecasts,
                                                   (j )       (j ) (j )
                                              ~ i = i si ,                       i = 1, . . . , N,                                        (9)

with
                                                                                       (j )
                                                          (j )            Cov{ri , si }
                                                          i      =                  (j )
                                                                                                   .                                     (10)
                                                                           Var{si }
                           (j )                                                                        (j )
Note that because si              is uncorrelated with ri - i and i                                           is uncorrelated with i ,
                                                                                 2
                                                            (j )                 ,i
                                                          i =                          2(j )
                                                                                               ,                                         (11)
                                                                          2
                                                                          ,i + 
     2                                                                        (j )
with ,i denoting the unconditional variance of i . The smaller is a manager's      , the
more she weights the signals she receives, and the greater is her resulting skill to identify the
                                           (j )
i 's accurately. Throughout I equate lower      to greater skill.

   The simple specification in equation (9), assumed for tractability, imposes linear condi-
tioning and a zero intercept. In general, neither property obtains formally here from the joint
                    (j )
distribution of si and the equilibrium i . As demonstrated later, however, both properties
can be close approximations in the context of the calibrated model. The number of assets,
                                                                                                                     (j )
N , is taken as large, such that the distributions of the vi 's and i 's across i correspond to
the continuous distributions characterizing the randomness in those quantities for a given i.
                                            (j )                                                                                 (j )
Distributions of the vi 's and i 's can be specified, for example, to give E{i |si } a Pearson
                             (j )                                    (j )
correlation of 0.998 with si across the individual percentiles of si and to give i a nearly
zero mean (2 basis points per annum).

   Given many (thousands) of managers, I assume that i in equation (8) is well approxi-
                                                                   (j )
mated by the weighted average of the si 's across managers, with the (j ) 's as weights, so
that,                                                                               
                                                                   M         (j )
                                                                i   (j ) = 0,
                                                   (1/M )          i                                                                     (12)
                                                          j =1  i
                                   (j )                                                                                       (j )
with i = (1/M ) M  j =1 i . Given the independence assumptions for the i 's, the earlier
                                               (1)          (M )
definition of i as E{ri |} requires i = E{ri |si , . . . , si }. The same independence as-
sumptions imply that, as M grows large, this conditional expectation of ri approaches a
                                     (j )                                                   M       2  2(j ) (j )    2
weighted average of the si 's across managers, (1/M )                                       j =1 ( / )si , with  denoting
                                                                                    M            -1
                     2(j )                                                                 2(j )
the harmonic mean of       , equal to (1/M )                                        j =1 1/         . The equivalent relation in


                                                                             8
                (j )
terms of the i 's is that their same weighted average is zero,
                                                    M          2
                                                                           (j )
                                       (1/M )                 2(j )
                                                                       i = 0.                      (13)
                                                    j =1      
From equations (8) through (11), equation (12) is equivalent to the condition
                                                                           
                                             M             2    2
                                                           ,i + 
                                    (1/M )                                   (j ) = 0,             (14)
                                                       2           2(j )    i
                                             j =1      ,i      +   
     2
with ,i + 2 denoting the harmonic mean of  2 +  2(j ) . If  2(j ) is identical across managers
                                          ,i               
(as in an some of the later calibrations), then of course equations (13) and (14) are equivalent.
         2(j )                                                                                        2
When           differs across managers, the difference in weightings depends on the size of ,i
                                          2(j )                              2(j )
in equilibrium relative to the typical          . In the later calibrations,       is typically at least
                                  2
an order of magnitude larger than ,i . I impose equation (12) for tractability in deriving
equilibrium prices, but it seems reasonable to assume that independent signal noise generally
averages out across the large number of managers, especially when the noisier signals receive
less weight, as they do in both equations (13) and (14).


2.5.     Managers' objective

Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) define the fund's value added as its AUM times its benchmark-
adjusted rate of return net of trading costs but before fees charged to investors. Denote that
                             (j )
return for manager j as rA , so that the manager's value added, her investment profit, is
therefore
                                                    (j )        (j )
                                               VA = rA W (j ) .                                    (15)
Let F (j ) denote fund j 's total fee revenue, paid by investors as a deduction from the invest-
                                                       (j )
ment profit, and define  (j ) = F (j ) /E{VA }. In the model of Berk and Green (2004), for
example, a fund's expected value added is equal to its fee revenue, because in equilibrium
the fund's expected benchmark-adjusted return net of both trading costs and fees is equal
to zero. This zero-net-alpha condition is equivalent to  (j ) = 1. A somewhat less restrictive
view is that managers see producing higher average value added as the path to higher fee
revenue, essentially viewing  (j ) as positive and relatively fixed but not necessarily equal to
1. Accordingly, I simply assume that managers seek the highest expected value added, with
the implicit motivation being maximizing fee revenue.

   Specifically, manager j 's objective is to choose the fund's active weights to maximize the
fund's expected value added, conditional on her signals and chosen weights. In perform-
ing this maximization, the manager takes the fund's current AUM, W (j ) , as given, so the

                                                               9
equivalent objective is
                                                                                                 N
                               (j )   (j )   (j )      (j )         (j )                              (j )
               max E rA |s1 , . . . , sN , 1 , . . . , N                   ,       subject to         i = 0.   (16)
             (j )   (j )
             1 ,...,N                                                                           i=1

The fund's AUM likely depends on its fee structure, with, say, a higher fixed fee rate simply
implying a lower AUM, other things equal. As will be shown, however, the fund's maximized
expected value added does not depend on W (j ) and thus not on the fee structure, so the
latter is not relevant to the general model. Later, in calibrating the model, I assume a fixed
proportional fee rate but do not impose a zero-net-alpha restriction that equates fee revenue
to expected value added.
                                                                            (j )
     With the manager assumed to maximize expected rA , the fund is essentially risk neutral
with respect to its benchmark-adjusted return. This property coincides, for example, with
that of the fund's investors in the Berk and Green (2004) model. Those investors do not
require expected compensation (net alpha) for bearing risk in the fund's benchmark-adjusted
return.


2.6.      Equilibrium conditions

                                                                                    (j )       (j )
An equilibrium occurs when each fund's active weights (1 , . . . , N ) satisfy the objective
in equation (16) and stock prices (p1 , . . . , pN ) satisfy the market-clearing conditions

                               hH,i + (1 - h)S,i = m,i ,                   i = 1, . . . , N,                   (17)

                      N
where m,i = pi /      j =1   pj is stock i's market weight, and S,i is the stock's weight in investors'
aggregate stock portfolio. The latter portfolio combines the aggregate active portfolio with
the index fund.



3.      Model implications

3.1.      Active weights

Proposition 1. The active weight of fund j in stock i is given by
                                                                   (j )
                                                    (j )       pi ~i
                                               i =                     .                                       (18)
                                                              2cW (j )


                                                              10
Note that active weights are inversely proportional to AUM, as W (j ) appears in the de-
nominator in equation (18). That is, other things equal, a smaller AUM simply implies
proportionately larger magnitudes for active weights, such that the dollar active positions
in each stock are unaffected. In the fixed-fee-rate, zero-net-alpha scenario discussed earlier,
recall that, holding skill constant, a higher fee rate implies a lower AUM. The lower AUM
then implies proportionately larger deviations from benchmark weights, by equation (18).
This implication is consistent with the empirical evidence of P´
                                                               astor, Stambaugh, and Taylor
(2020), who find that among active equity mutual funds, those with a higher fee rate, prox-
ied by the expense ratio, essentially tend to have portfolio weights that deviate more from
benchmark weights.


3.2.    Stock prices

Proposition 2. The equilibrium price of stock i is given by

                                      pi = p     pi - p
                                           ¯i + (^    ¯i ),                                  (19)

where the positive scalar   (0, 1) is the solution to
                                                                -1
                                                  µM
                                       = 1+                              ,                   (20)
                                                  2hc
with
                                                      M
                                        = (1/M )             (j ) ,                          (21)
                                                      j =1

in which                                              2
                                                      
                                       (j ) =                2(j )
                                                                     ,                       (22)
                                                2 +
                                                    
    2
and   = Var{i }, equal across stocks, is given by
                                   2
                                         2
                                     = E{i } - (E{i })2 ,                                    (23)

with
                                                  (vi - 1)
                                     i = -µ                  .                               (24)
                                                1 + (vi - 1)

                                                           (j )
   The model inputs consist of the cross-section of skill (     's), the distribution of noise-
trader demands (vi 's), and the scalar parameters M , h, c, and µ. Given , µ, and the
probability distribution of vi , the expectations in equation (23) can be computed numerically.
                                                        (j )
The resulting  , along with the cross-section of             's, gives the value of  via equations

                                                 11
(21) and (22). That value of , along with M , h, and c then implies  from equation (20).
These equations are solved numerically for , and in all later calibrations a unique positive
solution for  obtains over a wide range of starting values.


3.3.       Aggregate active weights and active share

The aggregate active weight in stock i is its AUM-weighted active weight across funds:
                             (j )
i = (1/M ) Mj =1 (W
                    (j )
                         /W )i , with W = (1/M ) M
                                                 j =1 W
                                                        (j )
                                                             .

Proposition 3. The aggregate active weight in stock i is given by

                                                pi - pi )
                                              µ(¯
                                        i =               .                                      (25)
                                               2cW

Aggregate active weights are inversely proportional to average fund AUM, with W appearing
in the denominator in equation (25). This relation mirrors the corresponding inverse relation
between AUM and active weights for an individual fund. Observe from equation (25) that a
                                                                                ¯i - pi , with an
stock's aggregate active weight also is proportional to the stock's mispricing, p
overpriced (underpriced) stock receiving a negative (positive) active weight. In other words,
active management in aggregate reduces mispricing.

   The cross-sectional dispersion in a portfolio's active weights can be summarized by active
share, a measure proposed by Cremers and Petajisto (2009). Using their definition, the active
                                                              N
share of the aggregate active portfolio equals AS = (1/2)     i=1   |i |. The following proposition
                                                                                         N
gives this measure when the number of stocks, N , is large, such that (1/N )             i=1   |i | =
E{|i |}.

Proposition 4. For N large, the aggregate active portfolio's active share is
                                          M µ
                                 AS =              E{|vi - 1|},                                  (26)
                                        4c (1 - h)

where  , active management's market share, i.e., the aggregate fraction of investors' stock-
market wealth that is actively managed, is given by
                                                M
                                                  W (j )
                                                j =1
                                        =                .                                       (27)
                                            (1 - h)N pm

   The inverse relation between AUM and the magnitudes of active weights noted above also
arises for aggregate active share in equation (26). That is, the larger is active management's

                                                12
market share,  , the lower is its active share, AS . For example, active management could
increase  simply by decreasing its fee rates. With no changes in managers' skill, noise-trader
demands, and the other basic parameters in Proposition 2, nothing other than  changes in
equation (26), and thus AS decreases.


3.4.    Expected value added

                                                                              (j )
The unconditional expectation of a manager's dollar value added, E{VA }, is a central
implication of the model. The following proposition characterizes this quantity, scaled by
the total dollar value of the stock market, N pm , simply to produce a unitless measure.
                                     (j )
Proposition 5. Define (j ) = E{VA }/(N pm ). Then
                                               2   2(j )
                                              ~  + 
                                  (j ) =                      2,                           (28)
                                                   2(j )
                                                     2
                                            4c 1 +  /

with
                          2       pi 2            (vi - 1)2
                         ~  =E       i = (µ)2 E              .                             (29)
                                  pm            1 + (vi - 1)
The expectations in equation (29) are identical across i (assets).

                 2
   The quantity ~  defined in equation (29) can be interpreted as the variance of the i 's
with respect to the value-weighted probability measure, pi /pm . Under this measure, the
                                2
variance is simply the expected i because the expected i is zero (the value-weighted
                                                              2                             2
average alpha is zero by construction). Both this variance,  ~  , and the regular variance,   ,
reflect expected magnitudes in equilibrium i 's. These related measures thus both summarize
equilibrium mispricing in the cross-section of stocks, with larger values interpreted as greater
overall mispricing. Observe that (j ) is increasing in both 2
                                                              and ~2
                                                                     , consistent with greater
mispricing allowing any manager to produce greater value added, whatever her skill.


3.5.    Skill and value added

Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) argue that managers with greater skill produce greater
                                 (j )
value added, and they propose E{VA } as capturing skill differences across managers. The
following proposition justifies doing so.
                                                       (j )                   (j )
Proposition 6. Within a given equilibrium, E{VA } is a decreasing function of      for
 2(j ) 2     2                                    (j )
 >  - 2~    . The latter inequality holds for all  if  > 0.5.

                                              13
   The above condition that  > 0.5 appears to be very weak. In all of the quantitative
analyses presented later, including those departing substantially from a setting capturing
numerous empirical features of active management and asset returns,  is much closer to 0
than to 1. Thus, within settings that seem reasonable to entertain, expected value added is
greater for the managers who more accurately identify i 's, and this statement applies for
all levels of such skill. Also important to note, however, is that this statement about skill's
relation to value added applies within a given equilibrium, i.e., for a given distribution of
(j )                            (j )
     's across managers. If the      's of some or all managers change, then so does the amount
                                             2      2
of equilibrium price correction reflected by   and ~  in equation (28).


3.6.      Correlations between weights and returns

The following proposition links the cross-section of managers' skills to the correlation between
each manager's active weights and future benchmark-adjusted returns.
                                                                     (j )
Proposition 7. The correlation across stocks between ri and i               is a decreasing function
   (j )
of      within the cross-section of managers.


   When combined with Proposition 6, the above proposition provides an implication that
can be investigated empirically. That is, funds whose active weights better predict benchmark-
adjusted returns should also exhibit greater average value added. This implication can be
investigated using holdings of active mutual funds, while recognizing some inherent limita-
tions. A reasonable concession to the degree of abstraction in the simple model would be to
test this implication within style sectors (e.g., separately for large-cap funds and small-cap
funds). Also, funds' holdings are reported quarterly, obscuring effects of intra-quarter port-
folio choices that could be nontrivial, given the evidence of Kazperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng
(2008).

   A number of previous studies, including Grinblatt and Titman (1993), Daniel, Grinblatt,
Titman, and Wermers (1997), and Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014),
estimate a fund's stock-selection skill as essentially a covariance between weights and future
returns. For example, Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014) measure stock-
                   N    (j )
picking skill as   j =1 i ri , which   is proportional to the covariance across stocks between ri
      (j )         N    (j )
and i (recall      j =1 i = 0).

                                                                                                 (j )
  An important distinction to be drawn, however, is that the covariance between ri and i
                                                             (j )
must be divided by the cross-sectional standard deviation of i to compute the correlation in

                                                 14
Proposition 7. Controlling for this cross-sectional dispersion in a fund's active stock weights
is necessary to capture differences in skill across funds. Otherwise, what one identifies as
skill differences using just the above covariance is potentially contaminated by differences
across funds in fee rates and their accompanying AUMs that are unrelated to skill. Recall
from the discussion of Proposition 1 that, holding constant the manager's return predictions,
which embody any skill, a higher fee rate and thus lower AUM implies greater magnitudes
                                                    (j )
(and thus a higher standard deviation) of the i 's.


3.7.    Trading costs and net alpha

        (j )                                                                      N      (j )
With Ci given in equation (4), fund j 's total dollar trading cost is C (j ) =    i=1   Ci . This
cost has a simple relation to the fund's value added:

Proposition 8.
                                                            (j )
                                     E C (j ) = E VA                                             (30)


   The above result can reinterpreted in terms of the fund's net return to investors. Recall
that F (j ) denotes the fund's total fee revenue, and define the corresponding proportional fee
                                                                                                (j )
rate f (j ) = F (j ) /W (j ) . Also recall that the fund's investment return before fees is rA =
 (j )
VA /W (j ) , so the expected net benchmark-adjusted return for an investor in the fund is
 (j )          (j )
net = E rA - f (j ) . Combining these relations with equation (30) gives the following
implication about the fund's net alpha.

Corollary 1.
                                     (j )
                                            E C (j )
                                    net =                  - f (j )                              (31)
                                              W (j )

Empirical estimates of equity mutual funds' average net alphas are generally small in mag-
nitude (as discussed later), and the model of Berk and Green (2004) predicts zero net alpha
                     (j )
in equilibrium. If net  0, then equation (31) implies that f (j ) should be close to the
fund's trading costs divided by AUM. This implication seems consistent with the evidence of
Edelen, Evans, and Kadlec (2013), for example, who observe that estimated trading costs of
equity mutual funds as a fraction of AUM are similar in magnitude to funds' expense ratios.

    Suppose that a fund charges a fixed proportional fee rate, f (j ) , and that its expected
value added equals fee revenue, as in the zero-net-alpha setting of Berk and Green (2004), so
                      (j )
f (j ) W (j ) = E{VA }. Then charging a higher fee rate simply implies a proportionately lower


                                               15
AUM, because expected value added, which is determined by skill, does not change. In other
words, holding skill constant, higher-fee funds should be smaller. P´
                                                                    astor, Stambaugh, and
Taylor (2020) observe empirically a strong negative cross-sectional correlation between fund
size and expense ratio, and they predict such a result as long as differences in skill are not
large.

                                                            M
   Recall that W is the average fund AUM,                   j =1   W (j ) /M , and let C denote the aver-
age expected trading cost, M              (j )
                                  j =1 E{C }/M . The AUM-weighted average across funds of
E{C (j ) /W (j ) } then equals C/W . Also, from equation (31), net = C/W - f , where net and f
                                           (j )
denote the AUM-weighted averages of net and f (j ) . Recall as well that M W =  (1 - h)N pm ,
                       (j )
and that (j ) = E{VA }/(N pm ). Combining these relations with equation (30) gives the
following corollary.

Corollary 2.
                                                        M
                                                   C        (j )
                                     net + f =       = j =1      .                                     (32)
                                                   W    (1 - h)

Equation (32) proves useful in the subsequent quantitative analysis. In particular, recall
                               (j )
from Proposition 5 that if the      's are equal across managers, then so are the (j ) 's in the
numerator of the right-most expression above.


3.8.       Decreasing returns to scale

               (j )           (j )                       (j )
Note that E{rA } = E{VA }/W (j ) . Also, E{VA } in equilibrium does not depend on the
fund's AUM. That is, W (j ) does not enter (j ) in equation (28). The following corollary then
follows.
                                            (j )
Corollary 3. For a given fund j , E{rA } is decreasing in W (j ) , as the product of those
quantities is a constant (expected value added).


Each individual fund therefore faces decreasing returns to scale (DRS): the fund's expected
(benchmark-adjusted) investment profit per dollar of AUM is decreasing in total AUM.
Recent studies such as Zhu (2018), using fund returns, and P´ astor, Stambaugh, and Taylor
(2020), using fund characteristics, find evidence of fund-level DRS. The Berk and Green
(2004) model assumes each fund faces DRS. The model here has DRS as an implication. If
the fund's fee revenue equals its expected value added, as in Berk and Green (2004), then if
                                                                                                (j )
the fund raises its AUM by lowering its fee rate, the above corollary implies its E{rA } falls
accordingly.

                                                    16
    P´
     astor and Stambaugh (2012) assume a fund has decreasing returns with respect to the
scale of its competition, essentially the entire active management industry. The rationale is
that more money being deployed actively in aggregate has greater equilibrium price impacts,
thereby shrinking alphas and lowering any fund's investment profit. In the current model,
such equilibrium pricing effects on each fund's profits occur endogenously.



4.       Quantitative analysis

This section explores the model's implications about the effects of skill on expected value
added. I specify the model quantitatively in a setting that captures numerous observed
properties of both the active management industry and asset returns. Against this backdrop,
I analyze the effects on managers' value added when the skill of some managers shifts relative
to a benchmark case in which all have equal skill.


4.1.       Model inputs and the benchmark setting

Some of the model's inputs have direct empirical analogs. For example, I set µ equal to 1.065,
corresponding to one plus the average U.S. stock-market return over recent decades (though
results are not sensitive to this parameter). Some other quantities equal approximately their
mid-sample values from Stambaugh (2014). Specifically, I set the fraction of stock market
wealth owned by noise traders, h, to 0.30; I set active management's market share,  , equal
to 0.8; and I set the number of active managers, M , to 2200. The average fee rate, f , is
set to 0.012, equal to the average active equity fund's expense ratio computed by P´
                                                                                   astor,
Stambaugh, and Taylor (2020) but also close to the quantity's mid-sample trend point of
0.011 from Stambaugh (2014). The remaining model inputs are c,  , and the distribution
of vi . Empirical analogs for these three inputs are more elusive, and I do not attempt a
correspondence for each one individually. Instead, as explained below, I jointly specify them
to deliver a seemingly reasonable set of additional empirical implications.

      I first assume vi (> 0) obeys a Weibull distribution, which is characterized by two param-
eters that determine its scale and shape.4 Because E{vi } = 1 by assumption, there is one
free parameter, k , that determines the distribution's shape. Figure 1 displays densities under
alternative values of k . As k increases, the density concentrates around vi = 1, corresponding
to relatively modest deviations of p
                                   ^i from p
                                           ¯i in equation (6). As k decreases, the density's
  4
      For a discussion of the Weibull distribution, see Johnson and Kotz (1970, chapter 20).

                                                      17
mass moves toward zero and skewness increases. One can view the latter case as noise
traders collectively putting low weights on many stocks and large weights on a relative few.
As Stambaugh (2014) discusses, numerous empirical studies indicate that direct holdings of
individuals are quite undiversified and exhibit significant commonality across individuals.5
Commonality in holdings limits the extent to which the low diversification by individuals
washes out when their holdings aggregate. To the extent that noise trading reflects direct
holdings by individuals, the evidence of such commonality is consistent with low values of k .

       I then specify k , c, and  to have the model deliver seemingly reasonable values for a
rather diverse set of quantities:

   1. active management's active share

   2. active management's trading cost as a fraction of AUM

   3. active management's net alpha

   4. the dispersion in individual stocks' (gross) alphas

The first three are obtained using equations (26) and (32), while the fourth uses the distri-
bution of vi combined with i in equation (24). For ease of discussion and interpretation, k ,
c, and  are constrained to round values having just one significant digit.

       Table 1 summarizes the parameter values and implied quantities. Panel A lists the values
given earlier and those specified for c, k , and  . The choice of c = 2 means, for example, that
trading 10 basis points of a stock's outstanding shares incurs a round-trip cost of 20 basis
points, which seems at least plausible given the empirical analysis of institutional trading
costs by Keim and Madhavan (1997). For example, that study's regression estimates imply
the same round-trip cost for that trade size when a value-oriented manager trades the stock
of an NYSE-listed company whose stock has a $20 share price and a $1.5 billion market
capitalization.6 The input of k = 0.6 is consistent with the previously discussed scenario
of relatively low aggregate diversification of noise traders, as illustrated in Figure 1. The
input of  = 0.06 means each active manager receives rather imprecise signals about stocks'
annual alphas.
   5
     Studies presenting evidence of poor diversification include Blume, Crockett, and Friend (1974), Lease,
Lewellen, and Schlarbaum (1974), Blume and Friend (1975), Kelly (1995), Polkovnichenko (2005), and
Goetzmann and Kumar (2008). Evidence of significant commonality in individuals' stock holdings is reported
by Feng and Seasholes (2004), Dorn, Huberman, and Sengmueller (2008), Barber and Odean (2008), and
Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2009).
   6
     Their regression, whose coefficient estimates are reported in their Table 5, gives the expected one-way
trading cost as 10 basis points. Also, a trade representing 10 basis points of a firm's shares is close in size to
the 12 basis points used by Keim and Madhavan (1997) as a typical case.

                                                       18
    The inputs in Panel A of Table 1 imply additional properties of the benchmark scenario,
listed in Panel B. The first of these is the active share of the aggregate active portfolio (AS ),
which has an implied value of 0.28. This value closely matches the mid-sample trend value
from Stambaugh (2014) for the active share of the aggregate portfolio of active equity mutual
funds.7

    The second quantity in Panel B is the ratio of active management's expected trading
                                       ¯
cost to its AUM, i.e., the value of E C/W    in equation (32). That quantity's implied value
is fairly consistent with the evidence of Edelen, Evans, and Kadlec (2013). Those authors
report, for example, that among large equity mutual funds, the average cost per dollar traded
is 0.0098, and the average annual turnover is 0.77 of AUM.8 The product of those values
equals 0.0075, comparable in magnitude to the implied value of 0.0066 in Panel B.

       The next implied quantity in Panel B is the net alpha earned by investors in active
management, i.e., the value of net in equation (32). Beginning with the seminal study of
Jensen (1968), numerous academic studies over the subsequent five decades find negative
average net alphas on active equity mutual funds. As summarized by Elton and Gruber
(2013), most studies find net alphas that are negative but relatively small, around 0.01 or
less in magnitude on an annualized basis. The implied net alpha in Panel B of -0.0054 is
well within that range.

       Panel B also summarizes the implied dispersion in individual stocks' alphas. Whether
this dispersion seems reasonable when compared to, say, returns reported in the anomalies
literature, probably depends on how one views the latter, especially with regard to pre- and
post-publication evidence. The model's implied difference between average annual alphas
in the top and bottom quintiles is 0.031, which is virtually identical to the value of 0.032
reported by McLean and Pontiff (2016) for the average return spread between the top and
bottom quintiles when sorting stocks on 97 anomaly variables subsequent to their corre-
sponding publication dates.9 As compared to that post-publication average, those authors
also find that the pre-publication average is about twice as high, but at least part of that
higher average could reflect data mining, as the authors discuss. Observe also in Panel B that
the average alpha for the bottom decile, -0.022, is more than twice the magnitude of the
average for the top decile, 0.009. This asymmetry is consistent with alphas reported in the
   7
     As Stambaugh acknowledges, these active-share data were supplied courtesy of Martijn Cremers.
   8
     Reported fund turnover, following SEC guidelines, reflects the lesser of a fund's buy volume and sell
volume, thereby largely excluding trading activity driven by fund flows. This treatment is consistent with
the current model's excluding the costs of flow-driven trading.
   9
     That study's Table 1 reports an average post-publication monthly difference of 0.00264, and multiplying
by 12 gives 0.032.


                                                    19
anomalies literature. For example, based on a measure combining 11 prominent anomalies,
Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015) find that the negative average benchmark-adjusted re-
turn among bottom-quintile stocks is more than twice the magnitude of the positive average
return for top-quintile stocks.

   An additional implication reported in Panel B is the correlation between the i 's and
                                                           (j )
an individual active manager's alpha forecasts, i.e., the i 's from equation (9). This cor-
relation's implied value, equal to 0.24, does not necessarily have an empirical counterpart.
It simply provides another measure of an individual manager's imperfect ability to identify
alphas, which reflect all managers' collective signals.


4.2.     Skill shifts and value added

The quantities listed in Table 1 constitute a broad set of characteristics of the active man-
agement industry and asset returns. Within this empirically relevant setting, I explore the
effect on a managers' expected value added when some fraction of managers shift their skill.
                                                                              (j )
Specifically, I compare an equal-skill equilibrium in which all managers have      =  to
                                                           (j )   
other equilibria in which a fraction  of managers have          =   while the remaining man-
             (j )
agers have        =  . The latter value is held constant at 0.06 along with the model's other
inputs in Panel A of Table 1.


4.2.1.   Managers whose skill shifts

                                                                      (j )
Figure 2 displays implications for a manager whose skill shifts, with      moving from  to
 
  . For a given fraction,  , of managers whose skill shifts in that manner, each curve traces
                                          
the equilibria across different values of  on the horizontal axis. The vertical axis plots the
ratio of the manager's (expected) value added under that equilibrium to the manager's value
                                                                   (j )
added under the equal-skill equilibrium in which all managers have      =  . All curves
                   
therefore cross at  =  .

   If a manager's skill shifts, what is the impact on her value added? As Figure 2 reveals,
the answer depends on  , the fraction of managers whose skill shifts along with hers. When
 equals 1.00 or 0.90, the manager's value added shifts in the opposite direction as her skill.
                                                    
For example, an increase in skill, corresponding to  <  , is accompanied by a decrease
in value added. The reason is as discussed at the outset: First, the increased skill for some
managers produces greater price correction in equilibrium and thus smaller magnitudes of

                                              20
stocks' alphas. That effect is greater, the larger is  . When  is sufficiently high, the smaller
alpha magnitudes outweigh the opposing effect of the manager's increased skill to identify
alphas more precisely. As a result, the manager earns lower investment profits. Similarly,
a decrease in skill to identify alphas is more than offset by the accompanying lower price
correction and larger alpha magnitudes, resulting in higher profits.

   The fewer are the managers whose skill shifts, the less that shift impacts prices. With
less price impact, and thus smaller effects on stocks' alphas, a manager's increased skill
to identify alphas outweighs the opposing effect of smaller alpha magnitudes. As Figure 2
shows, when  equals 0.25 and 0.50, the manager's value added shifts in the same direction
                                                 
as her skill. For example, an increase in skill ( <  ) is accompanied by an increase in
                                             
value added. That is the case, anyway, for     within a sufficiently confined neighborhood of
                                                                                       
 . As Figure 2 also shows, for sufficiently large increases in skill (sufficiently low  ), that
greater skill can instead produce lower value added, as illustrated when  = 0.5. The reason
is essentially the same as discussed earlier for the larger  values. Even when a lower fraction
of managers become more skilled, if that increase in skill is large enough, the accompanying
increased price correction and lower alpha magnitudes outweigh the skill to identify alphas
more precisely.

   The middle case in Figure 2, with  = 0.75, illustrates an interesting setting in which
managers whose skill shifts significantly away from the equal-skill benchmark in either direc-
tion produce lower value added. When their skill increases, the resulting smaller magnitudes
of alphas outweigh these managers' better identification of alphas. When these managers'
skill decreases, their worse identification of alphas outweighs the resulting larger alpha mag-
nitudes.

   In a seemingly relevant quantitative setting, the above results illustrate how the effect of
a shift in a manager's skill on her value added depends critically on the fraction of managers
whose skill shifts along with hers. When that fraction is low, higher skill results in higher
value added. When that fraction is large, the opposite effect occurs. For example, suppose a
                                    (j )
manager's skill increases, with her      dropping by a third, from 0.06 to 0.04. If that same
increase in skill occurs for just 25% of the other managers, then her value added, and that of
those managers, increases by over one-half (the y-axis value in Figure 2 is 1.53). If instead
that same skill increase occurs for all managers, then the value added of each one drops by
over one-fifth (the y-axis value in Figure 2 is 0.78).




                                              21
4.2.2.   Managers whose skill remains constant


Figure 3 parallels Figure 2, except that the vertical axis now reflects the relative shift in
                                                     (j )                  (j )
value added for a manager whose skill remains at          =  while the          of the other
                   
managers shifts to  . Recall that managers in the latter category constitute the fraction 
of all managers. For the managers whose skill does not shift, there is no effect opposing the
pricing effect of the other managers' skill shift. That shift can work in only one direction
from the perspective of the no-shift managers. That is, when the other managers become
more skilled, there is more price correction, shrinking the magnitudes of alphas. Those
smaller alphas are identified no more precisely than before by the no-change managers, so
their profits suffer. Similarly, if the other managers instead shift to lower skill, the resulting
larger alpha magnitudes improve the profits of the no-change managers. Therefore all of the
curves in Figure 3 slope upward, with a larger  simply producing a higher slope because
the effect on price correction is greater when the skill increase applies to more managers.


4.2.3.   All managers: the active management industry


If some managers become more skilled, their value added can increase, as shown in Figure
2. The value added of the remaining managers decreases, as shown in Figure 3. What is the
combined effect on expected value added of the active management industry? For the same 
values in those figures, Figure 4 plots the total value added, summed over all managers, again
divided by the same quantity in the equal-skill benchmark equilibrium. All of the curves
slope upward, meaning that an increase in skill by the fraction  of managers results in less
total value added for the active management industry. This result occurs even for the 
values of 0.25 and 0.50, under which greater value added is produced by the managers whose
skill increases (Figure 2). The increase in value added for those managers is more than offset
by the drop in value added of the remaining managers due to the greater price correction
(Figure 3). When the industry becomes more skilled, its total value added decreases.


4.3.     Conditional expectations given signals

Equation (9) assumes that the manager's conditional expectation of a stock's benchmark-
                                               (j )
adjusted return is proportional to the signal si . As discussed earlier, this linear conditioning
with a zero intercept is a simplification, not a formal implication. The extent to which such
                                                                     (j )
an assumption is appropriate depends on the joint distribution of si and the equilibrium i .


                                               22
The model, as presented in the previous section, does not make a distributional assumption
      (j )                                                           (j )
about i , which is introduced in equation (8) as the deviation of si from i . Nor does
the model assume a distribution for vi , which is introduced in equation (6) and determines
the equilibrium i in equation (24). The quantitative specification in this section specifies
                                            (j )                                 (j )
a distribution for vi but not for i . Only the standard deviation of the latter,      , is
necessary for the implications presented.

    Given the Weibull distribution for vi assumed for this section's quantitative analysis,
                                                           (j )
is there at least an example of a sensible distribution of i for which equation (9) holds
as a reasonable approximation? It seems so, even when not looking beyond the Weibull
                                                            (j )
family. Specifically, suppose the quantity 1 + i                   has a Weibull distribution with a mean
                                 (j )                          (j )
of 1 (because the mean of        i
                           is 0) and a standard deviation of        . The latter is set to
 = 0.06 in the benchmark scenario above, and this value, along with the mean, implies
                                                                                      (j )
a value of k for the Weibull equal to 20.7. Thus, the density for 1 + i                      is essentially that
shown for k = 20 in Figure 1. As displayed there, that density is unimodal and moderately
left-skewed (skewness = -0.88). I take 10 million draws of vi from its assumed Weibull
distribution, and for each draw I compute the corresponding value of i using equation (24)
and the benchmark equilibrium value of . For each such draw of i , I take a corresponding
                               (j )
independent draw of 1 + i             from its Weibull distribution, subtract 1, and add the result to
                  (j )                                                                              (j )
i to obtain      si ,
                 following equation (8). I then separate the 10 million draws of si into 100
bins defined by their percentiles. Within each bin, I compute the averages of the 100,000
 (j )
si 's and their corresponding i 's.
                                                    (j )
        Figure 5 plots the percentile average of si on the horizontal axis versus the corresponding
                                                                   (j )        (j )
average of i on the vertical axis. Note that E{i |si } = E{ri |si }, given that ri - i has
zero expectation conditional on the union all managers' signals, by the definition of i . Also
plotted is the zero-intercept line corresponding to equation (9). The actual averages from the
simulation display only slight concavity versus the linear relation. As reported earlier, the
Pearson correlation is 0.998, and the overall average i is just 2 basis points. The assumption
                                                                                                           (j )
in equation (9) appears reasonable, at least given the ease in finding a distribution of i for
                                                                                         (j )
which that equation seemingly provides a good approximation to E{ri |si }. Moreover, the
                                                    (j )
moderate negative skewness in that distribution for i also seems plausible, given that the
true alphas in the benchmark quantitative setting are also negatively skewed, as discussed
earlier. That is, suppose a fund's stock analysts know that the most severe cases of mispricing
are likelier to occur in the direction of overpricing, rather than underpricing. Then it seems
                                                                    (j )
reasonable that those analysts' biggest misses (largest absolute i 's) will be misidentifying
some stocks as being among those severely overpriced cases.

                                                       23
4.4.    Robustness

The model's implications in less realistic quantitative settings are presumably less interesting.
Nevertheless, it appears the basic implications about skill's roles are quite robust across
alternative specifications. As discussed earlier, the model's inputs for which direct empirical
counterparts seem most elusive are the last three in Panel A of Table 1: c, k , and  . For
each of these three parameters, I consider two values substantially different from that in
Table 1, one lower and one higher, while keeping the other two parameters at their original
values. This experiment provides six alternative settings that replace the original benchmark
setting. The alternative values of c are 0.01 and 10, versus the original value of 2.0 in Table
1. Instead of the original k = 0.6, the alternative k values are 0.2 and 20, which bound
the cases displayed in Figure 1. The alternative values of  are 0.01 and 0.20, versus the
original value of 0.06.

  For each of the six alternative settings, I repeat the previous analyses of skill shifts,
                                                (j )           
wherein a fraction  of managers has a shift in       from  to   . Figure 6 displays results
paralleling those in Figure 2, while Figure 7 parallels Figure 4. (Given these results, those
paralleling Figure 3 seem obvious and unnecessary to display.) While the alternative settings
generally imply rather different and less realistic values for the quantities in Panel B of Table
1, the results in Figures 6 and 7 tell a similar story to the original analyses. That is, if a
skill shift applies to enough managers, each of those managers produces lower value added.

  Can becoming more skilled produce higher value added even when all managers become
more skilled? In theory, yes, though such a case appears to require substantial departures
from the benchmarks in Table 1. For example, Figure 8 shows results for a case with noise-
trader demands more highly skewed than in that benchmark setting and with much costlier
trading than previously entertained. Specifically, k equals 0.2, its lowest value in Figures 6
and 7, and c equals 40, which is four times its highest value in those figures. The value of
 is again 0.06, as in the benchmark setting. For this case, Panel A of Figure 8 displays
                                                          
results for the managers whose skill shifts from from  to  , paralleling Figures 2 and 6;
Panel B displays the aggregate results for all managers, paralleling Figures 4 and 7. In both
                                                                 
panels of Figure 8, observe that all curves slope downward at      =  , even for  = 1. This
alternative case, however, has some extreme characteristics. Consider the equal-skill setting,
for example. With such a high trading-cost parameter, c, the implied ratio of funds' trading
costs to AUM is 0.089, more than 13 times the corresponding value of 0.0066 in Panel B
of Table 1 that is close to the empirical counterpart. Nevertheless, with the highly skewed
noise-trader demands (low k ), stocks' equilibrium alphas are extreme enough for managers to

                                               24
produce high value added despite high trading costs. For example, with active management's
80% market share and 1.2% fee rate, as assumed in Table 1, active management's implied
annual net alpha is 7.4%, in sharp contrast to the modest negative empirical estimates. With
its high value added in this case, active management could lower its net alpha to zero, as
in Berk and Green (2004), by charging a much higher 8.6% fee rate while maintaining an
80% market share, or by expanding to a much higher 573% market share while maintaining
a 1.2% fee rate, or by effecting some combination of those extremes. Such scenarios seem
quite counterfactual for the overall active management industry.



5.      Relation to previous studies

                        2(j )
A manager with a higher       assesses alphas less accurately. The opposing effects in equi-
librium of this higher variance have analogs in the model of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980),
in which there are opposing effects of higher variance of the signal about the risky asset's
payoff. On one hand, higher signal variance in their model reduces the benefit of observing
the signal, analogous in the current model to a manager's profits being reduced by identify-
ing stocks' alphas less accurately. At the same time, higher signal variance in their model
increases the benefit of observing the signal, because less information is reflected in the risky
asset's equilibrium price. The latter effect is analogous in the current model to all managers'
profits benefiting from stocks' larger alphas due to less price correction. In their model,
the net benefit of observing the signal can either rise or fall with its variance, somewhat
                                                                                   
analogously to how the effects on a manager's value added of shifting from  to       can in
principle go in either direction. Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) do not model delegated asset
management, but G^
                 arleanu and Pedersen (2018) do so in a model building on the Grossman-
Stiglitz framework. G^
                     arleanu and Pedersen show in their model that higher variance of the
signal about the risky asset's payoff has an ambiguous effect on aggregate fee revenue for ac-
tive management. The latter result relates to the analysis in Figure 4, which asks how value
added (and thus presumably fee revenue) for the active management industry is affected by
higher signal variance for some or all managers.

     The current study differs from G^
                                     arleanu and Pedersen (2018) in a number of respects.
First, I include a quantitative analysis that allows additional insights into the directions of
effects that would be more ambiguous if analyzed only qualitatively. Moreover, this analysis
examines the effects of skill shifts on not only the value added of the overall industry but
also on that of the managers for whom skill shifts and on that for whom it does not.


                                               25
   Second, I assume trading is costly. Empirical evidence indicates trading costs are sub-
stantial. As discussed earlier, Edelen, Evans, and Kadlec (2013) estimate that mutual funds'
proportional trading costs are roughly comparable to their expense ratios (which support
management fees). As Davila and Parlatore (2020) show, depending on the specifics of the
setting, price correction can be significantly affected by trading costs in models having both
noise traders and information traders. The key friction in the model of G^   arleanu and Ped-
ersen (2018), which has costless trading of the risky asset, is the costs investors incur in
searching for skilled managers. Manager search can be extensive for institutional investors,
as those authors detail. For retail mutual fund investors, the typical search seems often
less extensive, given the strong response of fund flows to readily accessible information such
as Morningstar ratings (Del Guercio and Tkac (2008)) and Wall Street Journal "Category
King" designations (Kaniel and Parham (2017)), though mutual funds do spend nontrivially
on marketing (Roussanov, Ruan, and Wei (2020)). In any case, the two models differ with
respect to the fundamental friction.10 With that friction being a fund investor's search cost,
rather than a fund's convex trading costs, the G^
                                                arleanu-Pedersen model also does not imply
fund-level decreasing returns to scale, unlike the current model. As noted earlier, empirical
evidence supports decreasing returns to scale.

       Third, the current model contains many risky assets, instead of one. This feature enables
numerous empirical implications that require a cross-section of assets, as discussed earlier.
Also, with the cross-section of assets, managers add value by stock selection (choosing weight-
ings across assets) rather than by market timing (trading an economy's single risky asset).
As noted by Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014), for example, numerous
empirical studies find evidence of successful stock selection among investment managers,
while evidence of successful market timing is more elusive, though those authors conclude it
does occur during recessions.

       Stambaugh (2014) also conducts a quantitative calibration for a multi-stock general equi-
librium model of the active management industry. That model shares similar specifications
of trading costs and noise-trader demands as the current model, but it does not address
                                              (j )
effects of skill. Rather, it essentially sets      = 0 for all managers.
  10
    The G^ arleanu-Pedersen model also has an information acquisition cost that is paid once by a manager
on behalf of all her investors. Thus, unlike the search cost that each searching investor bears separately, that
information cost becomes unimportant with many investors relative to managers, as the authors explain.




                                                      26
6.      Conclusions

A fund's expected investment profit depends on individual assets' alphas and the skill with
which the fund manager identifies those alphas. When some managers become more skilled,
prices get corrected more, shrinking assets' alphas. This effect of greater skill impacts all
managers, and it can result in lower expected profit even for the managers whose skill in-
creases, when there are enough of the latter. Even when there are not, and those managers
earn higher expected profit, their increased skill can nevertheless result in lower total ex-
pected profit for the active management industry. These general equilibrium effects are
demonstrated with an empirically relevant specification of the model that accommodates
numerous observed characteristics of the active management industry as well as asset re-
turns. Within a given equilibrium and thus a given cross-section of managers, those with
greater skill have higher expected investment profit (value added).

   In addition to providing the above insights, the model yields a number of empirical
implications. First, funds face decreasing returns to scale with respect to their AUM. In
addition, funds with higher fee rates are smaller, other things equal, and those funds have
portfolio weights that deviate more from benchmark weights. Also, a fund's total trading cost
equals its average investment profit, which in turn is essentially its fee revenue if investors
earn approximately zero net alpha. As discussed, all of these implications are supported by
existing evidence. An empirical implication for future investigation is that funds with higher
average total investment profit are those whose active weights have a higher cross-asset
correlation with future returns.

     Suppose that the active management industry has become more skilled over time, as
suggested by the findings of P´  astor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015). They estimate a proxy
for skill (different from that implied here) and observe that its distribution across managers
trends upward over the past three decades. In other words, that study's evidence suggests
the active management industry has become more skilled. The authors suggest education
and technology, for example, could be part of the story. One might even construe the recent
trend toward quantitatively managed "smart-beta" products as a self-proclaimed increase in
the industry's skill (or at least its "smartness"). The results here show that an increase in
overall skill can imply lower expected investment profits and thus lower fee revenue if the
former are what must largely support the latter. Fee revenue can decline through a loss of
AUM, a drop in fee rates, or both. Recent decades have seen active management lose AUM
market share to passive-index competition while the typical fee rate for active management
also declined. In the case of equity mutual funds, for example, over the period from 2000

                                              27
to 2018, active management lost 20% in market share while also reducing its fee rate by 30
basis points.11

    If greater skill spells less revenue, an upward trend in skill represents a potential challenge
for the active management industry in addition to that discussed by Stambaugh (2014),
who analyzes the effect of a downward trend in direct equity ownership by individuals, a
potential source of noise trading. That is, if not only the presence of noise traders declines,
but the mispricing they induce is more skillfully identified, then active management can
face a doubly strong headwind in maintaining its large presence in the money management
industry. Of course an industry of competing active managers cannot decide to calm that
headwind by becoming less skilled. Applying more skill is in each manager's individual
interest, because more-skilled managers make more than less-skilled managers, as implied
by the model presented here.

   A negative effect of skill on industry scale (revenue) has at least an imperfect analogy to
any industry that gets more efficient at producing a good or service for which the capacity
to consume is relatively constrained. The more efficient the industry becomes in exploiting
its productive resources, the less of those resources it needs to employ. A notable example
comes from agriculture, where efficiency gains play a big role in that sector's employing
a much smaller share of the U.S. labor force than it once did (e.g., Dimitri, Effland, and
Conklin (2005)). The capacity for consuming the active management industry's output is
constrained in the sense that the industry can go no further than to correct most mispricing.
Being more skilled in identifying mispriced assets can enable the industry to accomplish that
job with less resources.

   While active managers can earn less by becoming better at what they do, due to increased
price correction that shrinks stocks' alphas, the greater price correction can have societal
benefits. For example, van Binsbergen and Opp (2019) analyze how alphas represent pricing
frictions that distort real investment and create efficiency losses. Having prices more accu-
rately reflect underlying fundamentals can allow more efficient allocations of the economy's
resources.




  11
     Of total equity mutual fund assets, the fraction under active management went from 91% to 71%, while
the asset-weighted average expense ratio of active equity funds went from 1.06% to 0.76%. (Investment
Company Institute (2019)).


                                                   28
                                                         Appendix

   Proof of Proposition 1: Define the N -element vectors r, ~ (j ) , (j ) and , whose i-th
                         (j )    (j )
elements equal ri , ~i          i , and 1, respectively. Also define the N × N diagonal matrix
                                                                                     (j )                                (j )
P whose i-th diagonal element equals pi . Recall that di                                    in equation (4) equals Di /pi .
Substituting into equation (3) and summing over i gives the fund's total trading cost as
                                    N                N
                                          (j )                  (j )    (j )            2
                     C (j ) =            Ci      =         cdi Di = c(W (j ) ) (j ) P -1 (j ) .                            (A1)
                                   i=1               i=1

The fund's benchmark-adjusted return net of trading costs therefore equals
                         (j )
                     rA = (j ) r - C (j ) /W (j ) = (j ) r - cW (j ) (j ) P -1 (j ) ,                                      (A2)

and the manager's objective in equation (16) can be expressed as

                 max (j ) ~ (j ) - cW (j ) (j ) P -1 (j )                       subject to (j )  = 0.                      (A3)
                  (j )

The corresponding Lagrangian is

                                L = (j ) ~ (j ) - cW (j ) (j ) P -1 (j ) -  ( (j ) ).                                      (A4)

Differentiating with respect to (j ) and solving the first-order condition gives
                                                         1
                                          (j ) =                P ~ (j ) -  .                                              (A5)
                                                       2cW (j )
Because the value-weighted average of the ri 's is zero by construction,  P r =  P ~ (j ) = 0,
so premultiplying both sides of equation (A5) by  and applying  (j ) = 0 implies  = 0.
Therefore
                                            1
                                   (j ) =          P~ (j ) ,                      (A6)
                                          2cW (j )
giving equation (18).

   Proof of Proposition 2: I conjecture that pi takes the form in equation (19), with 
constant across i, and then I verify that this form is consistent with equilibrium. Combining
equations (1), (6), and (19) implies that i is given by equation (24). Because vi is assumed to
                                                  2
be distributed identically across i, the value of ,i in equation (11) is equal to the same value
           2                                             (j )
for all i,   in equation (23), and thus i is equal to (j ) , given in equation (22). Recall that
                                                                       M       (j )     (j )                      M
the aggregate active weight i equals (1/M )                            j =1 (W      /W )i ,    with W = (1/M )    j =1   W (j ) .




                                                                       29
Equations (8), (9), (12), and (18) then imply
                                         M
                                                                 1
                         i = (1/M )          (W (j ) /W )               pi ~ (j )
                                         j =1                  2cW (j )
                                                            
                                         M
                                 1             (j )
                             =       pi  (j ) si 
                               2cM W    j =1
                                                                       
                                                        M
                                          1                 (j ) (j ) 
                             =     pi i +                       i
                               2cW        M             j =1 
                                
                             =     pi i
                               2cW
                                µ
                             =      pi - pi ).
                                   (¯                                                             (A7)
                               2cW
The stock-market wealth of investors is (1 - h)N pm , of which M W is invested with active
management, and thus S,i in equation (17) equals

                           MW                               MW
               S,i =                 (m,i + i ) + 1 -               m,i
                       (1 - h)N pm                      (1 - h)N pm
                                  MW
                     = m,i +               i
                              (1 - h)N pm
                                  MW        µ
                     = m,i +                     pi - pi )
                                                (¯                                                (A8)
                              (1 - h)N pm 2cW

Recall from equation (5) that H,i = p
                                    ^i /(N pm ), and note m,i = pi /(N pm ). Substituting
these relations and equation (A8) into equation (17) gives
             pi
                 = hH,i + (1 - h)S,i
            N pm
                      p
                      ^i             pi        MW                               µ
                 = h      + (1 - h)      +                                          pi - pi ) .
                                                                                   (¯             (A9)
                     N pm           N pm   (1 - h)N pm                         2cW

Multiplying through by N pm and solving for pi gives
                                                          -1
                                            µM
                              pi = p
                                   ¯i + 1 +                     pi - p
                                                               (^    ¯i ) ,                       (A10)
                                            2hc

which is identical to equation (19) for  given by equation (20), verifying the initial conjecture.

   Proof of Proposition 3: Equation (25) is the same as equation (A7) derived in proving
Proposition 2.

                                                                 1  N
    Proof of Proposition 4: Recall that active share is AS = 2      i=1 |i |. As N grows
                                                               N
large, this quantity is increasingly well approximated as AS = 2 E{|i |}. Combining the

                                                   30
latter relation with equations (6) and (19), recalling that vi is independent of p
                                                                                 ¯i , gives

                               N                N µ                     N µ
                   AS =           E{|i |} =            E{|p
                                                          ¯i - pi |} =         E{|p  ¯i - p
                                                                                          ^i |}
                               2                4cW                      4cW
                               N µ            ¯i - p
                                              p     ^i        N µ
                             =       E p  ¯i              =          E{p
                                                                       ¯i |1 - vi |}
                                4cW              p
                                                 ¯i            4cW
                               N µ                             N µ
                             =       E{p ¯i }E{|vi - 1|} =            pm E{|vi - 1|}
                                4cW                             4cW
                                    M µ                                M µ
                             =                     E{|vi - 1|} =                E{|vi - 1|},                                       (A11)
                               4c(M W )/(N pm )                      4c (1 - h)
                                                                                                                      M
which is equation (26), with  as defined in equation (27), recalling M W =                                            j =1   W (j ) .

   Proof of Proposition 5: Define the N -element vectors s(j ) , , and  (j ) whose i-th
              (j )        (j )
elements are si , i , and i . Substituting for (j ) from equation (A7) into the objective
                                        (j )                   (j )
in equation (A3), recalling VA = W (j ) rA , gives the maximized conditional expected value
added as
     (j )   (j )      (j )
E{VA |s1 , . . . , sN } = W (j ) (j ) ~ (j ) - cW (j ) (j ) P -1 (j )
                                                    1                                                1                            1
                                = W (j )                   P~ (j )          ~ (j ) - cW (j )
                                                                                                            P~ (j )   P -1               P~ (j )
                                                  2cW (j )                                         2cW (j )                     2cW (j )
                                   1 (j )
                                =    ~ P     ~ (j )                                                                                         (A12)
                                  4c
                                  ((j ) )2 (j ) (j )
                                =          s Ps
                                    4c
                                  ((j ) )2
                                =            +  (j ) P  +  (j ) .
                                    4c
                                                                                                                         (j )
Taking the unconditional expectation and dividing by N pm to obtain (j ) = E{VA }/(N pm )
then gives

                           ((j ) )2
                   (j ) =           E{ P } + 2E{ (j ) P } + E{ (j ) P  (j ) }
                           4cN pm
                           ((j ) )2 1 N     pi            1 N
                         =                E    i + 0 +           E pi  2(j )
                             4c     N i=1   pm          N pm i=1
                                           2              2                                    N
                           1                                           pi      1
                         =                      2(j )
                                                                   E      i +                      E{pi }E{ 2(j ) }
                           4c        2   +                             pm     N pm         i=1
                                           2              2
                                1                                   2      1         2(j )
                         =                        2(j )
                                                                   ~  +        N p m 
                                4c      2 +
                                                                          N pm
                                       2   2(j )
                                     ~  + 
                         =                                    2,                                                                   (A13)
                                         2     2(j )
                                4c 1 +  /

                                                                       31
which is equation (28). From equations (1), (6), and (19), along with the independence of
vi and p
       ¯i ,
                                                                 
                                                                 2
            2       pi 2                p
                                          i         pi - p i )
                                                  µ(¯                    12 2             pi - p
                                                                                         (¯     ^i )2
           ~    = E                 = E                           = µ E
                    pm i                 pm           pi                pm                   pi
                           1       pi - p
                                  (¯     ^i )2                     p¯i     pi - p
                                                                         [(^     ¯i )/p¯i ]2
                = µ2  2 E                              = µ2  2 E
                          pm   p
                               ¯i + (^ pi - p  ¯i )                pm 1 + (^  pi - p ¯i )/p¯i )
                                           2                                          2
                          p¯i     (vi - 1)                       p¯i        (vi - 1)
                = µ2  2 E                             = µ2  2 E        E
                          pm   1 + (vi - 1)                      pm      1 + (vi - 1)
                                  (vi - 1)2
                = (µ)2 · 1 · E                      ,                                                   (A14)
                               1 + (vi - 1)
which gives equation (29).

    Proof of Proposition 6: Straightforward differentiation reveals that the right-hand
                                       2(j )     2(j )   2      2
side of equation (28) is decreasing in       for       >   - 2~
                                                                  . This inequality holds for all
2(j )       2   2
      if 2~
              >   . From equations (23), (24), and (29),
                                                                                    
                                                                                    2                           2
   2       2                (vi - 1)2           (vi - 1)                                      (vi - 1)
2~
       -        = 2(µ)2 E              -E  -µ                                        + E -µ
                          1 + (vi - 1)        1 + (vi - 1)                                  1 + (vi - 1)
                                                                     
                           2(v - 1)2                                 2
                               i                         vi - 1
                   (µ)2 E                -
                           1 +  (vi - 1)              1 + (vi - 1)   
                                                                     
                                                  2
                          
                           2    v -1  i
                                                                     
                = (µ) E                               [1 + 2(vi - 1)] .                                     (A15)
                                1 +  (vi - 1)                        

A sufficient (not necessary) condition for the above expectation to be positive is that the
quantity inside the expectation operator is always positive. The latter occurs when  < 0.5,
because vi is non-negative.

   Proof of Proposition 7: Recall the large-N setting, with sample moments across
stocks taken as population expectations. First observe, using equation (18), the properties
        (j )                      (j )
of the i 's, E{pi i } = 0, and E{i } = 0, that the cross-stock covariance of manager j 's
active weights and returns is given by
                    (j )                  (j )                           (j )
            Cov i , ri          = E i , i + (ri - i )            = E i , i
                                                   
                                          (j )
                                     p
                                       i ~i
                                                       (j )               (j )
                                = E            , i  =           E pi (i + i ), i
                                     2cW (j )         2cW ( j )


                                     (j )          2        (j )                    (j ) pm    pi 2
                                =            E pi  i + E pi i i                 =            E   
                                    2cW (j )                                        2cW (j )   pm i
                                    (j ) pm 2
                                =           ~ .                                                         (A16)
                                    2cW (j ) 
                                                         32
Similarly, the variance of manager j 's active weights is given by
                                    2                                                                                      
                               (j )                               2                  2
                      p
                            i ~i                     (j ) pm             pi
                                                                                                                           
           (j )                                                                           2             (j )       2(j )
    Var i         = E                  =                              E                   i + 2 i i + i
                      2cW (j )
                                                     2cW (j )            pm                                                
                                                                                             
                                 2                   2                           2
                     (j ) pm   pi                        2
                                                                pi    
                                                                                         2(j ) 
                  =                 E                    i  +E                                  .                          (A17)
                     2cW (j )          pm                       pm                   

                                                                                                (j )
Combining equations (A16) and (A17) gives the correlation between i                                    and ri as
                                                                   2
                     (j )                                         ~
              Corr{i , ri } =                                                        1/2
                                                                                                               ,           (A18)
                                          pi 2   2                pi 2       2(j )                       1/2
                                   E      pm
                                                 i       +E       pm
                                                                                           (Var{ri })

                       (j )
which is decreasing in      .

   Proof of Proposition 8: Combining equations (A1), (A7), and (A12) gives
                                          2
                    C (j ) = c(W (j ) ) (j ) P -1 (j )
                                       2        1                               1
                           = c(W (j ) )              P   ~ (j )       P -1             P~ (j )
                                            2cW (j )                          2cW (j )
                              1 (j )
                           =    ~ P      ~ (j )
                             4c
                                 (j ) (j )          (j )
                           = E{VA |s1 , . . . , sN }                                                                       (A19)

Taking unconditional expectations gives equation (30).




                                                         33
                                     Table 1
               Assumed and implied quantities in the benchmark setting


Description                                                                                    Value

Panel A. Assumed quantities
Expected annual gross return on the stock market (µm )                                         1.065
Fraction of the stock market owned by noise traders (h)                                          0.3
Active management's market share ( )                                                             0.8
Number of active managers (M )                                                                 2200
Active management's average annual fee rate ( f )                                              0.012
Proportional round-trip cost of a stock trade ÷ trade's fraction of stock's market cap. (c)       2
Weibull distribution parameter for noise-trader demands (k )                                     0.6
Standard deviation of noise in active managers' alpha signals ( )                               0.06
Panel B. Implied quantities
Active management's active share (AS )                                                          0.28
Active management's expected annual trading cost as a fraction of AUM (C/W )                   0.0066
Active management's annual net alpha (net )                                                   -0.0054
Dispersion in individual stocks' annual alphas (i 's)
   Standard Deviation                                                                          0.015
   Average alpha within top quintile                                                           0.009
   Average alpha within bottom quintile                                                       -0.022
   Difference between top-quintile and bottom-quintile averages                                0.031
                                                                (j )
Correlation of the i 's with each individual active manager's ~ i 's                            0.24




                                                34
Figure 1. Noise Trading Densities. The figure plots alternative specifications of a Weibull
density for vi , which equals p^i /p
                                   ¯i , where p
                                              ^i is the price of asset i that corresponds to noise-
trader demand, and p  ¯i is the asset's fair value. All densities have 1.0 as the mean and differ
with respect to the shape parameter k .




                                              35
Figure 2. Effects on the value added of the managers whose skill shifts. The value
                                                            (j )                           
of  is the fraction of managers whose signal volatility,         , shifts from  = 0.06 to   . For
the managers whose skill shifts, the vertical axis plots the ratio of their expected value added
                                  (j )
to that when all managers have         =  .




                                             36
Figure 3. Effects on the value added of the managers whose skill does not shift.
                                                                   (j )
The value of  is the fraction of managers whose signal volatility,      , shifts from  = 0.06
    
to  . For the managers whose skill does not shift, the vertical axis plots the ratio of their
                                                       (j )
expected value added to that when all managers have         =  .




                                             37
Figure 4. Effects on the total value added of all managers when the skill of some
                                                                           (j )
shifts. The value of  is the fraction of managers whose signal volatility,      , shifts from
              
 = 0.06 to  . The vertical axis plots the ratio of the total expected value added for all
                                      (j )
managers to that when they all have        =  .




                                             38
                                                  (j )
Figure 5. Conditional means of i given si . The individual points plot the model's
                                                      (j )
mean equilibrium i within each of the percentiles of si . The line plots the assumed relation
in equation (9).




                                             39
Figure 6. Effects on the value added of the managers whose skill shifts under
alternative values of c, k, and  . The value of  is the fraction of managers whose
                   (j )                   
signal volatility,      , shifts from  to  . For the managers whose skill shifts, the vertical
                                                                                     (j )
axis plots the ratio of their expected value added to that when all managers have         =  .
The value of  is the midpoint of the horizontal axis. The trading-cost parameter is c, and
the noise-trader parameter is k .



                                          40
Figure 7. Effects on the total value added of all managers when the skill of
some shifts under alternative values of c, k, and  . The value of  is the fraction of
                                   (j )                   
managers whose signal volatility,       , shifts from  to  . The vertical axis plots the ratio
                                                                                (j )
of the total expected value added for all managers to that when they all have        =  . The
value of  is the midpoint of the horizontal axis. The trading-cost parameter is c, and the
noise-trader parameter is k .



                                          41
Figure 8. Effects on value added when the skill of some managers shifts under a
more extreme setting. The value of  is the fraction of managers whose signal volatility,
  (j )                              
       , shifts from  = 0.06 to      . For the managers whose skill shifts, the vertical axis
in Panel A plots the ratio of their expected value added to that when all managers have
  (j )
        =  . In Panel B, the vertical axis plots the ratio of the total expected value added for
                                              (j )
all managers to that when they all have            =  .



                                           42
                                      References
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1980, Dealership market: Market making with in-
  ventory, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 31­53.
Banerjee, Snehal, 2011, Learning from prices and the dispersion in beliefs, Review of Finan-
   cial Studies 24, 3025­3068.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2008, All that glitters: The effect of attention and
   news on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors, Review of Financial
   Studies 21, 785­818.
Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Ning Zhu, 2009, Systematic noise, Journal of Finan-
   cial Markets 12, 547­569.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in
   rational markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269­1295.
Berk, Jonathan, and Jules H. van Binsbergen, 2015, Measuring skill in the mutual fund
   industry, Journal of Financial Economics 118, 1­20.
van Binsbergen, Jules H., and Christian C. Opp, 2019, Real anomalies, Journal of Finance
   74, 1659­1706.
Black, Fischer, 1986, Noise, Journal of Finance 41, 529­543.
Blume, Marshall E., Jean Crockett, and Irwin Friend, 1974, Stock ownership in the United
   States: Characteristics and trends, Survey of Current Business 54 (November), 16­40.
Blume, Marshall E., and Irwin Friend, 1975, The asset structure of individual portfolios and
   some implications for utility functions, Journal of Finance 30, 585­603.
Cremers, K.J. Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2009, How active is your fund manager? A new
   measure that predicts performance, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329­3365.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
  fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035­
  1058.
D´
 avila, Eduardo, and Cecilia Parlatore, 2020, Trading costs and informational efficiency,
   Working paper, Yale University and New York University.
Dimitri, Carolyn, Anne Effland, and Neilson Conklin, 2005, The 20th Century transfor-
   mation of U.S. agriculture and farm policy, Economic Information Bulletin Number 3,
   United States Department of Agriculture.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula A. Tkac, 2008, Star power: The effect of Morningstar ratings
   on mutual fund flow, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 907­936.
Dorn, Daniel, Gur Huberman, and Paul Sengmueller, 2008, Correlated trading and returns,
   Journal of Finance 58, 885­920.
Edelen, Roger M., Richard Evans, and Gregory B. Kadlec, 2007, Scale effects in mutual

                                             43
   fund performance: The role of trading costs, Working paper, Echo Investment Advisors,
   Boston College, and Virginia Tech.
Edelen, Roger, Richard Evans, and Gregory Kadlec, 2013, Shedding light on "invisible"
   costs: Trading costs and mutual fund performance, Financial Analysts Journal 69 (Jan-
   uary/February), 33­44.
Elton, Edwin J., and Martin J. Gruber, 2013, Mutual funds, chapter 15 in Handbook of
   the Economics of Finance, G.M. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, eds., North
   Holland, Amsterdam.
Feng, Lei, and Mark S. Seasholes, 2004, Correlated trading and location, Journal of Finance
   59, 2117­2144.
Garcia, Diego, and Joel M. Vanden, 2009, Information acquisition and mutual funds, Journal
   of Economic Theory 144, 1965­1995.
G^
 arleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2013, Dynamic trading with predictable returns
   and transaction costs, Journal of Finance 58, 2309­2340.
G^
 arleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2018, Efficiently inefficient markets for assets
   and asset management, Journal of Finance 73, 1663­1712.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a
   specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics
   14, 71­100.
Goetzmann, William N., and Alok Kumar, 2008, Equity portfolio diversification, Review of
  Finance 12, 433­463.
Grinold, Richard, 2006, A dynamic model of investment management, Journal of Investment
   Management 4 (2), 5­22.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Performance measurement without bench-
   marks: An examination of mutual fund returns, Journal of Business 66, 47­68.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally
   efficient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393­408.
Heaton, John, and Deborah J. Lucas, 1996, Evaluating the effects of incomplete markets on
   risk sharing and asset pricing, Journal of Political Economy 104, 443­487.
Investment Company Institute, 2019, 2019 Investment Company Fact Book.
Jensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945­1964, Journal
   of Finance 23, 389­416.
Johnson, Norman L., and Samuel Kotz, 1970, Continuous Univariate Distributions ­ 1, John
   Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2014, Time-varying
   fund manager skill, Journal of Finance 69, 1455­1484.

                                            44
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008, Unobserved actions of mutual
   funds, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2379­2416.
Kaniel, Ron, and Robert Parham, 2017, WSJ Category Kings ­ The impact of media at-
  tention on consumer and mutual fund decisions, Journal of Financial Economics 123,
  337­356.
Keim, Donald B., and Ananth Madhavan, 1997, Transactions costs and investment style: An
   inter-exchange analysis of institutional equity trades, Journal of Financial Economics 46,
   265­292.
Kelly, Morgan, 1995, All their eggs in one basket: Portfolio diversification of US households,
   Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 27, 87­96.
Kyle, Albert S., and Anna A. Obizhaeva, 2016, Market microstructure invariance: Empirical
   hypotheses, Econometrica 84, 1345­1404.
Lease, Ronald C., Wilbur G. Lewellen, and Gary G. Schlarbaum, 1974, The individual
   investor: Attributes and attitudes, Journal of Finance 29, 413­433.
McLean, R. David, and Jeffrey Pontiff, 2016, Does academic research destroy stock return
  predictability?, Journal of Finance 71, 5­31.
P´      
 astor, Lubo s, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2012, On the size of the active management
   industry, Journal of Political Economy 120, 740­781.
P´      
 astor, Lubos, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2015, Scale and skill in active
   management, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 23­45.
P´      
 astor, Lubos, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2020, Fund tradeoffs, Journal
   of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Polkovnichenko, Valery, 2005, Household portfolio diversification: A case for rank-dependent
   preferences, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1467­1502.
Roussanov, Nikolai, Hongxun Ruan, and Yanhao Wei, 2020, Marketing mutual funds, Review
   of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Sharpe, William F. 1991, The arithmetic of active management, Financial Analysts Journal
   47 (January/February), 7­9.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 2014, Presidential address: Investment noise and trends, Journal of
   Finance 69, 1415­1453.
Stambaugh, Robert F., Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2015, Arbitrage asymmetry and the
   idiosyncratic volatility puzzle, Journal of Finance 70, 1903­1948.
Stoll, Hans R., 1979, The supply of dealer services in securities markets, Journal of Finance
   33, 1133­1151.
Zhu, Min, 2018, Informative fund size, managerial skill, and investor rationality, Journal of
   Financial Economics 130, 114­134.

                                             45
