                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 PERSISTENCY IN TEACHERS' GRADING BIAS
                 AND EFFECTS ON LONGER-TERM OUTCOMES:
        UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS EXAMS AND CHOICE OF FIELD OF STUDY

                                        Victor Lavy
                                  Rigissa Megalokonomou

                                     Working Paper 26021
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26021


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2019




Victor Lavy acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council through ERC
Advance Grant 323439 and from CAGE at the Department of Economics at the University of
Warwick. Rigissa Megalokonomou acknowledges financial support from The University of
Queensland BEL Early Career Grant No: UQECR1833757. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Victor Lavy and Rigissa Megalokonomou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Persistency in Teachers' Grading Bias and Effects on Longer-Term Outcomes: University
Admissions Exams and Choice of Field of Study
Victor Lavy and Rigissa Megalokonomou
NBER Working Paper No. 26021
June 2019
JEL No. I24,J16,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

Recent research has focused on what shapes gender differences in academic achievement and
students' choice of university field of study. In this paper we examine how teachers' gender role
attitudes and stereotypes influence the gender gap by affecting the school environment. We
explore the extent to which teachers' gender bias in high school influences students' school
attendance and academic performance in high-stakes university admission exams and students'
choice of university field of study. We use data from a large number of high schools in Greece,
where the performance in these high-stakes exams determines university admission. We measure
teachers' bias as the difference between a high school student's school exam score and national
exam score. We then define a teacher bias measure at the class level by the difference between
boys' and girls' average gap between the school score and the national score. We link teachers
over time to obtain a persistent teacher bias measure based on multiple classes, and to estimate
the effect for later cohorts' performance. We find a very high correlation of within-teacher gender
biases measured in different classes, which reveals high persistency in teachers' gender
favoritism behavior. We then find substantial effects of these teacher biases on students' school
attendance and performance in university admission exams, quality of enrolled degree and the
given field of study at the university. We also find that gender biases are more prevalent among
low value added teachers, while the more effective teachers have an approximately neutral gender
attitude. This suggests that less effective teachers can harm their students twice, by being a bad
teacher and by discriminating against one of the genders.


Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk

Rigissa Megalokonomou
Department of Economics
University of Qeensland
r.megalokonomou@uq.edu.au
1       Introduction

A robust stylized fact established in recent years in many countries is that girls out-perform boys in school
achievements in primary and secondary school. The gap is larger for school tests that are graded by school
teachers and smaller for external exams that are graded `blindly'. The gaps are smaller in STEM subjects,
often still showing boys' advantage followed universally by higher college enrollment rates of men in these
fields of study. For example, the National Center for Educational Statistics (NCES) 2015 report shows
that 57 percent of all bachelor degrees conferred by post-secondary institutions in the U.S. in 2013-14 went
to women while in STEM subjects the rate was much lower: 39 percent in physical sciences and science
technologies, 18 percent in computer and information sciences, 18 percent in engineering and engineering
technologies, and 10 percent in computer engineering.1 This skewed pattern of gender differences in fields
of study naturally determines gender occupational differences in the labor market. For example, only 14%
of engineers in the US are women, though this rate is much higher than in the early 1980s, when only
5.8% of engineers in the U.S. were women.2
    What shapes these gender differences in academic achievements and in university fields of study is
the focus of much recent research.3 In this paper we focus on how teachers' gender role attitudes and
stereotypes influence the gender gap by affecting the school environment. We explore the extent to which
teachers' gender bias in high school influences students' academic performance in high-stakes exams that
determine admission to universities and on students' choice of university field of study. We use data from
a large number of high schools in Greece, where performance in these exams is the sole determinant of
university admission. Our sample includes female and male teachers, so the analysis reflects potential
bias due to the teacher's own gender, allowing us to distinguish the gender bias by teachers gender. We
measure teachers' bias as the difference between a student's school exam score in 11th and 12th grade
(scored by the student's teacher) and his or her external exam score (taken at the end of 11th and 12th
grade and scored nationally).4 We then define a teachers' bias measure at the class level by the difference
    1
      The female share of degrees conferred was 84 percent in health professions and related programs, 69 percent
in English language and literature/letters, 58 percent in biological and biomedical sciences, and 43 percent in
mathematics and statistics. https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d15/tables/dt15_318.30.asp?current=
yes.
    2
      STEM Education: Preparing for the Jobs of the Future, A Report by the Joint Economic Committee Chair-
man's Staff Senator Bob Casey, Chairman April 2012.
    3
      Some studies emphasize the role of biological gender differences in determining gender cognitive differences
(Witelson 1976, Lansdell 1962, Waber 1976), while others emphasize the social, psychological and environmental
factors that might influence this gap. There is limited credible evidence for this debate because it is difficult to
disentangle the impact of biological gender dissimilarities from environmental conditions, and because it is difficult
to measure stereotypes and prejudices and test their causal implications.
    4
      The systematic difference between non-blind and blind assessment across groups as a measure of discrimination


                                                          1
between boys' and girls' average gap between the school score and the national score. Positive values
indicate that a teacher is biased in favor of boys in a particular subject. We link teachers over time and are
therefore able to get a persistent teacher bias measure based on multiple classes (on average 11 classes per
teacher), and the effect is estimated for performance by students in later cohorts. Panel data on teachers
relieve concerns that our measure of gender bias may only pick up random (small sample) variation in
the unobserved "quality" or non-cognitive skills of the boys vs. girls in a particular single class or any
other class-specific dynamics. We find that the same teachers who are biased for one class are biased
in the same way for other classes in the same year and in earlier or later academic years. We also find
that the correlation between same teacher's biases (when teaching two different subjects) is significantly
higher than the correlation between different teachers' biases. This evidence of a "persistent" (average)
teacher bias component (across multiple years/classes) reassures us that our bias measure is not picking
up random variation in unobserved attributes in the mix of boys and girls.
   We use data from high school teachers and students in Greece for the period 2003-2011. Our panel
data of teachers include more than 400 teachers from 21 high schools over this entire period. Using this
sample, we find that the bias measures derived from the teachers' panel data yield results very similar
to those obtained when measuring bias based only on current own class. Perhaps this result is expected,
given the higher correlation and persistence of teachers' bias measured in different classes. We also have a
sample of an additional 114 schools for which we do not have panel data on teachers. Using this sample, we
measure teachers' bias based on grading information from their current own classes and obtain estimates
that are similar to the results obtained from the 21 schools sample.
   We first estimate the effect of teachers' bias in 11th grade on students' performance in the national
exams at the end of 12th grade. We measure the bias in each subject and then average these results over
bundles of subjects, as follows: The first bundle includes core subjects that all students are required to
study, including modern Greek, history, physics, algebra and geometry. The other three bundles are the
three study tracks available to students in 11th and 12th grade: classics, science and exact science. In
11th grade the subjects taught on the classics track include ancient Greek, philosophy and Latin; on the
science track they are mathematics, physics, and chemistry, and on the exact science track they include
mathematics, physics and computer science. In 12th grade the subjects taught on the classics track are
or stereotypes was pioneered in economics by Blank (1991) and Goldin and Rouse (2000). This approach was first
applied to the economics of education in Lavy (2008), to measure gender bias in grading by teachers and it was
followed by others, for example, Tyrefors et al. (2011), Hanna and Linden (2012), Cornwell et al. (2013), Burgess
and Greaves (2013), and Botelho et al. (2015), who implemented the same methodology using data from other
countries and getting overall similar evidence about teachers' stereotypes/biases.



                                                       2
ancient Greek, Latin, literature and history; on the science track they are biology, mathematics, physics
and chemistry, and on the exact science track they are mathematics, physics, business administration and
computer science. We find that the teachers' biases in all four groups of subjects have a positive effect
on boys' and a negative effect on girls' 12th grade external exams scores. All estimates are precise and
statistically significantly different from zero, except in the classics track. Based on bias measures derived
from teachers' panel data, the effects size (in terms of standard deviation of the test score distribution)
is 0.090 for boys and -0.100 for girls, in classics it is 0.185 and -0.051, in science it is 0.211 and -0.109
and in exact science 0.145 and -0.163. We correct for potential sampling error that could bias both our
estimates and the standard errors by applying an empirical Bayes technique and a two-step bootstrapping
procedure.
   Our results are significantly different from the results of placebo exercises, which show no effects on
students' later performance. These placebo exercises are based on a random reshuffling of teacher gender
bias within each school and across teachers who teach the same subjects. We then re-estimate the effects
of teachers' gender favoritism on students' performance. The only difference is that this time we use
the bias of teachers who teach the same subjects within the school, but who are not actually teaching
this particular class. To do this, we rely on the large number of teachers who teach the same subject
within schools for the period 2003-2005. Using these placebo measures of teachers' gender bias, we find
(almost) zero and statistically insignificant effects on students' subsequent performances for all groups of
subjects. The lack of any discernible effects using the placebo measures of the variable of interest suggest
that the estimated effects of the correct measure of treatment are not biased due to omitted unobservable
confounders of the effect of interest.
   The psychology and sociology literatures provide ample evidence about the potential mechanisms by
which teacher's gender-stereotypical attitudes affect students' cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes. For
example, teachers are said to treat the successes and failures of boys and girls differently, by encouraging
boys to try harder and allowing girls to give up (Dweck et al. 1978 and Rebhorn and Miles 1999). Sadker
and Sadker (1985) suggest that teachers give more attention to boys by addressing them more often in
class, giving them more time to respond and providing more substantive feedback. Teachers are also
found to treat boys and girls differently, in particular with regard to math instruction: Hyde and Jaffe
(1998) show that math teachers tend to encourage boys to exert independence by not using algorithms
and that boys who adopt this rebellious approach are seen as having a promising future in mathematics.
Girls, on the other hand, are controlled more than boys, and are taught mathematics as a set of rules



                                                     3
or computational methods. Leinhardt et al. (1979) find that teachers spent more time training girls in
reading and less time in math relative to boys. In addition, according to the National Center of Education
Statistics (1997) girls are less likely than boys to be advised, counseled and encouraged to take courses
in math (Bae and Smith 1997).
   In the second part of the paper, we estimate the effect of 11th and 12th grade teachers' bias on
post-secondary enrollment status, quality of post-secondary program enrolled, and university enrollment
by field of study. We find that teacher gender bias has a significant effect on students' post-secondary
options and choices. First, we find that a one standard deviation (sd) increase in a teacher's bias in the
core subjects in 11th and 12th grade increases the probability of boys enrolling in some post-secondary
program by 2 and 4 percentage points, while it lowers the enrollment probability for girls by 5 and 3
percentage points. We find that teacher bias in all groups of subjects (core, classics, science and exact
science) has a significant effect on students' probability of enrolling in post-secondary schooling.
   Second, we examine the effect of teacher bias on the choice of university field of study. Girls have a
higher enrollment rate in humanities, 34 percent versus 11 percent of boys. In social science and science,
enrollment does not differ much by gender. In the exact sciences there are large enrollment disparities by
gender: 12 percent of girls and 27 percent of boys. Based on multiple-choice regressions, we find that 11th
and 12th grade teachers' bias has a negative and statistically significant effect on girls' choice of program
of study. A one sd increase in teacher's bias in 11th grade reduces the probability that a girl will choose
that field of study in university by 4 percentage points. The effect of teacher's bias in 12th grade reduces
this probability by 5 percentage points. The corresponding estimated effects for boys are positive but
small and imprecise, practically not different from zero. We also find significant effects of teacher bias on
the quality of the program that students enroll in. The results are in line with all previous results: An
increase in teacher bias (a bias in favor of boys) increases the probability of boys' enrolling into programs
of higher quality, whereas the effect is opposite for girls. We measure the quality of the program using
both the ranking based on the mean performance in the university admission exams of enrolled students
in each program and annual program admission cutoffs.
   In the third part of the paper, we examine whether there is any association between teachers' gender
bias and teachers' quality. We use teachers' value added (TVA) as a measure of teachers' quality (Rock-
off 2004, Chetty et al. 2014a, Chetty et al. 2014b). Relying on high persistent teachers' stereotypical
behavior across classes, subjects, grades and years that we find in the first part of the paper, we esti-
mate teachers' value added based on 2003-2005 schooling years. Gender bias is computed as the average



                                                     4
gender bias a teacher exhibits in the 2006-2011 period. We find that teachers who have no gender bias
have significantly higher value added relative to pro-boy or pro-girl teachers. This is the first study to
link gender discrimination among teachers and their quality as teachers. There is ample evidence that
show negative correlation between individuals' level education and prejudice-discriminatory behavior, for
example anti-Black attitudes (Kuppens and Spears 2014, Wodtke 2016), or anti-women views (Sawhill
2014) but there is no evidence of this link for discrimination in the work place.
   This paper makes three main contributions. First, it makes a substantive contribution to the literature
on gender differences in STEM majors and careers by linking quantitative measures of teacher bias to
students' later academic outcomes. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to establish a reliable causal
link between high school culture and the prevalence of differential gendered outcomes. Two earlier papers
examined the effect of teachers' bias in primary schools on students cognitive performance. Lavy and
Sand (2018) analyze teachers' bias in primary schools in Tel Aviv, Israel, and estimate its effect on boys'
and girls' scores in math, English and Hebrew in middle school and on high school tests and choices about
the level of math and science courses. Terrier (2014) estimates the effect of teachers' bias similarly to
Lavy and Sand (2018) and reports similar results, namely that teachers' grading bias in favor of boys in
primary schools in France is positively correlated with boys' relative test score achievements. Carlana
(2019) shows that teachers' stereotypes affect the gender gap in math, track choice, and self-confidence
in own mathematical abilities for girls in middle school.5 However, these earlier papers lack panel data
on teachers, which is necessary to measure teachers' bias `out of sample'. This drawback is eliminated in
the current paper by using panel data on high school teachers in Greece. Using the full record of teaching
for all teachers in our sample over several years, we document highly persistent stereotypical biases in
teachers and the significant effects on short and longer term outcomes of high school students.
   Second, in this paper we are able to examine the effect of teachers' gender favoritism on students'
longer-term outcomes: We are able to link students' performance in high school with their university
schooling. In particular, we examine whether the biases of those who teach 11th and 12th grade affect
students' decisions to enroll in post-secondary institutions, the field of study chosen and the quality of
their university­all of which have important implications for students' later occupational choices.
   Third, we believe that this is the first paper in the literature on grading biases that relates the
persistent pattern of teachers' discriminatory behavior to their quality, as measured by the value added.
The important implication of our finding is that improving teacher quality would largely eliminate gender
   5
       Field experiments have also been used to study discrimination (Bertrand and Duflo 2016).



                                                         5
stereotypes among teachers.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present our institutional setting and
data. Section 3 explains the identification and estimation methodologies. We detail our short run results
in Section 4 and longer-term results in Section 5. Section 6 discusses the relationship between teacher
gender bias and teacher value added and Section 7 offers conclusions and policy implications.



2       Context and Data

2.1     The Greek University Admissions System

The school education system in Greece is highly centralized (OECD 2018). University admission is also
centralized and is administered by the Ministry of Education. The majority of universities in Greece
are public, with no tuition fees and admission based solely on national high school exit exams. Most
undergraduate degrees in Greek universities are designed to be completed in four years, with the exception
of the Polytechnic University in Athens (the most prestigious of the universities that offer engineering)
which has a five year undergraduate course. Students have to participate in standardized national tests
to be eligible for university admission. All schools that administer these tests follow the same curriculum
and offer courses in core and track subjects in accordance with the material covered in the national exams
(OECD 2018). Until 2005, students took national exams in 11th and 12th grade. Since 2006 there has
only been one national exam, at the end of 12th grade.6 University admission is based on the results of
national exams and school exams that they take throughout the year. Until 2005 the average score used
for university admission was also based on students' performance in national and school exams taken in
the 11th grade.
    The data we use in this study include school and national exam test scores for all students. The
Ministry of Education receives the national exams scripts and sends them to examiners across the country
with the name and gender of the student concealed. Therefore, we consider national exam scores to be
"blind" scores, as the external examiner does not know the name or gender of the student. In contrast,
school exams are graded by the student's teacher and therefore are considered to be "non-blind scores",
as the identity and gender of the student are obviously not concealed.7 We use these non-blind test scores
in each subject to examine teacher biases. Most students have a different teacher for each subject, but
    6
     Since 2006, students also have taken national exams in fewer subjects than previously.
    7
     The non-blind scores could be affected by a student's performance in previous class exams in the same term,
if there is more than one class exam in class.



                                                       6
some might have the same teacher in two or more related subjects in the same grade. For the period
2003-2005 we observe the blind and non-blind scores of students in both grades (11th and 12th ). From
2006 to 2011 the relevant data is the 12th grade national and school test scores.
   Even though every student has a first- and second-term school exam score in every subject, we prefer
to use the latter for two reasons: (1) the second-term exam is more likely to cover the same material
as is included in the end-of-year national exam, and (2) the second-term school exam and the national
exam take place around the same time.8 Schools typically administer the school exam at the very end of
the school year, before the national exams. From the student's perspective, both exams are high-stakes:
For the purpose of university admission, the final grade that counts towards university admission is a
weighted average of the national exam (70%) and the school exam (30%). The blind and non-blind scores
are also important for grade completion and high school graduation, as well as for decisions regarding
dropout and grade repetition metrics. Both scores are reported in the high school graduation diploma,
which is sometimes requested by potential employers.
   The assignment of students and teachers to classes within each school is random. In particular, in
accordance with a law that is strictly enforced, students are allocated to classes based on a lexicographical
order. Using the same data as we use in our main analysis, we provide further evidence for this random as-
signment in contemporaneous work (Lavy and Megalokonomou 2019). Students are not allowed to switch
class for any reason and must remain in their assigned class for all grades in high school. Within schools
and across classes, there is no significant variation in student's observed characteristics and abilities.
   University applicants submit a list of their preferred post-secondary programs9 to the Ministry of
Education (OECD 2018).10 The admission score (cutoff) for each post-secondary program is not known
when students submit their application and students can apply to several programs conditional on their
high school track of study. At the beginning of the 11th and 12th grades, students enroll in one of three
study tracks: classics, science, or exact science. All schools offer these three tracks and students must
choose one in the 11th grade; most remain in the same track in 12th grade. Each track includes different
subjects, but all students in a given track have to take the same subjects. It is conceivable that students'
choice of track takes into consideration their aspirations for university field of study. Although students
can apply to many programs from all high school tracks,11 some programs assign a special weight to
   8
      However, we note here that we obtain very similar results when we use the first term non-blind scores. These
results are not reported in this paper and are available from the authors.
    9
      By program we mean the university and field of study.
   10
      See Goulas and Megalokonomou (2018) for more details about the admission algorithm.
   11
      For example, students from all tracks can apply to economics degrees at the university level.



                                                        7
specific subjects when calculating the university admission grade.12 In addition to the track subjects,
students must take exams in compulsory core subjects. These core subjects are the same for all students,
regardless of track.


2.2    Data

In this study we combine information about a large number of high schools in Greece from the schools
and other administrative sources. The baseline sample is 11th grade students in 2003-2005 in 21 schools
and 12th grade students in 2003-2011 in the same schools. In our main analysis we use information about
teachers, students and principals from these 21 high schools. The information on teachers permits us to
track individuals through their teaching history in the same high school during 2003-2011. Specifically,
for each teacher we have information about the combination of classes, subjects and grades that he/she
taught in each sample year. This allows us to construct panel data on teachers and school principals.
Teachers' and principals' gender is inferred from their first names. We obtained student-level information
about their high school performance from the schools' administrative records.
    The student-level information includes identifiers for students and their classes (including class size
in both grades), gender, year of birth, study track in high school, absenteeism records in 11th and 12th
grade and test scores from the school and national exams in all subjects in 11th and 12th grade. The raw
national exam score is scored on a 1-20 scale, which we transform it into z-scores for each year by type of
exam and subject, to facilitate comparison over time and interpretation of our findings. The raw school
exam is also scored on a 1-20 scale, which we transform it into z-scores for each year, school, type of exam
and subject. The sample includes public, private and experimental13 schools, in large and smaller cities
and urban and rural areas. Then, teachers are matched to their classes and students by year, class and
subject for the whole nine-year period. To complement our main analysis we also use a sample of another
114 schools for the same time period, for which we obtain only the student-level information.14
    We then link the students' and teachers' datasets with administrative data from the Ministry of
Education. We link our baseline sample and we access information about students' university enrollment
status, university admission score,15 and information about the post-secondary program (university and
  12
      For example, for a student who applies to an engineering school, a special weight is given to his/her performance
in mathematics in either the science or exact science track.
   13
      These are public schools. Admission to these schools is based on a lottery for the years in this study. In 2013
the admissions process was; students now gain admission based on their performance in very competitive admissions
exams
   14
      For the sample of 135 schools, which is the total number of schools for which we have the student-level
information, the sample contains 1,244 11th grade classes and 3,787 12th grade classes.
   15
      This is the combination of students' scores in the school and national exams.


                                                          8
department) they enrolled in. We derive each post-secondary program's annual admissions cutoff in two
ways. First, we calculate the mean performance of students who enroll in this program for each year;
the Ministry's dataset provides us with information about the universe of students who apply to each
post-secondary institution and program every year. Second, we can calculate the minimum score for the
last-ranked enrolled student; this is the official program admissions cutoff or threshold the Ministry uses.
     Table A1 presents descriptive statistics for the full sample of schools. The proportion of female students
is 56 percent. The average GPA in 11th and 12th grade is 72 and 77, respectively. 92 percent of students
attend public schools, 4 percent and 4 percent attend private and experimental schools, respectively, and
90 percent live in urban areas. Almost 82 percent of students eventually enroll in a university. Students
apply on average to 25 programs16 and on average they study their 8th most preferred program. The
proportions enrolled in exact science, science, humanities and social science departments in 2003-2011 are
15 percent, 4 percent, 19 percent and 22 percent. Table 1 presents summary statistics for the full sample
and also mean differences between the sample of 114 schools and the sample of 21 schools. The average
number of classes in the full sample of 135 schools is 3.90, 3.90 in the sample of 114 schools and 3.92 in
the sample of 21 schools. Average class size is 18-20 students in 11th grade and 19-20 students in 12th
grade. 37 percent of the students study in the classics track, 28 percent in the science track, and 43 in
the exact science track. The differences between the two samples17 are small and for some variables they
are not statistically significant.



3         Methodology and Estimation Framework

3.1        Measuring Teacher Gender Biases

The national exam scripts are collected by the Ministry of Education and are assigned for grading to
teachers from other schools, with the name and gender of the student concealed. The student ID does not
reveal any information about the student. Therefore, we denote the national exam scores as "blind". In
contrast, school exams are graded by the class teacher, who knows the name, gender and other information
about the student. Therefore, school exam scores are "non-blind". For each student we observe a set of
both national (blind) and school (non-blind) exams scores. Most students have different teachers in each
subject, although some may have the same teacher in two or more related subjects in the same year and
grade. For the years 2003-2005 we have the data for the blind and non-blind scores for each of the 11th
    16
         This is equivalent to submitting 25 program applications.
    17
         i.e., the sample of 114 schools and the sample of 21 schools.


                                                              9
and 12th grade students. Starting from 2006, national exams were administered only in 12th grade.18
   Table 2 presents the means of the blind and the non-blind scores for boys and girls and the gender
differences between these test scores in 11th grade for 2003-2005. The gender gap varies by subject and
type of exam. Boys outperform girls in physics, geometry and algebra (core subjects) in the blind exams.
In all other subjects, girls outperform boys in the blind exams. Gender differences in the non-blind exams
scores is always in favor of girls, that is, girls always outperform boys in exams that are graded by the
teacher of the class. This girls' advantage is evident even in subjects in which boys outscore girls in
externally marked blind exams. These systematic gender differences are interesting as they imply that
the achievement gap is always in favor of girls in the non-blind exams­ those graded by their own teacher.
   Table 3 presents the same descriptive statistics for the 12th grade students. The gender gaps in 12th
grade have a similar pattern as in the 11th grade. Boys outperform girls in the blind exams in mathematics
and physics (core subjects) and in mathematics, physics and chemistry (science track). The differences
between boys' and girls' blind scores are statistically significant in most cases and they vary from 0.36
sd in favor of girls in Modern Greek to 0.16 sd in favor of boys in physics (science track). However, girls
obtain higher scores in the non-blind exam in all subjects. The non-blind and blind gender differences
vary from 0.47 in favor of girls in Modern Greek to 0.04 sd in science track mathematics in favor of girls.
The positive achievement gaps in favor of boys in the blind exams in mathematics and physics are not
present in the non-blind exams.
   We construct the teacher bias measure in two steps based on each student's test scores in the blind and
non-blind exam by subject. We first compute for each student in each exam the difference between her/his
non-blind and blind exam scores. We then average these differences for boys and for girls separately for
each class and then compute the difference of these two means for each class. That is, we define teacher
bias T B of teacher j in class c as the difference between boys' and girls' average gap between the non-blind
score (NB) and the blind score (B):


        T Bjc = M eanc [        (N Bi - Bi |M alei )] - M eanc [        (N Bi - Bi |F emalei )]    (1)
                           ic                                      ic

   We repeat this procedure for every class, subject and grade. This measure takes negative or positive
values depending on teachers' stereotypical behavior. Positive (negative) values indicate that a teacher is
  18
     The combinations of subjects that students take national exams on also changes slightly. Students now take
national exams in six subjects instead of nine. The school exams that students take in all nine subjects are not
affected. Students can select the same optional subjects (for example, economics) as in the pre-2006 period in
addition to the six compulsory subjects.



                                                         10
biased in favor of boys (girls) in this particular subject and class. Importantly and uniquely in this study,
we use panel data for teachers by class, subject, and year, which allow us to compute the persistence
of a teacher's stereotypical bias by averaging the bias measure over all of a teacher's classes during the
study period. We do however want to exclude from this average the bias in the class for which we want
to estimate the impact of the teacher bias, so we construct the average bias of a teacher based on all
her/his other classes except the current class for which we are estimating the bias (excluding class i from
the mean). In other words, we measure the bias in a particular classroom using the blind and non-blind
scores for students in all other classes taught by the same teacher.
   To demonstrate, assume we are interested in class c1 , taught by teacher j1 . We measure teacher's j1
bias in all other classes that she has taught in the sample including classes in earlier years, other classes
in the same year and other classes in later years. We use the bias for teacher j1 that is measured in
all these other classes to estimate her impact on class c1 . The intuition behind this is that this measure
incorporates information about teacher j1 with many different groups of students and captures any gender
favoritism in different classes. Thus, this measure captures all possible information about the teacher and
reflects more reliably her persistent gender biased behavior. Following this approach, of using `out of
sample' data to measure teachers' bias, we alleviate the concern that our teacher bias measure picks
up class-level unobserved variation in boys' and girls' behavior or other gender-differential non-cognitive
characteristics. The left figures in Figure 5 present the distribution of a teacher's bias measures, the first
based on the current own class test scores and the second based on the teacher's other classes in both
grades during the study period. The top panel shows the distributions of the two bias measures in 11th
grade and the bottom panel in 12th grade. The right figures in Figure 5 present the distribution of a
teacher's bias measures, the first based on the current own class test scores and the second based on the
other classes a teacher taught only in the same grade and year.
   In Figures 1 and 2, we present the histogram for these two measures of teachers' gender bias for 11th
and 12th grade. We produce these distributions for core subjects and classics, science and exact science
tracks. Different measures of teachers' gender bias are the teacher's bias in the own current class (following
the formula in (1)) and the teacher's bias based on all other classes during the study period (average of
different teacher bias measures calculated using (1)). We notice that these two distributions show a similar
pattern, with both measures indicating considerable variation in teachers' discriminatory behavior. We
also show that there is high correlation between the two measures of teacher bias for 11th and 12th grade,
which can be seen in the scatter plots in Figures 3 and 4. The points show a high persistency in the two



                                                     11
different measures of teachers' gender biases, and there is clustering around the 45-degree line.
   In Table 4 we present descriptive statistics for the average number of times a teacher shows up in the
sample of 21 high schools. There is one row for each teacher-class-grade-year combination. On average,
a teacher appears 16 times in the sample, which means that he/she teaches 16 unique combinations of
class, subject, grade, and year. We drop teachers who teach only one class in the whole sampling period,
because we cannot construct a measure of teacher bias based on their behavior in other classes. Also,
teachers teach on average almost 7 times in the 11th grade over the period 2003-2005. This means that
they teach 7 combinations of classes, subjects and years in the 11th grade. On average a teacher teaches 3
combinations of classes and subjects per year, 1.5 different subjects per year and 1.7 different classes per
year. There is little variation in these statistics from year to year in 2003-2005 and on average teachers
are present in the 11th grade sample in 2.2 years. A 12th grade teacher appears in our sample on average
13 times over the period 2003-2011. She teaches 3.4 combinations of classes and subjects per year, with
1.6 different subjects per year and 1.8 classes per year. Twelfth-grade teachers appear on average in 4.4
years in the sample.
   In Table 5 we present descriptive statistics for both measures of teacher bias by subject and grade
using the sample of 21 high schools.19 In column (1) we present the proportion of female teachers
per subject and grade. We note a higher proportion of female teachers in humanities-oriented subjects
(modern Greek, history, and other classics track subjects) and a higher proportion of male teachers in
STEM-subjects (mathematics, physics, science and exact science track subjects). In columns (2)-(3) we
present the mean and standard deviation of the measure of teacher bias based on all other classes by
subject and grade, in the sample of 21 schools. These descriptive statistics show negative teacher bias
throughout, suggesting that on average, teachers are biased in favor of girls across all subjects. The bias
in 11th grade is higher in exact science track, highest in computer science (-0.271) and lowest in physics
(-0.037). Among 12th grade teachers, the bias is highest in physics in the science track (-0.300) and lowest
in economics (-0.085). Columns (4)-(5) show the mean and standard deviation of the measure of teacher
bias calculated in own current class, by subject and grade in the sample of 21 schools. Again, teachers on
average are pro-girls in all subjects, and the teacher bias is very similar across subjects to those reported
in column (2). In columns (6) and (7) we report the difference between columns (2) and (4) and the
  19
     To construct these teacher bias measures, we use the non-blind score of the second semester. In Table A2, we
present the teacher bias calculated using both the first- and second- semester non-blind score. The pattern in both
cases is the same: Teacher bias is on average negative. In most cases, the differences between these two measures
is small. As we explain in the text, we use the second semester non-blind score to measure the teacher bias in the
main analysis.



                                                        12
standard error. The differences are quite small and not statistically significant. In column (8) we report
the simple row correlation between columns (2) and (4). These correlations are high enough to further
support our observation that there is high persistency in teachers' gender biases.
   In Table 6 we examine the relationship between the teacher's bias as measured in his current class
and the bias as measured in all other classes that he taught during the study period. We condition the
correlation between these two bias measures on subject, year, and school fixed effects. In particular, the
structure of the data is such that there is one row per teacher-school-subject-year-grade and for each
row there are two teacher bias measures. One is the bias measured in current class and the other is the
bias of the same teacher measured in all other classes she/he ever taught during the study period. In
columns 1-2 we present the 11th grade estimates, and in columns 3-4 we show the 12th grade estimates.
The estimates in this table provide additional evidence that there is high correlation between the bias
measured in current and in all other classes. This is evident in both grades. In the first panel, we present
the results based on the full sample of teachers; in the second panel we present the results only for female
teachers and in the third panel only for male teachers. For example, the correlation between the 11th
grade bias measure in other classes in any year and the bias measure in current own class in 11th grade
is 0.714 when estimated in a regression with only subject and year fixed effect. The pattern is clear, high
persistency in teacher gender grading bias among both female and among male teachers, and the degree
of persistency is very similar for the two genders.
   Additional support for our claim that there is high persistency in teachers' discriminatory behavior
is documented in Table 7, where we present estimated correlations between teachers' bias in pairs of
subjects: once where both subjects are taught by the same teachers and once where they are taught by
different teachers. If the teacher gender bias measure we suggest captures teachers' and not students'
behavior, we would expect these correlations to be high when both subjects are taught by the same teacher
and low when two different teachers teach the two subjects. In columns 1-2, we present the estimated
correlation coefficient when the two subjects are taught by two teachers and in columns 3-4 when they
are taught by the same teacher. The estimates in columns 1-2 are small­mostly close to zero­and not
significant. In columns 3-4 the estimates are positive, large and statistically significant, revealing high
correlation between teacher bias when the same teacher is teaching a pair of subjects. These correlations
are estimated based not only on school and year but also on class fixed effects. Clearly this evidence
indicates that the teacher gender bias we measure captures teachers' and not students' behavior. In
Table A3 we present these correlations for various combinations of subjects and report the individual



                                                      13
correlations between different pairs of subjects. The pattern is very similar when we look at each pair of
subjects separately.
    The estimated effects for the same-teachers case in Table 7 are almost identical to the estimated cor-
relation coefficient obtained in Table 6. The estimated effects in columns 3-4 are 0.664 (SE=0.061) in 11th
grade and 0.581 (SE=0.064) in 12th grade, while in Table 11 the related estimates were 0.671 (SE=0.050)
in 11th grade and 0.628 (SE=0.042) in 12th grade. If this correlation is driven by some classroom-specific
unobserved dynamics or other gender-specific unobserved skills or characteristics, then we would expect
to find the same pattern in the case of different teachers. These estimated effects are presented in columns
1-2 and correspond to the case in which different teachers instruct students from the same class in two
different subjects. The estimates are very close to zero, and are not statistically significant. These results
provide further evidence that our teacher bias measures reflect teachers' favoritism behavior.
    Using the sample of 114 schools, we are able to measure teacher biases based on their current classes
and compare them to the estimates from the sample of 21 schools. These results are presented in online
appendix Table A4 and show that the differences between these two sets of bias estimates are small and
follow the same pattern across subjects. The combined evidence presented in Tables 5 and A3 shows that
the estimates of teacher bias derived from the sample of 21 schools based on all other classes are very
similar to the bias measures obtained from the sample of 114 schools based on the current teacher's class.
In the next section, we report the results of estimating the effect of various measures of teachers' bias
on students' short-term academic performance (i.e., subsequent national exam tests) and on longer-term
outcomes­specifically, choice of university field of study and quality of the post-secondary program.



4    Effect of Teacher Biases on High School Outcomes

We estimate the following model to obtain the effect of teacher biases in 11th grade on the performance
of students on 12th grade national exams. We note again that test scores on these exams are used by
universities to admit students to study programs and therefore these are high stake exams.


                  Yicjt =  + µc + j + t + Xicjt + T Bcj + cj + icjt                     (2)

    where Yicjt denotes the outcome of student i, in high school or class c, subject j and year t; Xicjt is
a vector of a student's prior score on the national exam in subject j; µc is a high school or class fixed
effect; j is a subject fixed effect; t is a year fixed effect, and T Bcj is the measure of teachers' biased



                                                     14
behavior in school (class) c and subject j. We also control for the gender of the teacher in the regressions.
The error term in the equation includes a school- (or class-) and subject-specific random element cj that
allows for any type of correlation within observations of the same school across classes and an individual
random element icjt . The coefficient of interest is  and it captures the effect of teacher bias on academic
outcomes.
    We use the following two correction techniques when estimating equation 2: (1) an empirical Bayes
(EB) shrinkage estimation approach to address the sampling error that might result from the fact that
some bias measures might be obtained from a small number of observations20 and (2) a two-step boot-
strapping technique to account for the fact that the main variable of interest is a generated regressor.21
After adjusting the teacher bias measures for estimation error using the EB shrinkage approach, the
standard deviations of teacher bias are 0.279 and 0.328 for the core and classics subjects, while before
the shrinkage the standard deviations of teacher bias were 0.299 and 0.359. This confirms that only a
small part of the variation between teachers is due to sampling noise. It has been shown that applying
the empirical Bayes technique to the explanatory variable addresses attenuation bias that would result if
we were using standard OLS standard errors (Jacob and Lefgren, 2005). The EB shrinkage adjustment
and two-step bootstrapping are used in all of our regressions to estimate the effects of teacher bias on
students' subsequent outcomes and choices.
    In Table 8 we present the results of estimating equation (2) to obtain the effect of teacher bias in 11th
  20
      Our main measure of teacher bias is derived based on a teacher's grading behavior in 16 different classes
(Table 4), which makes it highly unlikely for a small number of observations to have a large impact on the outcome
variables. Nevertheless, we follow Kane and Staiger (2008) and construct the EB shrinkage factor for teachers in
our sample. The EB shrinkage is the ratio of signal variance to signal variance plus noise variance. We assume
that the measure of teacher bias includes an error component. Thus, we estimate teachers' effects on students'
weighted difference between non-blind and blind scores (where the weights are the inverse proportion of each gender
in class, defined positively for boys and negatively for girls). This allows us to distinguish between the signal
variance (variance of teachers' effects) and noise variance of teacher i (variance of the residuals for teacher i).
The EB estimate for each teacher is a weighted average of the teacher estimated effect and the mean of teacher
estimates, where the weight is the EB shrinkage factor. By using this approach the noisy measure of a teacher bias
is multiplied by an estimate of its reliability, where the reliability of a noisy measure is the ratio of signal variance
to signal variance plus noise variance. Thus, the less reliable estimates of teacher bias (those with a large variation
in estimated residuals) are shrunk towards the mean of teacher estimates.
   21
      This procedure is done in two steps. Two-step estimations obtain inconsistent standard errors in the second-
stage regression, as they fail to account for the presence of a generated regressor (Pagan, 1984). We follow a
two-step bootstrapping method to compute standard errors (Ashraf and Galor, 2013). Bootstrapped standard
errors are constructed as follows: In the first stage, a random sample with replacement is drawn from each class
by the gender of students. Then a new measure of teacher gender bias is calculated using this random sample of
students. In the second stage, we estimate the effect of these new teacher gender bias on students' performance
in 12th grade national exams and the coefficients are stored. This process of two-step bootstrap sampling and
estimation is repeated 1,000 times. Standard deviations in the sample of 1,000 observations of coefficient estimates
from the second step are the bootstrap standard errors of the estimates of teacher biases. These standard errors
are reported from now on in all tables.



                                                           15
grade as measured based on all classes taught by the teacher except the current class. From now on this
is the treatment variable that we use in all regressions as the measure of teachers' biases, unless otherwise
stated. The dependent variable in the regression is the blind score in a given subject in 12th grade and
we use the sample of 21 schools. We report estimates based on three regression specifications: The first
includes subject and year fixed effects, the second includes school fixed effects and the third includes a
class instead of a school fixed effect. Standard errors are adjusted for the two-step bootstrapping technique
and are clustered at the class level. The estimated effects in all three specifications are positive in the
boys' regressions and negative in the girls' regressions. We present estimates on students' performance in
the core, classics, science and exact science subjects separately. In the core and exact science subjects,
the estimated coefficients for boys and girls are almost identical, but with an opposite sign. A one sd
increase in 11th grade core subjects' teacher bias increases boys' test score in 12th grade by 0.09 sd and
reduces girls' test score by 0.10 sd. In classics, the effect for boys is 0.19 and smaller and not significant.
In science, the effects are larger; a 0.21 increase among boys and a 0.11 decrease among girls. In exact
science the effect is large and negative for girls at 0.16, while for boys it is 0.15. Appendix Table A9 is
a mirror image of Table 8, but the teacher bias measure is derived from the teacher's current class boys
and girls, blind and non-blind test scores. Based on the same sample of 21 schools, the point estimates
in this table display the exact same pattern; a positive effect on boys and a negative effect on girls with
similar point estimates. The similarity in the estimates presented in Table 9 and Table A8 reflect the
high correlation between the two measures of teachers' biases, underscoring the persistence of teachers'
stereotypical gender attitudes.
   Summarizing the evidence presented in Tables 5-8, we find that teachers who persistently exhibit a
pro-boy bias in 11th grade have a positive effect on boys and a negative effect on girls' test score in
the 12th grade national exam. The absolute effect size is similar by gender and they are economically
meaningful. These results suggest that the various bias measures are highly correlated and the high degree
of persistence is similar in male and female teachers.


4.1   Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Female and Male Teachers and School Prin-
      cipals

In Tables A5 and A6 in the online appendix we present the means and the standard deviations of teacher
bias by subject for male and female teachers. Table A5 presents the differences when the bias is measured
based on the current class, while Table A6 presents the same statistics when the bias is measured based



                                                      16
on all other classes. Teachers in all subjects and both genders appear to be pro-girl, as the mean biases
are negative. The difference in the average bias seems to be statistically significant in physics in 11th
grade, with male teachers demonstrating significantly more "pro-girl" behavior (-0.164 against -0.068 in
Table A5 and -0.212 against -0.076 in Table A6) compared to female teachers. The same pattern persists
in economics in 12th grade, in which male teachers seem to have a significantly stronger negative bias
compared to female teachers. Additionally, female teachers in mathematics in 12th grade seem to be
significantly more "pro-girl" under both measures of the teacher biases. The pattern by which teachers
are even more pro-girl in mathematics and physics is intriguing, especially because in Tables 2 and 3 we
notice that these are the subjects in which boys perform better than girls in the national exams.
   How does teacher gender bias evolve over time for the most experienced teachers in our sample?
Figure A7 shows the average teacher bias over time for all teachers and also for male and female teachers
only.22 We focus this analysis on teachers in the sample with 8 or 9 years of experience during the study
period. This allows us to follow them for a meaningful period of time and observe their behavior in
consecutive years. In this analysis we use average teacher bias in all other classes and subjects, for each
year. In the top, middle, and bottom panels of Figure A7, we present the average teacher biases for all
teachers and also only for male and female teachers. As expected, the average bias is negative (pro-girl
behavior) and stable over time. Male and female teachers exhibit the same pattern.
   In Table A7 we present estimates in which we allow the effect of teachers' biases to vary by teacher's
gender. We add to equation (2) an interaction term between T Bcj and an indicator for female teacher
and we also include in the equation the main effect for teacher's gender. The coefficient on the interaction
term in the boys' regression is positive in all four groups of subjects (core, classics, science and exact
science), but it is not significantly different from zero in all cases. This implies that female teachers' bias
has a larger effect on boys than that of male teachers, but we do not have enough power to estimate this
difference precisely. The effect of female teachers' bias on girls is smaller than the effect of male teachers'
biases. The effect of having pro-boy teachers on girls remains negative and significant in core and exact
science subjects and the effect of female teachers is also negative but smaller and not significantly different
from the effect of male teachers. Female teachers' grading bias seems more harmful for girls than for boys,
but again we cannot draw firm conclusions given the standard error of the estimates. Figure 6 presents
the distribution of our main measure of teacher bias for male and female teachers separately.
   School principals may act as role models for students, their gender perhaps mitigate or enhance the
  22
       A teacher sample is used here.



                                                      17
effect of teachers' gender biases. In Table A8 we allow for teachers' bias effect to vary by the gender of
the school principal. Overall, the effect of grading bias on boys is negative and larger in schools with a
female principal, but this differential treatment effect is not statistically significant.


4.2    The Effect of Teachers Biased Grading on Students' School Attendance

In Table 9 we examine whether students' absenteeism is affected by teachers' stereotypical behavior
toward boys and girls. We view this outcome as a mechanism for the effect of teachers' biases on test
scores because it is related to the amount of instructional time students are exposed to in school. We
use three measures of school attendance: total number, excused and unexcused hours of being absent
from school. The first is the sum of excused and unexcused hours of absence, the second is excused hours
of absence and the third is the unexcused hours of absence. Some absences are authorized by parents,
often with a note signed by a doctor or parent for short-term illness. An unexcused absence signals the
students' reluctance to attend school or a student's suspension.
   In Table 9, columns 1-6 and 7-12 we present estimates of the effect of teachers' biases on students'
11th and 12th grade school absences­total, excused and unexcused. We use four different bias measures,
each based on a different group of subjects: core, classics, science and exact science. In all specifications
we include subject, year, and class fixed effects. The estimated effects on total and unexcused absences
are positive in the boys' regressions and negative in the girls' regressions. This means that an increase in
a teacher's bias in favor of boys increases boys' class attendance and reduces girls' class attendance. This
effect is largest on unexcused absences. For example, a one sd increase in 11th grade bias in core subjects
decreases boys' unexcused absences in 11th grade by 0.6 hours and increases girls' unexcused absences by
0.4 hours. Estimates of girls' unexcused absences are statistically significant for all groups of subjects,
except classics. Respective patterns are similar in 12th grade. Boys seem to attend class more often when
their teacher exhibits pro-boy behavior, while girls seem to attend their class less often when their teacher
exhibits pro-boy behavior. A one sd increase in 12th grade science or exact science teacher's bias increases
girls' unexcused absences in 12th grade by approximately 1 hour. These results suggest that the effect
of teachers' biases on cognitive performance of students in national exams are partly mediated through
increasing or decreasing absenteeism from regular school days, making them miss classes and material
covered during these days.23
  23
    There is growing evidence of the effect of instructional time in school on students' test score in primary and
high school standardized exams. See for example Lavy (2015) and Lavy (2019) and Rivkin and Schiman (2015).




                                                       18
4.3   Placebo Estimation

Table 10 presents our placebo treatment estimates based on randomly reshuffling teacher gender biases
within each school and subject. We examine these effects in each group of subjects (core, classics, science
and exact science) separately.
    Placebo treatment estimates are very different from the true treatment effect estimates presented in
Table 8. For example, placebo estimated effects on boys are -0.004, 0.026, -0.045 and 0.005­all almost zero
and not statistically significant­while the respective estimates in Table 8 are 0.090, 0.185, 0.211 and 0.145.
The same findings are obtained for girls. The lack of any discernible effects in the placebo regressions
suggests that the estimates of the actual bias measures are not biased due to omitted unobservable
confounders.



5     Effect of Teachers' Biases on University Enrollment and Choice of

      Field of Study

5.1   Effect of Teachers' Gender Biases on University Enrollment

We first examine whether teachers' gender bias affects students' probability of enrollment in any post-
secondary institution. We again group subjects in core, classics, science and exact science and we estimate
the effects of the 11th and 12th grades bias, separately. Table 11 presents estimates from a linear regres-
sion model in which the dependent variable is equal to one if a student enrolls in some post-secondary
institution and zero otherwise. Given our large sample, the estimates from this model are not different
from marginal effects obtained from a probit or logit regression model. Estimates for boys are presented
in columns 1 and 3 and for girls in columns 2 and 4. All regressions include subject, year and class fixed
effects. Teachers' bias in both grades increase the likelihood of boys' enrollment in any university and
they have the opposite effect on girls.
    For example, a one sd increase in 11th grade teacher bias in core, classics, science and exact science,
increases boys' likelihood of studying in a university by 2, 5, 2, and 2 percentage points. The effects of
the same increase in 12th grade is higher and equal to 4, 5, 4, and 3 percentage points. At the same time,
the effects for girls are negative. If an 11th grade teacher becomes one standard deviation more pro-boy
in core, classics, science and exact science subjects, girls' likelihood of enrolling in any post-secondary
program decreases by 5, 1, 3, and 3 percentage points. The effects are similar for females in 12th grade: An
increase in teacher bias by one sd decreases their likelihood of enrolling in some post-secondary program


                                                     19
by 3, 4, 2, and 3 percentage points.


5.2    Effect of Teacher Bias on University Field of Study

Teachers' gender bias may affect university schooling through two channels. The first is by affecting test
scores in exams that are used for admission to universities and various study programs. Higher test scores
in these exams enable admission to highly-demanded universities and fields of study. Second, higher test
scores in the national exams may increase students' self-confidence and motivation, which can increase
their interest in higher education and more challenging and rewarding courses. In this section we will
estimate the effect of teachers' bias on students' choice of field of study conditional on enrollment in a
university, and on the quality of the university where a student is enrolled.
   We group fields of study at the university according to the four study tracks, in the same way as we
did for high school. The humanities include liberal arts, literature, psychology, journalism, philosophy,
education, Greek language, history, foreign languages, home economics and law. Social sciences includes
economics, statistics, business and management, accounting, political science and European studies. Ex-
act science includes mathematics, engineering, physics and computer science. Science includes biology,
chemistry, medicine, pharmacy, veterinary studies and dentistry. Table 12 shows that among boys, 3.7
percent enroll in science studies, 22.3 percent in exact science, 21.2 percent in social science and 8.8
percent in humanities. 18.1 percent do not enroll in any post-secondary schooling and 25.8 percent are
enrolled in vocational schooling. Among girls, 4.6 percent are enrolled in science studies, 9.9 percent in
exact science, 22.5 percent in social science and 27.5 percent in humanities. Of the rest, 18.4 percent
of girls do not enroll in any post-secondary schooling and 17.1 enrolled in vocational schooling. Clearly,
there are large gender differences in the proportion of enrolled students in exact sciences and humanities.
Figure A3 presents the proportion of students enrolled in each field of university study by year and Fig-
ure A4 presents the proportion of enrolled boys and girls in each field of university study.24 We therefore
focus our analysis on the effect of high school teachers' biases on the choice of field of study conditional
on attending university.
   We model students' choices in a linear probability regression in which we stack the four possible choices
as the dependent variable for each student against teachers' bias in each of the four areas of study. The
dependent variable is a 0/1 indicator, assuming the value of 1 for the observed field of study and 0 for the
other three possible choices. We estimate simple linear probability models since a probit or logit model
  24
    In Figure A5 we also present the proportion of students enrolled in each STEM field of university study by
year and in Figure A6 we present the proportion of enrolled boys and girls in each STEM field of university study.


                                                       20
will yield similar estimates, given that we use very large samples. We estimate three specifications: The
benchmark includes year and major fixed effects and the national exam score in 11th or 12th grade, a
second specification adds high school fixed effects and in the third we replace the latter with a high school
class fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered at the class level.
   The teacher bias we assign to each field of study is as follows. For exact science we average the biases
in 11th grade in algebra, geometry and physics and the 12th grade biases in mathematics and physics.
For science, we average the 11th grade biases in algebra, geometry and physics and the 12th grade bias in
biology. For humanities, we the average the biases in 11th and 12th grade in history and Modern Greek.
For social science, we average 11th grade biases in Modern Greek and history and 12th grade bias in
economics. Figures A1 and A2 present these average bias measures by high school track (Figure A1) and
the related annual core subjects bias in each field of university study (Figure A2).
   In Table 13 we present the effect of 11th and 12th grade teachers' biases on the choice of university
field of study. In the top panel we present evidence from a stacked sample of 11th and 12th grade classes
in 2003-2005. These regressions include grade fixed effects in all specifications. In the bottom panel we
present evidence based on the sample of 12th grade classes for the whole sample period, 2003-2011.
   The absolute size of the estimated effect of 11th grade bias is small and not significant for boys, while
for girls the estimates are more precisely measured and are significantly different from zero. The estimated
effect on girls is -0.037 with year and school fixed effects and -0.046 when we add class fixed effects. The
estimated effects for girls with school or class fixed effects suggest that a one sd increase in bias in favor
of boys in a given field lowers the probability of girls' choosing that field of study by 4.6 percent. The
respective estimate of the 12th grade bias is similar. The estimated effect for boys is not significant, while
for girls it is -0.042 when the preferred specification is used. In Table A10 in the online appendix we
present estimates in which the bias is measured based on the current class in a given year. The same
pattern emerges with a negative effect of 11th and 12th grade bias on girls and a positive though small and
non-significant effect on boys. What is striking is that the effect sizes for girls are practically identical,
regardless of how we calculate the bias, based on all other classes taught by a teacher or based only on his
current class (-0.046 vs -0.040 for the 2003-2005 sample and -0.042 vs -0.048 for the 2003-2011 sample).
   We also estimate a model in which we include in the set of choices the node of vocational education as
possible post-secondary schooling. These results are presented in Table A11 in the online appendix. We
assign to vocational departments the average bias in 11th and 12th grades in science and exact science.
These results show a similar pattern to those reported in Table 13.



                                                      21
5.3   Effect of Teachers' Gender Biases on Quality of Program Enrolled In

We next present estimates of the effect of teachers' gender bias on the quality of post-secondary program
students enroll in. We rank universities in each field of study, first based on the average score in national
exams of students enrolled either across all years or based on 2003 (the first year in our data) and secondly
based on the admissions cutoffs, which we determine using the marginal student enrolled in the program
in the average year or in 2003. We then transform the ranking distribution to percentile rank.
   In Table 14 we present estimates of the effect of teachers' gender bias on the rank of the students'
university and department of study. We use in these regressions the quality of each post-secondary
program calculated across all years in the sample. As a measure of teachers' gender bias we use the
average bias of teachers in the core subjects that are closest to the university field of study. Estimates in
columns 1-4 are from regressions in which we use the 11th grade teachers' gender biases, while in columns
5-8 we use the 12th grade teachers' bias. Overall, we find positive estimates for boys (columns 1 and 3)
and negative estimates for girls (columns 2 and 4). For example, a one sd increase in 11th grade pro-boys
teachers' bias lowers for girls the rank of the department of study in humanities by 6 percentiles in the
admissions cutoff distribution (column 2) or 7 percentiles in the mean score of the admitted students
distribution (column 4). Twelfth-grade estimates follow the same pattern although they are smaller
for girls but still statistically significant. Estimated effects for boys are positive but imprecise. They
imply that a one standard deviation increase in pro-boy teachers' bias in the related subjects leads to
lower enrollment of boys in exact science departments by 9 percentiles based on the first quality measure
(column 1) or 10 percentiles when the second quality measure is used (column 3). Estimates for girls are
negative but not precise. We find similar results when we combine the related fields of study, as shown
in the bottom part of Table 14.
   In Table 15 we report the effect of 11th and 12th grade teachers' gender bias on the percentile rank of
each student's enrolled post-secondary program by field of study. The quality of post-secondary program
is calculated only based on the 2003 cohort. The first row presents estimates when the bias variable is
the average in core subjects, in the second row in classics track subjects, in the third row in science track
subjects and in the fourth row in exact science track subjects. Focusing on the effect of the gender bias
based on 11th grade classes (Panel A), all estimates in columns 1 and 3 are positive and all estimates in
columns 2 and 4 are negative. The effect in the boys' sample is statistically significant for bias in the core
subjects and classics tracks. For girls the effect is statistically significant for bias in core subjects and
exact science tracks. In panel B we present estimates when the bias is measured in 12th grade classes and


                                                     22
the patterns of signs and significance of estimates are similar to those in panel A.
     The results presented in this section add another channel to the arsenal through which teachers'
gender stereotypical behavior affect high school students. Since the quality of university schooling impact
employment and earnings throughout adulthood, gender based biased grading of teachers clearly impose
financial cost on their students. The estimated effects seem larger for boys, especially in science and
exact science. Since these fields of study have higher predicted earnings, teachers' grading biases may
contribute to the gender wage gap through this channel.



6        Does the Gender Bias Vary with Teacher's Quality?

The results reported above show that teachers' gender bias affects not only the subsequent performance
of boys and girls during high school but also their post-secondary choices and decisions and the quality of
their university schooling. In this section, we examine who are the teachers that discriminate by exploring
the relationship between teacher gender biases and teacher quality. We use teachers' value-added (TVA)
as a measure of their quality (Chetty et al., 2014a,b).
     We construct TVA for teachers in the sample of 21 schools using the data for the 2003-2005 period.
We use students' test score data in 10th -12th grades. We compute TVA using the mean performance of
each teacher's class. The random assignment of students and teachers to classes in the Greek high school
system guarantees that there is no selection and sorting.25 However, we still control for the student
demographics and lagged test score in the most closely related subject. Table A12 in the online appendix
presents summary statistics for these controls which include gender, age, and an indicator for being born
in the first quarter of a calendar year. We also control for whether a student expressed an interest in
enrolling in given track (classics, science, or exact science). We pool students' test scores in 11th and 12th
grades, and as a measure of prior test scores we use the 10th and 11th grade test scores.
     Thus, TVA is measured in terms of standard deviations in the test score distribution and is estimated
using data from all classes taught by a teacher in all years he appears in the data in our study period.
Our sample includes only students who have non-missing values for the control variables we use in the
baseline value-added model.26 We show the distribution of TVA in 2003-2005 in the top panel of Figure 7.
    25
      Each school's board decides the assignment of teachers to classes. Specifically, teachers are assigned to classes
following a process that schedules their various classes across grades based on the subjects they teach (each teacher
who teaches in high school has a specific teaching specialization and teaches specific subjects). According to the
law, if there is any disagreement between members of the school board about teachers' assignment to classes, then
members of the school authority and the school counselor are asked to attend the meeting and determine the
assignment of teachers to classes.
   26
      Our baseline VA model includes as controls students' demographics, cubic polynomials of lagged test scores in


                                                          23
We then restrict the sample so that VA is only weighted by the number of teachers (and not students)
in the school-year-grade-subject-class-year cell, and we also keep only teachers whose gender bias we can
measure, as we describe below.
   The teacher gender bias measure we use in this section is the average teacher gender bias overall
classes the teacher taught during 2006-2011. We restrict the analysis to this period in order to avoid an
overlap between the period in which we measure TVA and the period we use to estimate the correlation
between teachers' gender bias and TVA. This restriction is not a limitation at all because of the high
persistency in teachers' biased behavior across classes and years as we have shown above. In the bottom
panel of Figure 7 we show the distribution of teachers' gender bias using the data for 2006-2011 only.
   We start the analysis by presenting descriptive statistics and comparisons of VA for teachers who are
pro-boy and those who are pro-girl. We define as pro-boy teachers who have a bias greater than 0.10
and as pro-girl teachers whose gender bias is smaller than -0.10. We consider teachers with a gender
bias between -0.10 and 0.10 to be neutral in terms of gender bias. Our sample includes 101 pro-boy
teachers, 259 pro-girl teachers, and 58 neutral teachers. In Table 16 we present the means and standard
deviations of TVA for these three groups. Column 3 shows the difference and standard errors of the
pairwise differences. We note that neutral teachers have a TVA that is not strictly zero, but it is small
and statistically not different from zero (equal to 0.053 with sd=0.132).
   Pro-boys and pro-girls teachers have lower TVA, -0.037 (sd=0.222) and -0.049 (sd=0.235), respectively,
while neutral teachers have high TVA, 0.053 (sd=0.132). These differences, presented in column 3 between
neutral teachers and the other two groups, are statistically significant.
   In Table 17 we present estimates of the standard coefficient of teachers' gender bias from a TVA
regression model. We construct two bias variables as splines indicators. The first is a spline-variable
for pro-boy teachers, and it assumes positive values for teacher gender bias, otherwise zero. The second
spline is similarly constructed for pro-girl teachers. In particular, the spline-variable for pro-girls teachers
assumes negative values for teacher gender bias, otherwise zero. We include these two spline variables
in the same regression. All regressions include year, school and grade fixed effects. The estimate of the
pro-boy bias variable is negative and statistically significant. Changing the specification, from column
1 to column 4 by adding gradually control variables (teacher's gender, class size and teacher's years of
the same subject, class size, school-level-grade enrollment, gender of the teacher, number of classes taught by the
teacher throughout the years (a proxy for a teacher's experience), class and school-grade means of prior-year test
scores, and neighborhood income. When a prior test score is missing, we set the prior score equal to 0 and include
an indicator for missing data. In Table A12 we show summary statistics for the variables that we used to estimate
the TVA models.



                                                        24
teaching experience), does not move the point estimate. This means that the higher the bias in favor of
boys, the lower the teacher quality. Estimates of the pro-girl bias variable are symmetrical, indicating
that a higher grading bias in favor of girls also leads to lower TVA.
   Another way to examine the relationship between TVA and teachers' grading bias is by splitting the
teacher bias measure into three ranges ­ pro-boy, pro-girl, and neutral ­ and constructing three dummy
indicators. We construct these indicators as follows: an indicator for teachers with a bias larger than
0.10 (pro-boy), a second for teachers with a bias smaller than -0.10 (pro-girl), and a third for teachers
with a bias between -0.10 and 0.10. These thresholds are somewhat arbitrary, and we examine below
how sensitive are the results to varying the thresholds. Of course, only two of these 0/1 indicators can be
included in the regression and we choose to omit the neutral group indicator. We present these results
in Table 18. Estimated coefficients of the dummies for pro-girl and pro-boy teachers are both negative
and statistically significant. Pro-girl and pro-boy teachers are associated with a reduction in TVA by
0.04 sd and by 0.03 sd, relative to neutral teachers. Gradually adding controls to the regression leaves
the estimates almost unchanged. This provides further evidence that neutral teachers are on average of
higher quality (higher TVA) compared to pro-boy and pro-girl teachers. These estimates are consistent
with the findings we report in Tables 15-16.
   In contemporaneous work (Lavy and Megalokonomou 2019), we find that there are not statistically
significant differences between TVA by the gender of teachers. Males and female teachers seem to be
of similar quality, on average, based on their TVA. Additionally, we find that science teachers are of
higher quality than exact science and classics teachers. In particular, science teachers have on average
positive TVA, while exact science and classics teachers have negative TVA on average. We also find that
exact science teachers have lower quality than classics teachers and that more experienced teachers have
a higher TVA on average.
   The evidence in this section is the first we know that attempt to link gender discriminatory behavior
of teachers to their quality. Our data does not include information on teachers' background so we cannot
identify who are the teachers that discriminate except based on TVA. However, earlier literature on
TVA or other measures of their quality show that these are not correlated with teachers' education,
age, experience, and personal status (see for example (Rivkin et al., 2005)). There are however some
descriptive studies that examined the correlation between prejudice or discrimination and education or
cognition. For example, Kuppens and Spears (2014) find that education reduces explicit self-report
measures of anti-Black attitudes, but it is much less related to implicit measures of anti-Black attitudes.



                                                    25
Higher educated people are more likely to be aversive racists, that is, to score low on explicit, but not
implicit measures of prejudice. Wodtke (2016) finds that high-ability whites are less likely than low-ability
whites to report prejudicial attitudes and more likely to support racial equality in principle, but they are
not more likely to support a variety of remedial policies for racial inequality. There is less evidence on
the correlation between education and gender based prejudice and discrimination. Sawhill (2014) argues
that college-educated men have adapted reasonably well to the feminist revolution but it seems to have
bypassed low-income men. This view implies negative correlation between education and gender based
discriminatory behavior.



7    Conclusion

In this paper we investigate how teachers' gender biases affect students' school attendance and academic
performance in high school, their probability of enrolling in a post-secondary program, the choice of
university field of study and the university's national quality rank in the respective study area, in terms
of the quality of its admitted students. The measure of teachers' gender-biased behavior we use is based
on a comparison of boys' and girls' average class test scores in a non-blind exam that the teacher marks,
versus a blind exam graded externally. We use panel data information on teachers' class assignment
history throughout the period we study and measure a teacher's grading behavior in each class. We then
use the teacher's average gender bias based on all classes except the one on which we are measuring
the bias impact. This approach allows us to estimate the effect of the persistent component of teachers'
biases, an endeavour that has not previously succeeded due to the lack of panel data. Based on observing
teachers in 16 classes, on average, we find that the teachers who are biased in one class are biased in the
same way in other classes in the same year and in classes in earlier or later academic years. The very
high correlations of within-teacher bias in different classes reveal high persistency in teachers' favoritism
or stereotypical behavior.
    For identification, we rely on the random assignment of teachers and students to classes in a large
number of high schools in Greece. We use novel data from a sample of high schools and compare students
who are exposed to teachers who have different patterns of gender stereotypical biases. An important
contribution of this paper is the use of gender stereotypical behavior `out of sample' (that is, in other
classes in previous and following years). This enables us to address several threats to the interpretation,
and provide further support that our estimates reflect teachers' behavior and not random (small sample)
variation in the unobserved quality or non-cognitive skills of the boys vs. girls in a particular class or any


                                                     26
other class-specific dynamics. We also construct measures for a teacher's quality using the value added
approach and exploiting the panel aspect of the data. An important contribution of this paper is that we
investigate the association between teacher quality and teacher gender biases.
   We can summarize our results with four broad conclusions. First, the same teachers who are biased
for one class are biased in the same way for other classes in the same year and in classes in earlier or
later academic years. The very high correlations of within-teacher biases in different classes reveal high
persistent stereotypical behavior by some teachers. This finding suggests that the stereotypical biases are
deeply rooted, a feature that should be taken into account in any planned remedial interventions. Second,
an increase in teachers' bias (more pro-boy behavior) in core and track subjects (classics, social science,
science, exact science) has a positive effect on boys' and a negative effect on girls' performance on the
end of high school university admissions exams. Female teachers are more pro-girls on average, but the
effects of female and male teachers' bias on national exams are not statistically different. Third, teachers'
bias in core and track courses affect the likelihood that students will enroll in a post-secondary program
and the quality of the program that they enroll in. Additionally, teacher bias has an effect on the related
field of study at the university level. This average effect masks large heterogeneity by gender, being larger
and statistically significant for girls and not different from zero for boys. Fourth, we find that the most
effective teachers (measured by their VA) have neutral attitude towards the two genders, namely they do
not exhibit any gender grading biases. This suggest that less effective teachers can harm their students
twice, first by being an ineffective teacher and second by discriminating against one of the genders. If this
relationship is causal, then it implies that training that improves teachers' quality will likely also reduce
gender-based discrimination in schools.




                                                     27
References

Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013). The 'Out of Africa' Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and Compar-
  ative Economic Development. American Economic Review 103 (1), 1­46.

Bae, Y. and T. Smith (1997). Women in Mathematics and Science. Findings from" The Condition of
  Education. National Center for Education Statistics (11).

Bertrand, M. and E. Duflo (2016). Field Experiments on Discrimination. Technical Report 22014, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Blank, R. (1991). The Effects of Double-Blind versus Single-Blind Reviewing: Experimental Evidence
  from the American Economic Review. American Economic Review (81), 1041­1067.

Botelho, F., R. A. Madeira, and M. A. Rangel (2015). Racial Discrimination in Grading: Evidence from
  Brazil. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (4), 37­52.

Burgess, S. and E. Greaves (2013). Test Scores, Subjective Assessment, and Stereotyping of Ethnic
  Minorities. Journal of Labor Economics 31 (3), 535­576.

Carlana, M. (2019). Implicit Stereotypes: Evidence from Teachers' Gender Bias. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics Forthcoming.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014a). Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I: Evaluating
  Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates. American Economic Review 104 (9), 2593­2632.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014b). Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher
  Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood. American Economic Review 104 (9), 2633­79.

Cornwell, C., D. B. Mustard, and J. V. Parys (2013). Non-cognitive Skills and the Gender Dispar-
  ities in Test Scores and Teacher Assessments: Evidence from Primary School. Journal of Human
  Resources 48 (1), 236­264.

Dweck, C., W. Davidson, S. Nelson, and B. Enna (1978). Sex Differences in Learned Helplessness:
  ii. The Contingencies of Evaluative Feedback in the Classroom and iii. An Experimental Analysis.
  Developmental Psychology 14, 268­276.

Goldin, C. and C. Rouse (2000). Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of "Blind "Auditions on Female
  Musicians. American Economic Review (90), 715­741.

                                                  28
Goulas, S. and R. Megalokonomou (2018). Which degrees do students prefer during recessions? Empirical
  Economics 56 (6), 2093­2125.

Hanna, R. N. and L. L. Linden (2012). Discrimination in Grading. American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy 4 (4), 146­68.

Hyde, J. and S. Jaffe (1998). Prospectives from Social and Feminist Psychology. Educational Re-
  searcher 27 (5), 14­16.

Jacob, B. A. and L. Lefgren (2005). Principals as Agents: Subjective Performance Measurement in
  Education. Working Paper 11463, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kane, T. J. and D. O. Staiger (2008). Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achievement: An Experi-
  mental Evaluation. Working Paper 14607, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kuppens, T. and R. Spears (2014). You don't have to be well-educated to be an aversive racist, but it
  helps. Social Science Research 45, 211 ­ 223.

Lansdell, H. (1962). A Sex Difference in the Effect of Temporal lobe Neurosurgery on Design Preference.
  Nature 194, 852­854.

Lavy, V. (2008). Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls' or Boys' Human Capital Outcomes? Evidence
  from a Natural Experiment. Journal of Public Economics (92), 2083­2105.

Lavy, V. (2015). Do Differences in School's Instruction Time Explain International Achievement Gaps
  in Math, Science, and Reading Evidence from Developed and Developing Countries. Economic Jour-
  nal 125 (588), F397­F424.

Lavy, V. (2019). Expanding School Resources and Increasing Time on Task: Effects of a Policy Exper-
  iment in Israel on Student Academic Achievement and Behavior. Journal of the European Economic
  Association .

Lavy, V. and R. Megalokonomou (2019). Long-Term Effects of Teachers: Evidence from a Random
  Assignment of Teachers to Students. Mimeo .

Lavy, V. and E. Sand (2018). On The Origins of the Gender Human Capital Gap: Short and Long Term
  Effect of Teachers' Stereotypes. Journal of Public Economics. 167, 263­279.




                                                  29
Leinhardt, G., A. M. Seewald, and M. Engel (1979). Learning what's taught: Sex Differences in Instruc-
  tion. Journal of Educational Psychology 71 (4), 432­439.

OECD (2018). Education for a Bright Future in Greece. Reviews of National Policies for Education,
  OECD. Publishing, Paris..

Pagan, A. (1984). Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated Regressors. Inter-
  national Economic Review 25 (1), 221­247.

Rebhorn, L. S. and D. D. Miles (1999). High-Stakes Testing: Barrier to Gifted Girls in Mathematics and
  Science? School Science and Mathematics 99 (6), 313­319.

Rivkin, S. G., E. A. Hanushek, and J. F. Kain (2005). Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achievement.
  Econometrica 73 (2), 417­458.

Rivkin, S. G. and J. C. Schiman (2015). Instruction Time, Classroom Quality, and Academic Achievement.
  125 (588), 425­448.

Rockoff, J. E. (2004). The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from Panel
  Data. The American Economic Review 94 (2), 247­252.

Sadker, M. and D. Sadker (1985). Sexism in the Classroom. Vocational Education Journal 60 (7), 30­32.

Sawhill, I. V. (2014). Generation Unbound: Drifting into Sex and Parenthood without Marriage. Brookings
  Institution Press.

Terrier, C. (2014). Giving a Little Help to Girls? Evidence on Grade Discrimination and its Effect on
  Students' Achievement. PSE Working Papers n. 2014-36..

Tyrefors, B., E. Hglin, and M. Johannesson (2011). Are Boys Discriminated in Swedish High Schools.
  Economics of Education Review 30 (4), 682­690.

Waber, D. (1976). Sex Differences in Cognition: a Function of Maturation Rate? Science 192, 572­574.

Witelson, D. (1976). Sex and the Single Hemisphere: Specialization of the Right Hemisphere for Spatial
  Processing. Science 193, 425­427.

Wodtke, G. T. (2016, 01). Are Smart People Less Racist? Verbal Ability, Anti-Black Prejudice, and the
  Principle-Policy Paradox. Social Problems 63 (1), 21­45.


                                                   30
                                   Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Study Sample


                                               135 Schools          114 Schools          21 Schools              Difference

Variable                                        Mean      (sd)       Mean      (sd)      Mean      (sd)       diff      (s.e.)
I.   11th grade
Number of classes                               3.900     (1.199)    3.897     (1.134)   3.923     (1.581)    -0.026    (0.014)
Class size                                      19.424    (5.050)    19.537    (5.073)   18.653    (4.818)    0.884     (0.059)
School cohort size                              75.842    (27.524) 75.868      (26.257) 75.669     (34.945) 0.198       (0.320)
Proportion of students by track:
Classics                                        0.366     (0.058)    0.365     (0.058)   0.375     (0.054)    -0.010    (0.001)
Science                                         0.280     (0.074)    0.282     (0.070)   0.265     (0.095)    0.017     (0.001)
Exact Science                                   0.344     (0.070)    0.342     (0.068)   0.360     (0.078)    -0.018    (0.001)
Proportion of female students                   0.563     (0.496)    0.562     (0.496)   0.573     (0.495)    -0.011    (0.006)

No. of teacher-class-subject bias in year t                                              1,200
in own class
No. of teacher-class-subject bias in year t                                              1,051
in other classes
No. of teacher-class-subject bias in any                                                 1,128
year in all other classes
II.    12th grade
Number of classes                               3.866     (1.202)    3.868     (1.143)   3.854     (1.546)    0.014     (0.014)
Class size                                      19.589    (4.959)    19.675    (4.956)   19.006    (4.924)    0.669     (0.058)
School cohort size                              75.853    (27.520) 75.880      (26.252) 75.667     (34.944) 0.213       (0.320)
Proportion of students by track:
Classics                                        0.369     (0.060)    0.368     (0.060)   0.376     (0.056)    -0.008    (0.001)
Science                                         0.159     (0.050)    0.159     (0.050)   0.164     (0.056)    -0.005    (0.001)
Exact Science                                   0.463     (0.070)    0.463     (0.071)   0.460     (0.064)    0.003     (0.001)
Age                                             17.902    (0.465)    17.903    (0.451)   17.892    (0.552)    0.011     (0.006)

No. of teacher-class-subject bias in year t                                              2,290
in own class
No. of teacher-class-subject bias in year t                                              1,770
in other classes
No. of teacher-class-subject bias in any                                                 2,148
year in all other classes

  Notes: Teacher biases are calculated as the difference between boys' and girls' average gap between the non-blind score (NB)
  and the blind score (B) in the sample period. The school cohort size measures the number of students within a grade, school
  and year. There are three tracks available to students in 11th and 12th grade: classics, science and exact science. The baseline
  sample consists of 11th grade students in 2003-2005 and 12th grade students in 2003-2011.




                                                            31
     Table 2: Mean Scores and Standard Deviations in the National Exam (Blind) and the School Exam
                                          (Non-Blind) in 11th Grade, 2003-2005

                                                  National Exam                                     School Exam
Variables                             Boys         Girls        Difference                Boys         Girls           Difference
                                      (sd)         (sd)           (se)                    (sd)         (sd)              (se)
                                      (1)          (2)          (1)-(2)                   (3)          (4)             (3)-(4)
I.       Core subjects
Modern Greek                          -0.206       0.167            -0.372                -0.276       0.223           -0.500
                                      (0.997)      (0.971)          (0.013)               (1.003)      (0.925)         (0.013)
History                               -0.116       0.094            -0.210                -0.175       0.142           -0.317
                                      (0.965)      (1.018)          (0.013)               (1.007)      (0.957)         (0.013)
Physics                               0.057        -0.046           0.104                 -0.050       0.040           -0.090
                                      (1.003)      (0.995)          (0.013)               (1.019)      (0.969)         (0.013)
Algebra                               0.037        -0.030           0.067                 -0.046       0.037           -0.083
                                      (1.011)      (0.990)          (0.013)               (1.014)      (0.973)         (0.013)
Geometry                              0.046        -0.037           0.084                 -0.041       0.033           -0.074
                                      (1.000)      (0.998)          (0.013)               (1.010)      (0.976)         (0.013)
II.       Classics Track
Ancient Greek                         -0.233       0.061            -0.294                -0.330       0.087           -0.416
                                      (1.027)      (0.983)          (0.027)               (1.001)      (0.951)         (0.026)
Philosophy                            -0.180       0.047            -0.227                -0.291       0.076           -0.368
                                      (0.984)      (0.999)          (0.027)               (1.047)      (0.945)         (0.026)
Latin                                 -0.241       0.063            -0.304                -0.359       0.094           -0.454
                                                                                                                       (0.026)
                                      (1.011)      (0.987)          (0.027)               (1.051)      (0.936)
II.       Science Track
Mathematics                           0.011        -0.010           0.021                 -0.043       0.039           -0.081
                                      (1.014)      (0.987)          (0.024)               (1.005)      (0.945)         (0.024)
Physics                               0.030        -0.027           0.056                 -0.023       0.021           -0.043
                                      (0.996)      (1.003)          (0.024)               (0.996)      (0.955)         (0.024)
Chemistry                             -0.002       0.002            -0.004                -0.051       0.046           -0.097
                                      (1.000)      (1.000)          (0.024)               (0.991)      (0.959)         (0.024)
III.           Exact      Science
Track
Mathematics                           -0.052       0.096            -0.148                -0.107       0.198           -0.304
                                      (0.992)      (1.007)          (0.022)               (0.980)      (0.950)         (0.022)
Physics                               -0.035       0.065            -0.101                -0.088       0.162           -0.250
                                      (0.997)      (1.002)          (0.022)               (0.990)      (0.941)         (0.022)
Technology and Computers              0.025        -0.046           0.070                 -0.095       0.177           -0.272
                                      (0.971)      (1.051)          (0.022)               (0.984)      (0.948)         (0.022)


     Notes: There are three tracks available to students in 11th grade: classics, science and exact science. In 11th grade the subjects
     taught in the classics track are ancient Greek, philosophy and Latin; in the science track: mathematics, physics, chemistry, and
     in the exact science track: mathematics, physics and computer science. The national and school exam scores are standardized
     z-scores. This table presents test scores gender gaps by type of exam (blind and non-blind) and subject in 11th grade. A positive
     difference means that boys outperform girls, while a negative difference means that girls outperform boys. The non-blind score
     in each subject is the score in the second term school exam. The estimation is based on the sample of 21 schools.


                                                               32
Table 3: Mean Scores and Standard Deviations in the National Exam (Blind) and the School Exam (Non-Blind) in
                                           12th Grade, 2003-2011

                                         National Exam                              School Exam
Variables                      Boys       Girls       Difference          Boys        Girls       Difference
                               (sd)       (sd)          (se)              (sd)        (sd)          (se)
                               (1)        (2)          (1)-(2)            (3)         (4)          (3)-(4)

I.      Core subjects

Modern Greek                   -0.205     0.159           -0.364          -0.263      0.204        -0.467
                               (1.002)    (0.969)         (0.008)         (1.034)     (0.906)      (0.008)

History                        -0.065     0.052           -0.117          -0.166      0.134        -0.300
                               (0.984)    (1.009)         (0.013)         (1.027)     (0.940)      (0.013)

Mathematics                    0.035      -0.035          0.070           -0.054      0.055        -0.109
                               (1.002)    (0.997)         (0.009)         (1.040)     (0.930)      (0.009)

Physics                        0.086      -0.071          0.156           -0.057      0.046        -0.103
                               (1.001)    (0.993)         (0.013)         (1.032)     (0.955)      (0.013)

Biology                        -0.040     0.024           -0.064          -0.166      0.101        -0.266
                               (0.992)    (1.004)         (0.010)         (1.089)     (0.906)      (0.010)

II.     Classics Track

Ancient Greek                  -0.223     0.060           -0.283          -0.297      0.080        -0.376
                               (1.037)    (0.981)         (0.016)         (1.047)     (0.934)      (0.015)

Latin                          -0.242     0.065           -0.307          -0.320      0.086        -0.406
                               (1.079)    (0.977)         (0.016)         (1.047)     (0.930)      (0.015)

Modern Literature              -0.240     0.064           -0.305          -0.350      0.094        -0.442
                               (1.046)    (0.977)         (0.016)         (1.089)     (0.923)      (0.015)

History                        -0.064     0.017           -0.081          -0.189      0.051        -0.240
                               (0.990)    (1.002)         (0.016)         (1.053)     (0.950)      (0.015)
III.      Science Track

Biology                        -0.002     0.002           -0.004          -0.035      0.026        -0.061
                               (1.013)    (0.990)         (0.020)         (1.003)     (0.922)      (0.022)

Mathematics                    0.125      -0.087          0.211           0.022       -0.016       0.038
                               (1.008)    (0.985)         (0.020)         (0.973)     (0.942)      (0.020)

Continued on next page

                                                     33
Table 3 ­ Continued from previous page


                                                 National Exam                                     School Exam


Variables                            Boys         Girls              Difference          Boys         Girls           Difference
                                     (sd)         (sd)               (se)                (sd)         (sd)            (se)
                                     (1)          (2)                (1)-(2)             (3)          (4)             (3)-(4)

Physics                              0.162        -0.113             0.275               0.022        -0.015          0.037
                                     (0.986)      (0.993)            (0.020)             (0.968)      (0.947)         (0.020)

Chemistry                            0.082        -0.057             0.139               0.003        -0.002          0.006
                                     (0.978)      (1.010)            (0.020)             (0.972)      (0.947)         (0.021)
IV.       Exact Science Track

Mathematics                          -0.026       0.044              -0.071              -0.083       0.139           -0.220
                                     (1.016)      (0.970)            (0.012)             (1.012)      (0.914)         (0.012)

Physics                              0.012        -0.020             0.032               -0.076       0.126           -0.202
                                     (1.021)      (0.963)            (0.012)             (1.012)      (0.916)         (0.012)

Business Administration              -0.066       0.110              -0.176              -0.142       0.238           -0.380
                                     (0.996)      (0.996)            (0.012)             (1.028)      (0.850)         (0.012)

Computer Science                     0.005        -0.009             0.014               -0.075       0.124           -0.199
                                     (1.012)      (0.979)            (0.012)             (1.021)      (0.900)         (0.012)

V. Optional

Economics                            -0.023       0.022              -0.046              -0.100       0.096           -0.196
                                     (0.995)      (1.004)            (0.011)             (1.024)      (0.932)         (0.011)

  Notes: There are three tracks available to students in 12th grade: classics, science and exact science. In 12th grade the subjects
  taught in the classics track are ancient Greek, Latin, literature and history; in the science track: biology, mathematics, physics
  and chemistry, and in the exact science track: mathematics, physics, business administration and application development.
  The national and school exam scores are standardized z-scores. This table presents test scores' gender gaps by type of exam
  (blind and non-blind) and subject in 12th grade. A positive difference means that boys outperform girls, while a negative
  difference means that girls outperform boys. The non-blind score in each subject is the score in the second term school exam.
  The estimation is based on the sample of 21 schools.




                                                                34
                         Table 4: Descriptive Statistics for 11th and 12th Grade Teachers
Variable                                                                           Mean      Std. Dev.       Min.     Max.
Number of classes/subjects/years/grades taught by teacher                          15.51         12.92          1       74
                                   11th grade
Number of classes/subjects/year combinations taught by teacher                      6.55         4.54           1       23
Number of classes/subjects taught by teacher by year                                3.06         1.83           1       10
2003                                                                                3.11         1.89           1       10
2004                                                                                2.95         1.76           1        8
2005                                                                                3.16         1.85           1        9
Number of different subjects taught by teacher by year                              1.48         0.54           1        3
2003                                                                                1.51         0.57           1        3
2004                                                                                1.50         0.55           1        3
2005                                                                                1.44         0.50           1        2
Number of different classes taught by teacher by year                               1.70         0.90           1        4
2003                                                                                1.72         0.86           1        4
2004                                                                                1.57         0.87           1        4
2005                                                                                1.83         0.95           1        4
Number of years a teacher teaches                                                   2.15         0.81           1        4
                                   12th grade
Number of classes/subjects/year combinations taught by teacher                     13.25         12.69          1       70
Number of classes/subjects taught by teacher by year                                3.35          2.56          1       20
2003                                                                                3.50         2.04           1       10
2004                                                                                3.84         2.37           1       11
2005                                                                                3.79         2.46           1       10
2006                                                                                4.35         4.94           1       20
2007                                                                                2.73         1.84           1        9
2008                                                                                2.63         1.73           1        7
2009                                                                                2.64         1.76           1        7
2010                                                                                2.65         1.61           1        6
2011                                                                                2.83         1.91           1        8
Number of different subjects taught by teacher by year                              1.63         0.86           1        6
2003                                                                                1.69         0.75           1        4
2004                                                                                1.84         0.95           1        6
2005                                                                                1.68         0.76           1        5
2006                                                                                2.05         1.47           1        6
2007                                                                                1.34         0.512          1        3
2008                                                                                1.37         0.52           1        3
2009                                                                                1.47         0.65           1        3
2010                                                                                1.43         0.66           1        3
2011                                                                                1.43         0.70           1        4
Number of different classes taught by teacher by year                               1.78          1.14          1        7
2003                                                                                1.83         1.11           1        6
2004                                                                                1.95         1.23           1        7
2005                                                                                2.09         1.39           1        7
2006                                                                                1.85         1.21           1        6
2007                                                                                1.55         0.79           1        4
2008                                                                                1.56         0.92           1        5
2009                                                                                1.49         0.83           1        5
2010                                                                                1.51         0.88           1        5
2011                                                                                1.61         1.05           1        5
Number of years a teacher teaches                                                   4.35         2.32           1        9
  Notes: The estimation is based on the sample of 21 schools. The sample includes all teachers who teach core or track subjects
  in 11th and 12th grade. The 11th grade sample is from 2003-2005, while the 12th grade sample is from 2003-2011.


                                                            35
         Table 5: Descriptive Statistics for Different Measures of Teacher Bias in 11th and 12th Grade
                                              Teacher Bias            Teacher Bias
                                              measured in             measured in
                       Prop. of Fem.         other classes           the own class                           Correlation
                         Teachers            (21 schools)             (21 schools)                            between
Variable                                     Mean (sd)                 Mean (sd)          Diff.     se        (2) and (4)
Bias in                        (1)            (2)     (3)               (4)    (5)        (6)       (7)            (8)
11th grade (2003-2005)
Core subjects:
Modern Greek                  0.70           -0.122   (0.376)         -0.130   (0.496)    0.008    (0.034)        0.57
History                       0.67           -0.150   (0.365)         -0.192   (0.466)    0.042    (0.030)        0.60
Physics                       0.45           -0.157   (0.277)         -0.120   (0.372)   -0.037    (0.026)        0.53
Algebra                       0.39           -0.105   (0.281)         -0.103   (0.343)   -0.002    (0.025)        0.52
Geometry                      0.37           -0.124   (0.285)         -0.092   (0.348)   -0.033    (0.025)        0.51
Classics Track:
Ancient Greek                 0.62           -0.250 (0.433)           -0.331 (0.455)      0.081    (0.058)        0.61
Philosophy                    0.69           -0.165 (0.392)           -0.141 (0.526)     -0.024    (0.061)        0.62
Latin                         0.66           -0.153 (0.380)           -0.209 (0.475)     0.056     (0.072)        0.37
Science Track:
Mathematics                   0.49           -0.073 (0.251)           -0.116 (0.470)     0.043     (0.065)        0.59
Physics                       0.40           -0.037 (0.276)           -0.018 (0.468)     -0.019    (0.060)        0.63
Chemistry                     0.40           -0.108 (0.271)           -0.040 (0.450)     -0.068    (0.088)        0.12
Exact Science Track:
Mathematics              0.30                -0.076 (0.274)           -0.102 (0.427)     0.026     (0.045)        0.73
Physics                  0.39                -0.147 (0.297)           -0.080 (0.379)     -0.067    (0.051)        0.56
Technology and Computers 0.30                -0.271 (0.336)           -0.226 (0.653)     -0.045    (0.101)        0.33

12th grade (2003-2011)
Core subjects:
Modern Greek                  0.61           -0.145   (0.329)         -0.117   (0.533)   -0.028    (0.025)        0.59
History                       0.55           -0.224   (0.366)         -0.189   (0.415)   -0.035    (0.029)        0.64
Biology                       0.14           -0.153   (0.506)         -0.165   (0.772)    0.012    (0.048)        0.42
Mathematics                   0.25           -0.154   (0.342)         -0.161   (0.547)   0.006     (0.030)        0.49
Physics                       0.29           -0.175   (0.313)         -0.206   (0.361)   0.032     (0.025)        0.64
Classics Track:
Ancient Greek                 0.47           -0.171   (0.422)         -0.196   (0.564)    0.025    (0.059)        0.35
Latin                         0.68           -0.194   (0.432)         -0.156   (0.526)   -0.038    (0.049)        0.56
Literature                    0.54           -0.208   (0.397)         -0.195   (0.645)   -0.013    (0.055)        0.60
History                       0.61           -0.213   (0.367)         -0.291   (0.562)    0.078    (0.049)        0.59
Science Track:
Biology                       0.13           -0.210   (0.411)         -0.105   (0.469)   -0.105    (0.066)        0.59
Mathematics                   0.09           -0.253   (0.386)         -0.286   (0.525)   0.033     (0.073)        0.41
Physics                       0.16           -0.300   (0.254)         -0.284   (0.392)   -0.016    (0.060)        0.38
Chemistry                     0.06           -0.200   (0.413)         -0.135   (0.455)   -0.065    (0.092)        0.23
Exact Science Track:
Mathematics                   0.26           -0.156   (0.368)         -0.174   (0.478)   0.018     (0.045)        0.44
Physics                       0.19           -0.174   (0.308)         -0.234   (0.476)   0.060     (0.047)        0.35
Business Administration       0.63           -0.147   (0.487)         -0.205   (0.581)   0.058     (0.058)        0.44
Computers                     0.35           -0.189   (0.490)         -0.215   (0.475)   0.026     (0.064)        0.17
Optional
Economics                     0.59           -0.085 (0.394)           -0.044 (0.773)     -0.041    (0.047)        0.29
  Notes: Negative (positive) bias means that the teacher is pro-girl (boy). The means are weighted by the number of students.
  The estimation is based on the sample of 21 schools.
                                                                36
              Table 6: Correlations Between Different Measures of Teacher Gender Bias

                        Dependent Variable: Teacher Bias in the Current Class

                                                                         11th grade                 12th grade
                                                                       (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)

                                                                                 Panel A: All Teachers

Average Bias measured in other classes in any year                      0.714        0.671        0.639        0.628
                                                                    (0.052)***    (0.050)***   (0.044)***   (0.042)***


Sample Size                                                             1,157        1,157        2,222        2,222

                                                                             Panel B: Female Teachers

Average Bias measured in other classes in any year                      0.668        0.652        0.601        0.514
                                                                    (0.077)***    (0.079)***   (0.066)***   (0.072)***


Sample Size                                                               576          576          983          983

                                                                              Panel C: Male Teachers

Average Bias measured in other classes in any year                      0.764        0.639        0.657        0.618
                                                                    (0.061)***    (0.067)***   (0.054)***   (0.055)***


Sample Size                                                               581          581        1,239        1,239


Subjects FE
Year FE
School FE

  Notes: The sample includes all teachers who teach core and track subjects. The estimation is based on the sample
  of 21 schools. The structure of the data is such that there is one row per teacher-school-subject-year-grade and for
  each row there are two measures of teacher bias calculated: The bias in the own class-subject-year and the bias
  in all other classes-subjects-years this teacher taught in the sample. The table reports the estimates of teachers'
  biases in the current year and in the own class on teachers' biases in any other class and year they taught in the
  sample. The dependent variable is the teacher bias measured in the own class and is calculated as the difference
  between boys' and girls' average gap between the non-blind score (NB) and the blind score (B) in the sample
  period. The variable of interest is the teacher bias measured in all other classes in any year and is calculated as
  the difference of boys' and girls' average gap between the non-blind score (NB) and the blind score (B) in all other
  classes that a teacher taught. All regressions include subjects and year fixed effects, while we add school fixed
  effects in columns (2) and (4). In Panel A we also control for the gender of a teacher. Panel B includes only female
  teachers, while Panel C includes only male teachers. Standard errors are clustered by class and are reported in
  parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.




                                                        37
Table 7:   Correlations between Gender Biases of Same and Different Teachers

                    Dependent Variable: Teacher bias in the Own Subject

                                                                            11th Grade

                                                            Different Teachers        Same Teachers
                                                             (1)        (2)            (3)     (4)
Teacher Bias                                                0.029       0.030        0.665       0.664
                                                            (0.040)    (0.041)     (0.060)***   (0.061)***


Observations                                                1,198       1,198         444         444

                                                                            12th Grade

                                                            Different Teachers        Same Teachers
                                                             (1)        (2)            (3)     (4)
Teacher Bias                                                0.033       0.032        0.581       0.581
                                                            (0.030)    (0.030)     (0.064)***   (0.064)***


Observations                                                1,691       1,691         608         608


Year FE
School FE
Class FE

  Notes: The table includes stacked observations for the teacher gender biases in the own current class in
  11th (top panel) and 12th (bottom panel) grades. The estimation is based on the sample of 21 schools.
  The (OLS) estimated coefficients in columns 1-2 are the between biases measures of different teachers who
  instruct students from the same class in two subjects and the (OLS) estimated coefficients in columns 3-4
  are the between biases measures of the same teachers who instruct students from the same class in two
  subjects. Each estimate comes from a separate OLS regression. Standard errors are reported in parentheses
  and are clustered at the school and year level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
  level.




                                                   38
Table 8:   Effect of 11th Grade Teacher Bias (measured in all other classes) on Blind Score in 12th Grade

                                  Dependent Variable: Blind score in 12th grade national exams
                                                                  Boys                                              Girls
                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)                     (4)           (5)           (6)

 Core Subjects
                                                     0.057        0.037        0.090                   -0.060        -0.072       -0.100
                                                     (0.030)      (0.030)     (0.028)***              (0.024)***   (0.024)***    (0.024)***


 Sample Size                                         8,200        8,200        8,200                   10,348        10,348       10,348

 Classics Track Subjects
                                                     0.117        0.147        0.185                   -0.180        -0.099       -0.051
                                                     (0.077)     (0.076)*     (0.073)**               (0.042)***    (0.042)**     (0.046)


 Sample Size                                         1,401        1,401        1,401                    5,499        5,499         5,499



 Science Track Subjects
                                                     0.196        0.150        0.211                    0.059        -0.045       -0.109
                                                   (0.056)***   (0.053)***    (0.052)***                (0.050)      (0.050)      (0.050)*


 Sample Size                                         4,460        4,460        4,460                    4,910        4,910         4,910

 Exact Science Track Subjects
                                                     0.071        0.043        0.145                   -0.071        -0.052       -0.163
                                                     (0.046)      (0.049)     (0.044)***                (0.063)      (0.060)     (0.066)**


 Sample Size                                         5,164        5,164        5,164                    3,031        3,031         3,031


 Subjects FE
 Year FE
 School FE
 Class FE

   Notes: The datasets for the core subjects and each track subjects include stacked observations for each subject/exam. The estimation is
   based on the sample of 21 schools. Each row presents estimates from a separate regression using an empirical Bayes estimation strategy.
   The empirical Bayes shrinkage factor is the ratio of signal variance to signal plus noise variance. We assume that there is a sampling error
   problem and the measure of teacher gender bias consists of an error component. Estimating teachers' effects on students' weighted difference
   between "non-blind" and "blind" scores enables us to separate between the signal and the noise variance. The empirical Bayes estimate
   for each teacher is a weighted average of the teacher estimated effect and the mean of teacher estimates, where the weight is the empirical
   Bayes shrinkage factor. Standard errors are clustered by class and are reported in parentheses. The standard errors are also corrected
   using a two-step bootstrapping method. In the first stage, a random sample with replacement is drawn from each class by gender and the
   corresponding OLS coefficients are obtained. In the second stage, the effect of these new teachers' gender bias measures in 11th grades
   on students' performance in 12th grade are estimated and the coefficients are stored. This process of two-step bootstrap sampling and
   estimation is repeated 1,000 times. The standard deviations in the sample of 1,000 observations of coefficients estimates from the second
   stage regression are the bootstrap standard errors of the point estimates of these coefficients. All specifications include the students' blind
   score and the teacher's gender as controls. All scores are standardized z-scores. The first panel "Core Subjects" includes all core subjects.
   The second panel "Classics Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (history and modern Greek) and all the classics track subjects.
   The third panel "Science Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (algebra, geometry and physics) and all the science track subjects.
   The forth panel "Exact Science Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (algebra, geometry and physics) and all the exact science
   track subjects. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.




                                                                      39
Table 9: Effect of 11th and 12th Grade Gender Biases (measured in all other classes) on Students Total, Excused and Unexcused Absences in 11th and 12th
                                                                                          Grade
                                                                                 Dependent Variable: Total, Excused and Unexcused Absences
                                                                        11th Grade                                                                   12th Grade
                                       Boys    Girls           Boys Girls                Boys      Girls             Boys Girls            Boys    Girls              Boys   Girls
                                      Total Absences             Excused                    Unexcused               Total Absences           Excused                   Unexcused
                                      (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)               (7)       (8)       (9)            (10)        (11)        (12)


Bias in core subjects                 -0.259        0.299      0.078       -0.316       -0.337        0.615          0.361     0.214       0.969         -0.630      -0.551        0.641
                                     (0.102)**    (0.130)**   (0.058)     (0.099)***   (0.098)***   (0.096)***       (0.405)   (0.358)   (0.382)***     (0.384)*     (0.253)*    (0.254)**
Sample Size                            5,842        7,443      5,842        7,443        5,842        7,443          4,834     5,769       4,533          5,433       4,815        5,729


Bias in classics subjects             -0.297       -0.237      0.123       -0.286       -0.420        0.048          0.319     -0.089      0.954         -0.887      -0.777        0.621
                                      (0.254)      (0.175)    (0.156)      (0.135)*    (0.195)**     (0.144)         (0.208)   (0.181)   (0.353)***     (0.305)**   (0.221)***   (0.225)***
Sample Size                            2,804        4,776      2,804        4,776        2,804        4,776          2,528     3,835       2,385          3,638       2,517        3,816


Bias in science subjects              -0.363        0.223      0.100       -0.163       -0.463        0.387          0.830     0.736       1.381         -0.477      -0.438        0.987
                                     (0.140)***   (0.094)**   (0.089)     (0.072)**    (0.114)**    (0.092)***       (0.647)   (0.529)    (0.611)*       (0.618)     (0.393)     (0.390)***
Sample Size                            4,504        5,492      4,504        5,492        4,504        5,492          2,881     3,340       2,657          3,098       2,869        3,306


Bias in exact science subjects        -0.206        0.225      0.101       -0.211       -0.308        0.436          0.605     0.462       0.861         -0.717      -0.227        0.970
                                      (0.131)     (0.104)**   (0.080)     (0.085)**    (0.114)***   (0.097)***       (0.459)   (0.454)    (0.429)        (0.529)     (0.278)     (0.327)***
Sample Size                            4,071        4,812      4,071        4,812        4,071        4,812          3,996     3,824       3,745          3,568       3,980        3,791




Subjects FE
Year FE
Class FE


  Notes: This table presents estimates for the effects of the bias (measured in all other classes) in the related subjects on students' different types of attendance (in hours). The
  estimation is based on the sample of 21 schools. The outcome variable is the total number of absences in a year (in hours), the excused number of absences in a year (in hours), and
  the unexcused number of absences in a year (in hours). The estimates are presented separately for the 11th and 12th grade. All estimates have been calculated using an empirical
  Bayes estimation strategy. All standard errors (reported in parentheses) are calculated using a two-step bootstrapping technique and are clustered at the class level. In the first panel
  all core subjects are used. The second panel includes only classics subjects. The third panel includes only science subjects. The forth panel includes only exact science subjects. The
  scores are standardized z-scores. *,**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.
   Table 10:   Placebo Estimation: Randomly Shuffle Biases Across Teachers of the Same
                                   Subjects Within Schools

                            Dependent Variable: Subsequent Blind score in 12th grade
                                                     Boys                                              Girls
                                               (1)     (2)     (3)                (4)                     (5)         (6)
Core Subjects
                                                 -0.010     -0.022     -0.004                0.004     -0.004      0.019
                                                  (0.027)   (0.027)    (0.025)               (0.022)    (0.022)    (0.021)

Sample Size                                       8,217     8,217      8,217                10,347     10,347     10,347

Classics Track Subjects
                                                 -0.111     -0.093     0.026                -0.048      0.063      0.030
                                                  (0.083)   (0.084)    (0.090)               (0.043)    (0.050)    (0.068)

Sample Size                                       1,391     1,391      1,391                5,443       5,443      5,443


Science Track Subjects
                                                  0.062     0.001      -0.045                0.103      0.062      0.010
                                                  (0.058)   (0.056)    (0.051)               (0.052)    (0.049)    (0.042)

Sample Size                                       4,492     4,492      4,492                 4,932      4,932      4,932

Exact Science Track Subjects
                                                  0.011     -0.010     0.005                -0.109     -0.075     -0.078
                                                  (0.042)   (0.043)    (0.039)               (0.055)    (0.054)    (0.052)

Sample Size                                       5,119     5,119      5,119                3,0130      3,030      3,030

Subjects FE
Year FE
School FE
Class FE

  Notes: We randomly reshuffle teacher biases within schools across teachers who teach the same subjects. The estimation is
  based on the sample of 21 schools. The datasets for the core subjects and each track subjects include stacked observations
  for each subject/exam. Each row presents estimates from a separate regression using an empirical Bayes estimation strategy,
  for 11th (columns 1-2) and 12th (columns 3-4) grade separately. The empirical Bayes shrinkage factor is the ratio of signal
  variance to signal plus noise variance. We assume that there is a sampling error problem and the measure of teacher gender
  bias consists of an error component. Estimating teachers' effects on students' weighted difference between "non-blind" and
  "blind" scores enables us to separate between the signal and the noise variance. The empirical Bayes estimate for each teacher
  is a weighted average of the teacher estimated effect and the mean of teacher estimates, where the weight is the empirical
  Bayes shrinkage factor. Standard errors are clustered using a two-step bootstrapping method. In the first stage, a random
  sample with replacement is drawn from each class by gender and the corresponding OLS coefficients are obtained. In the
  second stage, the effect of these new teachers' gender bias measures in 11th grades on students' performance in 12th grade are
  estimated and the coefficients are stored. This process of two-step bootstrap sampling and estimation is repeated 1,000 times.
  The standard deviations in the sample of 1,000 observations of coefficients estimates from the second stage regression are the
  bootstrap standard errors of the point estimates of these coefficients. All specifications include the students' blind score as
  a control. All scores are standardized z-scores. The first panel "Core Subjects" includes all core subjects. The second panel
  "Classics Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (history and modern Greek) and all the classics track subjects. The
  third panel "Science Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (Algebra, Geometry and physics) and all the science
  track subjects. The forth panel "Exact Science Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (Algebra, Geometry and
  physics) and all the exact science track subjects. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.




                                                            41
Table 11: Effect of 11th and 12th Grade Gender Biases (measured in all other classes) on Enrollment
                                          in Post-Secondary Schooling

                 Dependent Variable: Dummy variable for Enrollment Status in University

                                                               11th grade                      12th grade
                                                            Boys      Girls                 Boys      Girls
                                                           (1)          (2)                (3)          (4)

Bias core subjects                                         0.020        -0.047             0.036         -0.028
                                                         (0.005)***    (0.005)***        (0.008)***    (0.008)***

Sample Size                                                6,845         8,640             5,699         6,861

Bias in classics subjects                                  0.046        -0.014             0.050         -0.037
                                                         (0.008)***     (0.008)*         (0.015)***    (0.014)***

Sample Size                                                3,288         5,598             2,998         4,675

Bias in science subjects                                   0.021        -0.028             0.039         -0.021
                                                         (0.006)***    (0.005)***        (0.011)***     (0.010)*

Sample Size                                                5,219         6,357             3,376         3,950

Bias in exact science subjects                             0.015        -0.032             0.030         -0.026
                                                          (0.007)**    (0.006)***        (0.008)***    (0.010)**

Sample Size                                                4,795         5,587             4,786         4,495


Subjects FE
Year FE
Class FE

  Notes: The outcome variable is the post-secondary enrollment status (1 if enrolled, 0 otherwise). In these regressions,
  we also control for the blind performance a student gets in each grade (11th grade for columns 1-2 and 12th grade
  for columns 3-4). Standard errors are clustered by class and are reported in parentheses. The datasets for the core
  subjects and each track subjects include stacked observations for each subject/exam. Each row presents estimates
  from a separate regression using an empirical Bayes estimation strategy, for 11th (columns 1-2) and 12th (columns
  3-4) grade separately. The empirical Bayes shrinkage factor is the ratio of signal variance to signal plus noise
  variance. We assume that there is a sampling error problem and the measure of teacher gender bias consists of
  an error component. Estimating teachers' effects on students' weighted difference between "non-blind" and "blind"
  scores enables us to separate between the signal and the noise variance. The empirical Bayes estimate for each
  teacher is a weighted average of the teacher estimated effect and the mean of teacher estimates, where the weight
  is the empirical Bayes shrinkage factor. Standard errors are clustered using a two-step bootstrapping method. In
  the first stage, a random sample with replacement is drawn from each class by gender and the corresponding OLS
  coefficients are obtained. In the second stage, the effect of these new teachers' gender bias measures in 11th grades on
  students' performance in 12th grade are estimated and the coefficients are stored. This process of two-step bootstrap
  sampling and estimation is repeated 1,000 times. The standard deviations in the sample of 1,000 observations of
  coefficients estimates from the second stage regression are the bootstrap standard errors of the point estimates of
  these coefficients. All specifications include the students' blind score as a control. All scores are standardized z-
  scores. The first panel "Core Subjects" includes all core subjects. The second panel "Classics Subjects" includes
  relevant exams from the core (history and modern Greek) and all the classics track subjects. The third panel "Science
  Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (Algebra, Geometry and physics) and all the science track subjects.
  The forth panel "Exact Science Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (Algebra, Geometry and physics)
  and all the exact science track subjects. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                                                          42
                               Table 12: Descriptive Statistics by University Field of Studies 2003-2011


                                                                          Mean Enrolment                                          Difference
Field of studies                                             Girls                                    Boys


                                               Mean      (sd)    Mean      (sd)        Mean       (sd)     Mean     (sd)        (se)       (se)
                                                (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)      (7)      (8)       (1)-(5)    (3)-(7)



Exact Science                                   0.099 (0.298) 0.121 (0.326)             0.223    (0.416) 0.272 (0.445)          -0.124     -0.151
                                                                                                                               (0.003)    (0.003)

Science                                         0.046 (0.209) 0.056 (0.230)             0.037    (0.188) 0.045 (0.207)          0.009      0.011
                                                                                                                               (0.002)    (0.002)

Social Science                                  0.225 (0.419) 0.276 (0.448)             0.212    (0.409) 0.259 (0.438)          0.014      0.018
                                                                                                                               (0.003)    (0.004)

Humanities                                      0.275 (0.445) 0.336 (0.472)             0.088    (0.284) 0.108 (0.310)          0.186      0.228
                                                                                                                               (0.003)    (0.004)

Vocational Studies                              0.171 (0.377) 0.210 (0.407)             0.258    (0.438) 0.315 (0.464)          -0.087     -0.105
                                                                                                                               (0.003)    (0.004)

Not Enrolled in Post-Secondary Studies          0.184 (0.387)                           0.181    (0.385)                        0.003
                                                                                                                               (0.003)

  Notes: The sample includes 37,218 female students and 28,869 male students. In columns (3) and (7) we restrict the sample only to students who
  enroll in university studies. Humanities include the departments of liberal arts, psychology, journalism, philosophy, education, Greek language,
  history, foreign languages, home economics and law. Social Science includes the departments of economics, statistics, business and management,
  accounting, political and European studies. Exact Science includes the departments of mathematics, engineering, physics and computer science.
  Science includes the departments of biology, chemistry, medicine, pharmacy, veterinary studies and dentistry. Vocational studies include students
  who enroll in technical education institutes and agricultural studies.
Table 13: Effect of 11th and 12th Grade Teacher Gender Bias on the Choice of University Field of Study by Gender
                         Dependent Variable: Dummy variable for the Choice of University Study
                                              (1)       (2)         (3)              (4)                             (5)          (6)
                                                                    Boys                                            Girls

                                                            A. Stack 11th and 12th grades & Grade FE. (2003-2005)
                                                  0.010          0.013          0.004               -0.031         -0.037         -0.046
                                                  (0.013)        (0.014)        (0.018)           (0.011)***     (0.011)***     (0.015)***

Sample Size                                       7,929          7,929          7,929               9,953          9,953          9,953
                                                                              B.    12th grade (2003-2011)
                                                 -0.024         -0.026          -0.030              -0.029         -0.040         -0.042
                                                  (0.014)       (0.014)*        (0.019)            (0.011)**     (0.012)***     (0.016)***

Sample Size                                       5,161          5,161          5,161               6,559          6,559          6,559


Year FE
Major FE
Track FE
School FE
Class FE

  Notes: Each row presents estimates from a separate regression using an empirical Bayes estimation strategy. Estimation is based on the
  sample of 21 schools. The dependent variable is the decision to study in one of the following four fields: Social Science, Science, Exact
  Science and Humanities. Students not enrolled in any university or students who enroll in vocational studies are not included in the
  sample. We stack the four possible choices as the dependent variable for each student against the teachers' bias in each of the four areas
  of university studies. The dependent variable is a 0/1 indicator, assuming the value of 1 for the observed field of study and a value 0
  for the other three possible choices. The subjects that we use for each field of study are the following: for exact science departments
  we use the blind score and the bias in algebra, geometry and physics in 11th grade, and mathematics and physics in 12th grade. For
  humanities departments we use the blind score and the bias in history and modern Greek in both 11th and 12th grades. For social
  science departments we use the blind score and the bias in history and modern Greek in 11th , and economics in 12th grade. For science
  departments we use the blind score and the bias in algebra, geometry and physics in 11th grade, and biology and physics in 12th grade.
  The scores are standardized and have a zero mean and a standard deviation of one. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%
  and 1% level.
Table 14: Effect of 11th and 12th Grade Teacher Gender Bias on the Average Quality of the Program Students Enrolled In
                                   Dependent Variable: Percentile Quality Rank of Post-Secondary Program


                                      Rank based on cutoffs      Rank based on mean perf.      Rank based on cutoffs     Rank based on mean perf.
                                       Boys       Girls           Boys         Girls            Boys       Girls          Boys       Girls
                                       (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)
                                                          11th grade                                              12th grade


Humanities                             2.909       -6.407         2.115           -6.509        5.970      -2.357         6.089       -0.321
                                      (4.410)    (2.256)***       (4.332)        (2.087)***    (6.039)     (2.544)        (5.991)    (2.550)
Sample Size                             201         845            201              845          156         668           156         668


Social Science                         4.746       -2.380         5.020           -2.157        9.533      -3.274         12.652      -3.872
                                      (3.021)      (2.365)        (3.381)         (2.849)     (4.056)**    (2.765)      (4.420)***   (3.267)
Sample Size                             485         746            485              746          426         675           426         675


Science                               10.300        0.517         4.469           -1.685        5.579      -2.913         1.478       -2.333
                                      (9.671)      (4.327)       (11.973)         (5.555)      (8.434)     (11.805)      (11.522)    (13.159)
Sample Size                             137         179            137              179          67          92             67          92


Exact Science                          8.916       -4.977         9.444           -8.360        0.751      -1.541         1.576       -1.057
                                     (4.388)**     (5.017)       (4.831)**        (5.972)      (3.514)     (3.528)        (3.379)    (3.699)
Sample Size                             567         343            567              343          978         563           978         563

                                                          11th grade                                              12th grade


Humanities or Social Science           6.675       -4.878         6.378           -4.653        9.420      -2.884         11.666      -2.208
                                    (2.569)***   (1.768)***     (2.792)***       (1.843)***   (3.268)***   (1.848)      (3.495)***   (2.038)
Sample Size                             686         1,596          686             1,596         584        1,348          584        1,348



Science or Exact Science              10.211       -0.299         10.688          -3.570        0.223      -1.948         0.815       -1.593
                                     (3.937)**     (4.757)       (4.266)**        (5.252)      (3.388)     (2.923)        (3.425)    (3.246)
Sample Size                             657         468            657              468         1,113        745          1,113        745


Year FE
Subject FE
School FE


  Notes: Students are assigned the percentile quality rank of the post-secondary program they enroll in. The estimation is based on the sample
  of 21 schools. These quality measures represent the ranking of each post-secondary program and are measured using two different approaches:
  1) the mean test score of enrolled students in each post-secondary program and 2) the admission cutoff or threshold score for each university
  department over a period of 9 cohorts (2003-2011). We then look at the effects of average teacher biases in the core related subjects that are
  closely related to area of study (humanities, social science, science, exact science) on the quality of enrolled post-secondary program (using both
  measures) conditional on the field of study that students chose, while we also control for students' blind score in each subject and the gender
  of the teacher in each subject. As before there are four fields of study at the university level and these are Humanities, Social Science, Science
  and Exact Science. In the top panel, we examine the effect of teacher biases in the related subjects on post-secondary quality conditional
  on each field of study separately. The related bias for those who enroll in Humanities at the university level comes from modern Greek and
  history, for both 11th and 12th grade. The related bias for those who enroll in Social Sciences at the university level comes from modern Greek
  and history in 11th grade and modern Greek, history and economics in 12th grade. The related bias for those who enroll in Science at the
  university level comes from modern algebra and physics in 11th grade and biology and physics in 12th grade. The related bias for those who
  enroll in Exact Science at the university level comes from algebra and geometry in 11th grade and mathematics, biology and physics in 12th
  grade. In the bottom panel, we group Humanities together with Social Science and Science together with Exact Science and repeat the same
  exercise. The baseline sample is 11th grade students in 2003-2005 and 12th grade students in the period 2003-2011. All estimates are adjusted
  for the empirical Bayes technique. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the school level and are calculated using a two-step
  bootstrapping technique. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.



                                                                            45
Table 15: Effect of 11th and 12th Grade Teacher Bias on the Quality of the Program Students Enrolled
                                                           In

                  Dependent Variable: Percentile Quality Rank of Post-Secondary Program
                                                     Rank based on mean perf. 2003 Rank based on cutoffs 2003
                                                             Boys            Girls           Boys            Girls
                                                              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

                                                                                Panel A: 11th grade
Teacher Bias in Core                                         2.644          -4.246           2.632          -4.261
                                                           (1.125)**       (0.930)***      (1.123)**      (0.933)***

Sample Size                                                  4,131           5,135           4,131           5,135

Teacher Bias in Classics Track                               5.497          -1.115           5.230          -1.091
                                                           (2.408)**        (1.323)        (2.311)**        (1.297)

Sample Size                                                     624          2,400            624            2,400

Teacher Bias in Science Track                                4.332          -1.845           4.319          -1.837
                                                           (1.702)***       (1.268)       (1.694)***        (1.263)

Sample Size                                                  3,156           3,468           3,156           3,468

Teacher Bias in Exact Science Track                          1.718          -6.315           1.735          -6.477
                                                             (1.339)       (1.706)***       (1.339)       (1.741)***

Sample Size                                                  2,492           1,547           2,492           1,547

                                                                                Panel B: 12th grade
Teacher Bias in Core                                         4.006          -0.016           3.934          -0.219
                                                           (1.136)***       (1.117)        (1.132)**        (1.104)

Sample Size                                                  3,273           3,855           3,273           3,855

Teacher Bias in Classics Track                               5.562          -2.643           5.160          -2.555
                                                           (2.112)**       (1.338)***      (1.986)**        (1.337)*

Sample Size                                                     912          3,358            912            3,358

Teacher Bias in Science Track                                1.723           2.636           1.571           2.508
                                                             (2.681)        (2.131)         (2.604)         (2.103)

Sample Size                                                  1,377           1,862           1,377           1,862

Teacher Bias in Exact Science Track                          2.636          -0.086           2.546          -0.107
                                                           (1.077)**        (1.174)        (1.065)**        (1.200)

Sample Size                                                  4,039           2,457           4,039           2,457

Year FE
Subject FE
Class FE

  Notes: The estimation is based on the sample of 21 schools. Year 2003 is excluded from the analysis, as it is used to
  calculate the quality measures for the post-secondary program students enroll in. These quality measures represent
  the ranking of each post-secondary program and are measured using two different approaches: 1) the 2003 mean
  performance of enrolled students in each post-secondary program and 2) the 2003 admission cutoff or threshold score
  for each university department. This is calculated as the admission score of the last admitted student. We then assign
  these two measures of program quality to the relevant post-secondary programs and drop the year 2003 from the
  regressions. We then look at the effects of teacher biases on the quality of enrolled post-secondary program (using
  both measures), while we control for students' blind score in each subject and the gender of the teacher in each subject.
  All estimates are adjusted for the empirical Bayes technique. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered
  at the school level and are calculated using a two-step bootstrapping technique. *, **, and *** denote significance at
  the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.
Table 16: Comparisons of Mean Teacher Value Added for Pro-Boys, Neutral, and Pro-Girls
                                                  Teachers

                                                                         (1)         (2)           (3)
                                                                                    Panel A

                                                                      Neutral     Pro-Boy      Difference
                                                                       /(sd)       /(sd)         /(se)
Teacher Value Added                                                     0.053      -0.037         0.090
                                                                      (0.132)      (0.222)     (0.032)***
N                                                                        58          101           159


                                                                                    Panel B

                                                                      Neutral     Pro-Girl     Difference
                                                                       /(sd)       /(sd)         /(se)
Teacher Value Added                                                     0.053      -0.049         0.102
                                                                      (0.132)      (0.235)     (0.032)***
N                                                                        58          259           317


    Notes: We pool data on test scores for 11th and 12th grades for the period 2003-2005. The TVA measures
    are derived following the procedure described in Chetty et al (2014). Pro-boy teacher exhibit bias larger
    than or equal to 0.10. Pro-girl teachers exhibit a bias smaller than or equal to -0.10. We define as neutral
    teachers who exhibit bias that is larger than or equal to -0.10 and smaller than 0.10. The teacher bias
    measures are derived as the average bias across subjects, grades and classes a teacher exhibits in the 2006-
    2011 sample. Our sample includes only students who have non-missing baseline controls to estimate the
    VA model. Our baseline VA model controls for a rich set of student demographics and other variables,
    as well as teacher, class, and school level variables. In particular, our baseline VA model controls for a
    student's gender, age, a dummy whether the student is born in the first quarter of a calendar year, his/her
    lagged performance in the same subject, class size, school-level-grade enrollment, a dummy that takes the
    value of 1 if the teacher is female and 0 otherwise, how many classes each teacher taught in the sample
    (our proxy for a teacher's experience), students' average performance in all other classes taught by the
    same teacher in the sample and neighborhood income. When the prior test score is missing, we set the
    prior score equal to 0 and include an indicator for missing data. In Panel A, we compare the mean TVA
    of teachers who are neutral (column 1) to the mean TVA of teachers who are pro-boy (column 2). The
    related standard deviations are reported below the means. Column 3 reports the difference of the means
    and the respective standard error. In Panel B, we compare the mean TVA of teachers who are neutral
    (column 1) to the mean TVA of teachers who are pro-girl (column 2). The related standard deviations are
    reported below the means. Column 3 reports the difference of the means and the standard error.




                                                      47
Table 17: Correlations Between Teacher Bias And Teacher Quality (TVA) for Pro-Girl
                          and Pro-Boy Teachers (Spline Variables)

                Dependent Variable: Teacher Quality (Measured by TVA)
                                                           (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)


Spline for Pro-Boys Teachers                              -0.113      -0.113       -0.112      -0.112
                                                        (0.041)***   (0.040)***   (0.040)***   (0.043)**

Spline for Pro-Girls Teachers                             0.049        0.049       0.050        0.050
                                                         (0.026)*     (0.027)*     (0.028)*    (0.029)*

Female Teacher                                                        -0.006       -0.007      -0.007
                                                                       (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.019)

Class Size                                                                         -0.002      -0.002
                                                                                   (0.003)      (0.003)

Teacher Experience                                                                             -0.0001
                                                                                                (0.001)




Year FE
School FE
Grade FE

Observations                                               418          418         418          418

  Notes: The "Spline for Pro-Girl Teachers" takes the actual negative teacher bias values, and the value
  of zero for the positive ones. The "Spline for Pro-Boy Teachers" takes the actual positive teacher bias
  values, and the value zero for the negative ones. The teacher gender bias measures the average bias a
  teacher exhibits in different subjects and classes in the 2006-2011 sample. We include the two splines
  simultaneously in the regression. The outcome variable is the teacher value added derived using the
  2003-2005 sample and is described in details in the text. "Teacher experience" measures the different
  combination of classes and subjects a teacher has taught in 11th and 12th grades in the sample period
  2003-2011. Standard errors are clustered by school and year and are reported in parentheses. *, **,
  and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.




                                                  48
Table 18: Correlations Between Teacher Gender Bias And Teacher Quality (Measured
                                            by TVA)

              Dependent Variable: Teacher Quality (Measured by TVA)

                                                          (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)

 Pro-Girl Teacher Dummy                                 -0.035     -0.036      -0.037      -0.037
                                                       (0.017)**   (0.017)**   (0.018)**   (0.018)**

 Pro-Boy Teacher Dummy                                  -0.031     -0.032      -0.032      -0.031
                                                        (0.018)*   (0.018)*    (0.018)*    (0.018)*

 Female Teacher                                                    -0.007      -0.008      -0.007
                                                                    (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.019)

 Class Size                                                                    -0.003      -0.003
                                                                                (0.003)     (0.003)

 Teacher Experience                                                                         0.001
                                                                                            (0.001)



 Year FE
 School FE
 Grade FE

 Observations                                            418         418         418         418

   Notes: The "Pro-Girl Teacher Dummy" takes the value of one if the teacher exhibits a bias
   that is smaller than or equal to -0.10. The "Pro-Boy Teacher Dummy" takes the value of one
   if the teacher exhibits a bias that is above 0.10. We define as neutral teachers those who have
   a bias that is larger than or equal to -0.10 and smaller than 0.10. The omitted category in the
   regression is neutral teachers. The teacher bias is calculated in the sample period of 2006-2011.
   The outcome variable is the TVA derived using the 2003-2005 sample and described in the text.
   "Teacher experience" measures the different combination of classes and subjects a teacher has
   taught in 11th and 12th grades in the sample period 2003-2011. Standard errors are clustered by
   school and year and are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%,
   5%, and 1% level.




                                                49
 Figure 1: Histograms of the bias measured in current class and the bias measured in
               all other classes for Core and Track subjects in 11th grade




Notes: This figure presents the distributions for the 11th grade teacher gender bias measured
in two different ways: a) using the own current class (green histogram) and b) using the bias
of a teacher in all other classes except of the current one (white histogram). In 11th grade
the core subjects taught are: modern Greek, history, physics, algebra and geometry. There
are the following tracks in 11th grade: Classics, Science and Exact Science. In the classics
track the 11th grade subjects are: ancient Greek, philosophy and Latin; in the science track:
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and in the exact science track: mathematics, physics and
computer science.




                                             50
Figure 2: Histograms of the bias measured in the current class and the bias measured
              in all other classes for Core and Track subjects in 12th grade




Notes: This figure presents the distributions for the 12th grade teacher gender bias measured
in two different ways: a) using the own current class (green histogram) and b) using the bias
of a teacher in all other classes except of the current one (white histogram). In 12th grade the
core subjects taught are: modern Greek, history, physics, biology and mathematics. There are
the following tracks in 12th grade: Classics, Science and Exact Science. In the classics track
the 12th grade subjects are: ancient Greek, Latin, literature and history; in the science track:
biology, mathematics, physics and chemistry, and in the exact science track: mathematics,
physics, business administration and computer science.




                                              51
Figure 3: Correlations between the gender bias measured in the current class and the
      bias measured in all other classes for Core and Track subjects in 11th grade




Notes: These scatter plots present the correlations between the two different measures of
teacher biases, namely bias in current own class and bias in all other classes, for core subjects
(top left panel), classics track (top right panel), science track (bottom left panel) and exact
science (bottom right panel). The 45 degree line is also drawn in each figure. In 11th grade
the core subjects taught are: modern Greek, history, physics, algebra and geometry. There
are the following tracks in 11th grade: Classics, Science and Exact Science. In the classics
track the 11th grade subjects are: ancient Greek, philosophy and Latin; in the science track:
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and in the exact science track: mathematics, physics and
computer science.




                                               52
Figure 4: Correlations between the gender bias measured in the current class and the
      bias measured in all other classes for Core and Track subjects in 12th grade




Notes: Notes: These scatter plots present the correlations between the two different measures
of teacher biases, namely bias in current own class and bias in all other classes, for core subjects
(top left panel), classics track (top right panel), science track (bottom left panel) and exact
science (bottom right panel). The 45 degree line is also drawn in each figure. In 12th grade the
core subjects taught are: modern Greek, history, physics, biology and mathematics. There are
the following tracks in 12th grade: Classics, Science and Exact Science. In the classics track
the 12th grade subjects are: ancient Greek, Latin, literature and history; in the science track:
biology, mathematics, physics and chemistry, and in the exact science track: mathematics,
physics, business administration and computer science.




                                                53
 Figure 5: Distribution of Teacher Gender Bias in 11th and 12th Grade, Sample of 21
                                           Schools


                                     Panel A: 11th grade




                                     Panel B: 12th grade




Notes: The 11th (Panel A) and 12th (Panel B) teacher bias is measured in the current class,
in all other classes in any grade and in all other class in the same grade and year. We use data
for the sample period 2003-2011. The left figures show the 11th (Panel A) and 12th (Panel B)
teacher bias measured in the current class and in all other classes that a teacher taught in any
grade. The teacher bias in the current class is the bias a teacher exhibited in this particular
class. The teacher bias in all other classes that a teacher taught in any grade is measured as
the average bias that a teacher exhibited in all other classes she/he ever taught in the sample
period 2003-2011, irrespective of the grade. The right figures show the 11th (Panel A) and
12th (Panel B) teacher bias measured in the own class and in all other classes that the teacher
taught in the same grade and year. The teacher bias in all other classes that a teacher taught
in the same grade and year is calculated as the average bias across all other classes a teacher
taught in the same grade and year as the current own class.


                                              54
   Figure 6: Distribution of Teacher Gender Bias by Teacher Gender, Sample of 21
                                          Schools




Notes: The teacher bias here is measured based on all other classes in both grades that a
teacher taught in the sample period. We report the distribution of the teacher bias separately
for male and female teachers in 11th and 12th grades.


                                             55
   Figure 7: Histogram of Teacher Value Added Measure and Average Teacher Bias




Notes: The top panel presents the distribution of the TVA measure, which is weighted
by the number of students in the school-year-grade-subject-class year cell. To derive these
value added measures we pool the 11th and 12th grade data for the years 2003-2005. We
use 10th and 11th grade performance as a prior measure of performance. We follow closely
the value added procedure described in Chetty et al. (2014a). This sample includes only
students who have non-missing baseline controls to estimate the VA model. TVA is estimated
using the baseline control vector, which includes: lagged own-subject scores, student-level
characteristics including age, gender, a dummy for being born in the first quarter of the birth
year, dummies for whether students expressed a special interest in classics, science or exact
science (indicated by the track they have chosen), class size, school-grade enrollment, income
as well as school, year, and subject dummies. When prior test scores are missing, we set the
prior score equal to 0 and include an indicator for missing data. Student data are from the
administrative records of 21 schools in Greece. The structure of the dataset is one observation
per teacher-year-grade-subject-class combination. The bottom panel presents the distribution
of the average teacher bias measured in all other classes across subjects and classes. To derive
a teacher's bias we calculate the average bias a teacher exhibits in all classes they taught in
the later years, in particular between 2006 and 2011.
                                              56
 Online Appendix
Not For Publication




        57
                                   Table A1: Descriptive Statistics, Full Sample
Variable                                                                      Mean       Std. Dev.      Min.      Max.
I.       Student Characteristics

 11th grade
Female                                                                         0.563        0.496          0         1
Total absences (in hours per year)                                             50.850      27.426          1        450
Proportion of students by track:
Classics                                                                       0.366        0.482          0         1
Science                                                                        0.280        0.449          0         1
Exact Science                                                                  0.344        0.475          0         1

GPA 11th grade                                                                 72.335      14.158          0        100

 12th grade
Total absences (in hours per year)                                             73.442      30.752          1        208
Proportion of students by track:
Classics                                                                       0.369        0.483          0         1
Sciences                                                                       0.159        0.366          0         1
Exact Science                                                                  0.463        0.499          0         1

GPA 12th grade                                                                 76.976      12.526         44        100
Age                                                                            17.902       0.465         15        42
II. School Characteristics
Private School                                                                 0.037        0.190          0         1
Experimental School                                                            0.044        0.207          0         1
Public School                                                                  0.919        0.275          0         1
Urban                                                                          0.896        0.306          0         1
Postcode Income (in 2009 Euro)                                                 22,455       7,945       11,784    66,521
III. University Enrollment Characteristics
National exams average score                                                   64.987      20.178        10.35     99.3
Retake the national exams                                                      0.113        0.317          0         1
Number of university departments in preference list                            25.014      22.071          1        257
Rank in preference list of the actual university attended                      8.399       10.616          1        242
Enrollment in university or vocational schooling                               0.817        0.386          0         1
Exact Science department                                                       0.153        0.360          0         1
Science department                                                             0.042        0.201          0         1
Humanities department                                                          0.193        0.395          0         1
Social Science department                                                      0.220        0.407          0         1
Vocational schooling                                                           0.209        0.407          0         1

     Note: All statistics reported include students who graduate from high school between 2003 and 2011. Total absences
     are measured in hours per year. GPA11 and GPA12 include the average over the school exam scores in the first
     and second term, in 11th and 12th grade. The full sample of schools is used. There are three types of schools in the
     sample: public, private, and experimental schools. Experimental are public schools and school admission is based
     on a lottery for the sample years. A school is located in an urban area, if the area has more than 20,000 inhabitants.
     Postcode income is expressed in 2009 Euro.
                                                          58
Table A2: Descriptive Statistics for the Teacher Gender Bias Measured in the First and Second Semester
                                     (in current class), Sample of 21 schools

                                         Bias measured in          Bias measured in
                                          First Semester           Second Semester
                                         Mean      s.d.            Mean      s.d.            Difference      s.e.

                                                                   Panel A: 11th grade
                                           (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)
Core Subjects
Modern Greek                              -0.077     0.468          -0.130     0.482            0.053       0.012
History                                   -0.122     0.426          -0.176     0.427            0.054       0.011
Algebra                                   -0.135     0.300          -0.107     0.317            -0.028      0.008
Geometry                                  -0.127     0.315          -0.103     0.307            -0.023      0.008
Physics                                   -0.115     0.360          -0.099     0.368            -0.016      0.009
Classics
Ancient Greek                             -0.160     0.428          -0.201     0.399            0.041       0.011
Philosophy                                 0.034     0.472          -0.011     0.437            0.045       0.012
History                                   -0.132     0.351          -0.145     0.367            0.013       0.009
Science
Mathematics                               -0.096     0.326          -0.056     0.331            -0.040      0.009
Physics                                   -0.019     0.417          -0.083     0.440            0.064       0.011
Chemistry                                 -0.003     0.344          -0.061     0.350            0.058       0.009
Exact Science
Mathematics                               -0.100     0.282          -0.095     0.314            -0.004      0.008
Physics                                   -0.033     0.326          -0.072     0.349            0.039       0.009
Technology and Computers                  -0.234     0.462          -0.266     0.426            0.032       0.012
                                                                   Panel B: 12th grade
Core Subjects
Modern Greek                              -0.102     0.480          -0.100     0.493            -0.002      0.008
History                                   -0.178     0.378          -0.174     0.361            -0.004      0.009
Biology                                   -0.200     0.666          -0.165     0.787            -0.035      0.013
Mathematics                               -0.167     0.498          -0.175     0.535             0.007      0.008
Physics                                   -0.173     0.445          -0.213     0.441            0.040       0.011
Classics
Ancient Greek                             -0.142     0.429          -0.116     0.431            -0.026      0.007
Latin                                     -0.162     0.364          -0.151     0.378            -0.011      0.006
Modern Literature                         -0.176     0.516          -0.119     0.501            -0.056      0.008
History                                   -0.226     0.383          -0.247     0.398            0.021       0.006
Science
Biology                                   -0.121     0.466          -0.051     0.452            -0.069      0.009
Mathematics                               -0.172     0.472          -0.182     0.489             0.010      0.008
Physics                                   -0.207     0.456          -0.244     0.474            0.037       0.008
Chemistry                                 -0.124     0.475          -0.130     0.449             0.006      0.009
Exact Classics
Mathematics                               -0.178     0.302          -0.151     0.328            -0.026      0.005
Physics                                   -0.235     0.340          -0.231     0.328            -0.004      0.005
Business Administration                   -0.216     0.391          -0.220     0.391             0.004      0.006
Computer Science                          -0.225     0.355          -0.205     0.352            -0.020      0.006
Optional
Economics                                 -0.130     0.687          -0.092     0.694            -0.038      0.011
  Notes: Columns (1)-(2) present summary statistics for the teacher bias measured based on the first semester exam per
  subject in 11th and 12th grade. Columns (3)-(4) present summary statistics for the teacher bias measured based on the
  second semester exam per subject in 11th and 12th grade. We use the second semester exam in the main analysis, as it is
  taken closer in time to the blind exam. Columns (5) and (6) present the differences between the teacher biases measured
  based on the first and second semester non-blind exams as well as the respective standard error. The means are weighted
  by the number of students. The baseline sample is 11th grade students in 2003-2005 and 12th grade students in 2003-2011

                                                      59
                                Table A3: Correlations between Teachers Biases (in current class) by Subjects (Core) of Instruction, 11th and 12th grades

                                                                  Different Teachers                                                                    Same Teachers
    th
11       Grade Biases                History      Geometry        Philosophy (Clas.)       Latin(Clas.)     Physics     History        Geometry        Philosophy (Clas.)      Latin(Clas.)      Physics
                                       (1)           (2)                 (3)                   (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)                 (8)                  (9)            (10)
Modern Greek                        -0.016                              0.201                -0.215                     0.876                                0.735                0.129
                                    (0.106)                             (0.148)              (0.128)                   (0.212)***                           (0.256)**             (0.614)
N                                    117                                 120                  121                         38                                   24                   21
Algebra                                           -0.199                                                                                0.827
                                                   (0.222)                                                                            (0.096)***
N                                                    61                                                                                   91
Ancient Greek (Classics)            0.085                               -0.022               0.220                      0.463                                0.567                1.195
                                    (0.088)                             (0.148)              (0.317)                  (0.128)***                           (0.138)***           (0.201)***
N                                    119                                 111                   87                         32                                   25                   43
Math(Science)                                     -0.024                                                                                0.997
                                                   (0.113)                                                                            (0.193)***
N                                                   102                                                                                   30
Physics (Science)                                                                                          0.038                                                                                 0.697
                                                                                                           (0.073)                                                                              (0.229)**
N                                                                                                           101                                                                                    35
Math (Exact Science)                               0.214                                                                                0.093
                                                  (0.115)*                                                                              (0.139)
N                                                   101                                                                                   34
Physics (Exact Science)                                                                                    0.008                                                                                 0.013
                                                                                                           (0.095)                                                                               (0.241)
N                                                                                                           113                                                                                    16
                                                                  Different Teachers                                                                    Same Teachers
12th Grade Biases                    History    Latin (Clas.)      Literature (Clas.)        Physics         Math.      History      Latin (Clas.)     Literature (Clas.)         Physics         Math.
                                       (1)           (2)                  (3)                  (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)                 (8)                   (9)           (10)
Modern Greek                        0.031          0.060                0.300                                           0.661           0.301                0.369
                                    (0.163)        (0.089)              (0.295)                                       (0.213)***        (0.295)             (0.210)*
N                                     76           195                   40                                               54             40                   43
Ancient Greek (Classics)                          -0.063                0.158                                                           0.956                0.619
                                                   (0.145)              (0.161)                                                       (0.120)***           (0.054)***
N                                                   173                  193                                                              69                   51
History (Classics)                  0.030          0.241                0.019                                           0.205           1.060                0.893
                                    (0.059)       (0.109)**             (0.089)                                         (0.151)       (0.101)***           (0.274)***
N                                     83            167                  177                                              39              74                   70
Mathematics (Science)                                                                                      0.169                                                                                 0.239
                                                                                                           (0.118)*                                                                              (0.149)
N                                                                                                           133                                                                                    28
Physics (Exact Science)                                                                      0.069                                                                                0.280
                                                                                            (0.103)                                                                              (0.092)**
N                                                                                              84                                                                                   33
Mathematics (Exact Science)                                                                                -0.037                                                                                0.278
                                                                                                           (0.050)                                                                             (0.088)***
N                                                                                                           166                                                                                    70


    Notes: The (OLS) estimated coefficients in columns (1)-(5) are the between biases measures of different teachers who instruct students from the same class in two subjects. The (OLS) estimated coefficients
    in columns (6)-(10) are the between biases measures of the same teachers who instruct students from the same class in two subjects. The top panel corresponds to 11th grade teachers and the bottom
    panel to 12th grade teachers. Each estimate comes from a separate OLS regression. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.
Table A4: Descriptive Statistics for the Teacher Bias (measured in the current class) in 11th and 12th
                                    Grade, Samples of 114 and 21 Schools

                                                  Teacher Bias             Teacher Bias
                                                  measured in              measured in
                                               the current class         the current class
                                                 (114 schools)             (21 schools)
                                                Mean       sd               Mean      sd           Diff.       se

                                                                      Panel A: 11th grade
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)      (4)           (5)       (6)
Core subjects
Modern Greek                                    -0.145        0.411         -0.130   0.482        -0.016     0.008
History                                         -0.104        0.384         -0.176   0.427         0.072     0.007
Algebra                                         -0.133        0.308         -0.107   0.317        -0.026     0.006
Geometry                                        -0.138        0.306         -0.103   0.307        -0.035     0.006
Physics                                         -0.173        0.329         -0.099   0.368        -0.074     0.006
Classics Track
Ancient Greek                                   -0.155        0.380         -0.202   0.400         0.047     0.007
Philosophy                                      -0.195         0.435        -0.011   0.437        -0.184     0.008
Latin                                           -0.168        -0.519        -0.119   0.501        -0.049     0.006
Science Track
Mathematics                                     -0.108        0.356         -0.056   0.331        -0.051     0.007
Physics                                         -0.127        0.368         -0.083   0.440        -0.044     0.007
Chemistry                                       -0.140        0.372         -0.061   0.350        -0.079     0.007
Exact Science Track
Mathematics                                     -0.170        0.347         -0.095   0.315        -0.075     0.007
Physics                                         -0.183        0.342         -0.072   0.349        -0.111     0.007
Technology and Computers                        -0.366        0.444         -0.266   0.426        -0.100     0.009
                                                                      Panel B: 12th grade
Core subjects
Modern Greek                                    -0.115        0.445         -0.100   0.493        -0.015     0.005
Biology                                         -0.222        0.665         -0.165   0.787        -0.057     0.009
History                                         -0.183        0.380         -0.174   0.361        -0.009     0.007
Mathematics                                     -0.180        0.525         -0.175   0.535        -0.005     0.006
Physics                                         -0.271        0.357         -0.213   0.441        -0.058     0.007
Classics Track
Ancient Greek                                   -0.117        0.366         -0.116   0.431        -0.001     0.005
Latin                                           -0.118        0.414         -0.151   0.378         0.033     0.005
Literature                                      -0.168        0.519         -0.119   0.501        -0.049     0.006
History                                         -0.149        0.418         -0.247   0.399         0.098     0.005
Science Track
Biology                                         -0.057        0.536         -0.051   0.452        -0.005     0.008
Mathematics                                     -0.139        0.439         -0.183   0.487         0.044     0.006
Physics                                         -0.213        0.480         -0.244   0.474        0.031      0.007
Chemistry                                       -0.111        0.483         -0.130   0.449        0.019      0.007
Exact Science Track
Mathematics                                     -0.154        0.291         -0.151   0.328        -0.003     0.004
Physics                                         -0.239        0.324         -0.231   0.328        -0.008     0.004
Business Administration                         -0.208        0.346         -0.220   0.391         0.012     0.004
Computers                                       -0.210        0.325         -0.205   0.356        -0.005     0.004
Optional
Economics                                       -0.162        0.638         -0.092   0.694        -0.070     0.008
  Notes: This table presents the means, standard deviations and differences of teacher biases measured in the current
  class for the sample of 114 and 21 schools. The teacher biases are presented for each subject in 11th and 12th grades.
  The means are weighted by the number of students. A negative bias means that the teacher is pro-girl. The baseline
  sample is 11th grade students in 2003-2005 and 12th grade students in 2003-2011.
                                                         61
  Table A5: Descriptive Statistics for the Teacher Bias (measured in current class) by Teacher Gender,
                                                 Sample of 21 Schools

                                        Bias measured in current class
                                       Male Teachers      Female Teachers
                                       Mean     s.d.      Mean      s.d.                       Difference      s.e.

                                                            Panel A: 11th grade
                                          (1)       (2)             (3)        (4)                 (5)         (6)
Core Subjects
Modern Greek                            -0.128     0.532          -0.139      0.402              0.011        0.086
Algebra                                 -0.163     0.462          -0.230      0.477               0.067       0.078
Geometry                                -0.112     0.321          -0.107      0.434              -0.005       0.061
Physics                                 -0.164     0.296          -0.068      0.368              -0.096       0.055
History                                 -0.115     0.295          -0.076      0.372              -0.039       0.056
Track: Classics
Ancient Greek                           -0.344     0.479          -0.309      0.435              -0.035       0.139
Philosophy                              -0.108     0.434          -0.096      0.712              -0.012       0.163
Latin                                   -0.154     0.474          -0.262      0.459               0.108       0.141
Track: Science
Mathematics                             -0.152     0.296          -0.085      0.553              -0.068       0.149
Physics                                 -0.051     0.381          0.007       0.510              -0.057       0.150
Chemistry                                0.103     0.486          -0.009      0.551               0.111       0.174
Track: Exact Science
Mathematics                             -0.163     0.462          -0.067      0.411              -0.096       0.141
Physics                                 0.000      0.283          -0.117      0.429              0.117        0.121
Technology and Computers                -0.347     0.480          -0.173      0.675              -0.174       0.207
                                                            Panel B: 12th grade
Core Subjects
Modern Greek                            -0.138     0.535          -0.067      0.552              -0.071       0.064
History                                 -0.207     0.442          -0.161      0.372              -0.046       0.073
Physics                                 -0.024     0.656          -0.226      0.813              0.202        0.106
Biology                                 -0.222     0.293          -0.202      0.404              -0.020       0.063
Mathematics                             -0.207     0.569          -0.144      0.546              -0.063       0.075
Track:Classics
Ancient Greek                           -0.216     0.539          -0.173      0.597              -0.043       0.116
Latin                                   -0.137     0.490          -0.174      0.586               0.038       0.116
Literature                              -0.183     0.616          -0.201      0.691               0.017       0.138
History                                 -0.310     0.567          -0.270      0.540              -0.041       0.120
Track: Science
Biology                                  0.102     0.504          -0.163      0.452              0.265        0.185
Mathematics                             -0.286     0.471          -0.286      0.544              -0.001       0.188
Physics                                 -0.194     0.400          -0.306      0.390              0.112        0.138
Chemistry                               -0.256     0.740          -0.133      0.460              -0.124       0.200
Track: Exact Science
Mathematics                             -0.078     0.400          -0.212      0.516               0.134       0.108
Physics                                 -0.282     0.586          -0.204      0.458              -0.078       0.111
Bus. Administ.                          -0.168     0.612          -0.230      0.543               0.063       0.116
Computers                               -0.082     0.449          -0.270      0.493               0.188       0.101
Optional
Economics                               -0.135     0.671           0.063      0.869              -0.198       0.096
 Notes: This table presents the means, standard deviations and differences of teacher biases measured in the own class by
 teacher gender for the sample of 21 schools. These teacher biases by teacher gender are presented for each subject in 11th
 and 12th grades. A teacher sample is used here. A negative bias means that the teacher is pro-girl. The baseline sample is
 11th grade students in 2003-2005 and 12th grade students in 2003-2011.


                                                      62
       Table A6: Descriptive Statistics for Teachers Biases by Teacher Gender, Sample of 21 schools

                                         Bias measured in all other classes
                                         Male Teachers       Female Teachers
                                         Mean     s.d.        Mean     s.d.                       Difference      s.e.

                                                              Panel A: 11th grade
                                           (1)       (2)              (3)         (4)                 (5)         (6)
Core Subjects
Modern Greek                             -0.150     0.402            -0.060     0.303               -0.090       0.065
History                                  -0.185     0.355            -0.080     0.380               -0.105       0.061
Algebra                                  -0.149     0.223            -0.163     0.315                0.014       0.044
Geometry                                 -0.155     0.228            -0.074     0.307               -0.081       0.045
Physics                                  -0.212     0.215            -0.076     0.308               -0.136       0.046
Track:Classics
Ancient Greek                            -0.216     0.440            -0.305     0.428               0.089        0.134
Philosophy                               -0.171     0.389            -0.153     0.411               -0.018       0.124
Latin                                    -0.137     0.365            -0.183     0.419               0.046        0.119
Track: Science
Mathematics                              -0.148     0.175            -0.006     0.291               -0.143       0.084
Physics                                  -0.035     0.242            -0.039     0.302               0.004        0.094
Chemistry                                -0.154     0.203            -0.080     0.306               -0.075       0.100
Track: Exact Science
Mathematics                              -0.149     0.237            -0.045     0.286               -0.104       0.091
Physics                                  -0.154     0.404            -0.144     0.239               -0.010       0.102
Technology and Computers                 -0.318     0.191            -0.250     0.385               -0.068       0.118
                                                              Panel B: 12th grade
Core Subjects
Modern Greek                             -0.153     0.351            -0.132     0.292               -0.022       0.040
History                                  -0.238     0.366            -0.203     0.367               -0.035       0.064
Physics                                  -0.035     0.526            -0.211     0.487               0.175        0.070
Biology                                  -0.156     0.235            -0.187     0.356               0.031        0.055
Mathematics                              -0.159     0.281            -0.153     0.364               -0.007       0.047
Track:Classics
Ancient Greek                            -0.154     0.455            -0.186     0.394               0.031        0.088
Latin                                    -0.192     0.453            -0.197     0.397               0.004        0.097
Literature -0.181                         0.408     -0.251            0.382     0.070               0.087
History                                  -0.192     0.360            -0.244     0.382               0.053        0.080
Track: Science
Biology                                   0.068     0.296            -0.287     0.409               0.355        0.156
Mathematics                              -0.222     0.218            -0.261     0.421                0.039       0.139
Physics                                  -0.274     0.239            -0.309     0.262               0.035        0.094
Chemistry                                -0.254     0.582            -0.181     0.347               -0.073       0.163
Track: Exact Science
Mathematics                              -0.061     0.383            -0.191     0.358               0.131        0.081
Physics                                  -0.129     0.311            -0.191     0.308               0.062        0.070
Bus. Administration                      -0.167     0.459            -0.130     0.516               -0.037       0.100
Computers                                -0.153     0.418            -0.209     0.526               0.056        0.106
Optional
Economics                                -0.122     0.329            -0.041     0.457               -0.081       0.049
  Notes: This table presents the means, standard deviations and differences of teacher biases measured in the current class by
  teacher gender for the sample of 21 schools. These teacher biases by teacher gender are presented for each subject in 11th
  and 12th grades. A teacher sample is used here. A negative bias means that the teacher is pro-girl. The baseline sample is
  11th grade students in 2003-2005 and 12th grade students in 2003-2011.




                                                       63
Table A7: Heterogeneity in the Effect of 11th Grade Gender Bias on Blind 12th Grade Score by the Gender of the
                                                                 Teacher

                                  Dependent Variable: Blind score in 12th grade national exams

                                                                      Boys                                        Girls
                                                         (1)          (2)        (3)                 (4)           (5)         (6)
Core Subjects

Bias                                                  0.045       -0.022       0.048              0.009         -0.048       -0.121
                                                     (0.040)      (0.041)      (0.036)            (0.031)      (0.032)     (0.032)***
Bias × Female Teacher                                 0.026        0.125       0.083              -0.152        -0.051        0.041
                                                     (0.056)      (0.057)      (0.058)            (0.048)      (0.049)       (0.049)
Female Teacher                                        0.008       -0.031       -0.027             -0.008        -0.028       -0.036
                                                     (0.017)      (0.017)      (0.016)            (0.014)      (0.015)       (0.014)
Sample Size                                           8,226        8,226       8,226              10,369       10,369        10,369

Classics Subjects

Bias                                                  -0.218       0.043       -0.071             -0.044        0.206         0.157
                                                     (0.138)      (0.144)      (0.131)            (0.070)     (0.076)**      (0.086)
Bias × Female Teacher                                 0.470        0.145       0.361              -0.197        -0.422       -0.294
                                                    (0.179)***    (0.194)      (0.169)           (0.091)*     (0.098)***    (0.102)**
Female Teacher                                        0.056        0.090       0.039              0.020         0.050         0.007
                                                     (0.058)      (0.058)      (0.061)            (0.028)      (0.030)       (0.032)
Sample Size                                           1,401        1,401       1,401              5,499         5,499         5,499

Science Subjects

Bias                                                  0.256        0.133       0.218              0.073         -0.035       -0.115
                                                    (0.083)***   (0.069)*    (0.083)***           (0.077)      (0.069)       (0.083)
Bias × Female Teacher                                 -0.268       0.074       -0.026             -0.064        -0.041        0.024
                                                     (0.168)      (0.140)      (0.155)            (0.150)      (0.124)       (0.139)
Female Teacher                                        0.052        0.034       0.061              0.073         0.037        -0.010
                                                     (0.035)      (0.038)      (0.047)          (0.028)***     (0.027)       (0.036)
Sample Size                                           4,460        4,460       4,460              4,910         4,910         4,910

Exact Science Subjects

Bias                                                  0.059        0.001       0.100              -0.070        -0.073       -0.173
                                                     (0.072)      (0.061)     (0.052)*            (0.113)      (0.100)      (0.093)*
Bias *Female Teacher                                  0.048        0.159       0.176              -0.005        0.076         0.035
                                                     (0.123)      (0.110)      (0.121)            (0.154)      (0.158)       (0.154)
Female Teacher                                        0.015       -0.046       -0.012             -0.060        -0.050       -0.026
                                                     (0.031)      (0.029)      (0.029)            (0.038)      (0.042)       (0.043)
Sample Size                                           5,164        5,164       5,164              3,031         3,031         3,031


Subjects FE
Year FE
School FE
Class FE

  Notes: Notes: Each row presents estimates from a separate regression using an empirical Bayes estimation strategy. The empirical
  Bayes shrinkage factor is the ratio of signal variance to signal plus noise variance. We assume that there is a sampling error problem
  and the measure of teacher gender bias consists of an error component. Estimating teachers' effects on students' weighted difference
  between "non-blind" and "blind" scores enables us to separate between the signal and the noise variance. The empirical Bayes
  estimate for each teacher is a weighted average of the teacher estimated effect and the mean of teacher estimates, where the weight
  is the empirical Bayes shrinkage factor. Standard errors are clustered using a two-step bootstrapping method. In the first stage,
  a random sample with replacement is drawn from each class by gender and the corresponding OLS coefficients are obtained. In
  the second stage, the effect of these new teachers' gender bias measures in 11th grades on students' performance in 12th grade are
  estimated and the coefficients are stored. This process of two-step bootstrap sampling and estimation is repeated 1,000 times. The
  standard deviations in the sample of 1,000 observations of coefficients estimates from the second stage regression are the bootstrap
  standard errors of the point estimates of these coefficients. All specifications include the students' blind score as a control. All scores
  are standardized z-scores. The first panel "Core Subjects" includes all core subjects. The second panel "Classics Subjects" includes
  relevant exams from the core (history and modern Greek) and all the classics track subjects. The third panel "Science Subjects"
  includes relevant exams from the core (algebra, geometry and physics) and all the science track subjects. The forth panel "Exact
  Science Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (algebra, geometry and physics) and all the exact science track subjects. *,
  **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.
  Table A8: Heterogeneity in the Effect of 11th Grade Gender Bias (measured in all other
              classes) on Blind 12th Grade Score by the Gender of the Principal
                   Dependent Variable: Blind score in 12th grade national exams

                                                                     Boys                 Girls
                                                                      (1)                 (2)
Core Subjects

Bias                                                                0.047                -0.070
                                                                    (0.074)               (0.057)
Bias × Female Principal                                             0.013                 0.071
                                                                    (0.103)               (0.103)
Female Principal                                                    -0.051               -0.008
                                                                    (0.036)               (0.031)

Sample Size                                                         5,867                 7,675

Classics Subjects

Bias                                                                0.168                -0.239
                                                                    (0.110)             (0.062)***
Bias × Female Principal                                             -0.185                0.094
                                                                    (0.162)               (0.092)
Female Principal                                                    -0.256               -0.076
                                                                  (0.077)***             (0.040)*

Sample Size                                                         1,080                 4,022

Science Subjects

Bias                                                                0.002                 0.048
                                                                    (0.095)               (0.081)
Bias × Female Principal                                             0.240                 0.087
                                                                   (0.129)*               (0.120)
Female Principal                                                    -0.106               -0.086
                                                                  (0.049)***            (0.045)**

Sample Size                                                         2,918                 3,364

Exact Science Subjects

Bias                                                                0.030                -0.025
                                                                    (0.076)               (0.087)
Bias × Female Principal                                             0.101                -0.000
                                                                    (0.098)               (0.136)
Female Principal                                                    0.001                -0.008
                                                                    (0.036)               (0.040)

Sample Size                                                         3,660                 2,327


Subjects FE
Year FE

  Notes: Each row presents estimates from a separate regression using an empirical Bayes estimation strat-
  egy. Standard errors are clustered using a two-step bootstrapping method. All specifications include the
  students' blind score as a control. All scores are standardized z-scores. The first panel "Core Subjects"
  includes all core subjects. The second panel "Classics Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (his-
  tory and modern Greek) and all the classics track subjects. The third panel "Science Subjects" includes
  relevant exams from the core (algebra, geometry and physics) and all the science track subjects. The forth
  panel "Exact Science Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (algebra, geometry and physics) and
  all the exact science track subjects. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.


                                                    65
Table A9: Effect of 11th Grade Teacher Bias (measured in the current class) on Blind Score in 12th Grade, Sample of 21
                                                            Schools

                              Dependent Variable: Blind score in 12th grade national exams


                                                           Boys                                        Girls
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)                (4)           (5)          (6)

Core Subjects
                                              0.203       0.187        0.200               -0.143       -0.157       -0.153
                                              (0.048)     (0.048)     (0.049)***          (0.044)***   (0.044)***   (0.047)***


Sample Size                                   8,384       8,384        8,384               10,563       10,563       10,563

Classics Track Subjects
                                              0.323       0.276        0.248               -0.228       -0.193       -0.136
                                            (0.115)***   (0.101)***   (0.099)***          (0.064)***   (0.064)***   (0.066)**


Sample Size                                   1,884       1,884        1,884                7,399       7,399        7,399



Science Track Subjects
                                              0.191       0.134        0.211               -0.004       -0.114       -0.137
                                            (0.073)***    (0.068)*    (0.077)***           (0.071)      (0.070)     (0.068)**


Sample Size                                   4,633       4,633        4,633                5,138       5,138        5,138

Exact Science Track Subjects
                                              0.090       0.077        0.159               -0.157       -0.162       -0.098
                                              (0.049)     (0.050)     (0.045)***          (0.068)**    (0.063)***   (0.056)**


Sample Size                                   9,315       9,315        9,315                5,368       5,368        5,368


Subjects FE
Year FE
School FE
Class FE

  Notes: The datasets for the core subjects and each track subjects include stacked observations for each subject/exam.
  Each row presents estimates from a separate regression using an empirical Bayes estimation strategy. The empirical
  Bayes shrinkage factor is the ratio of signal variance to signal plus noise variance. We assume that there is a sampling
  error problem and the measure of teacher gender bias consists of an error component. Estimating teachers' effects on
  students' weighted difference between "non-blind" and "blind" scores enables us to separate between the signal and the
  noise variance. The empirical Bayes estimate for each teacher is a weighted average of the teacher estimated effect and
  the mean of teacher estimates, where the weight is the empirical Bayes shrinkage factor. Standard errors are clustered
  using a two-step bootstrapping method. In the first stage, a random sample with replacement is drawn from each class
  by gender and the corresponding OLS coefficients are obtained. In the second stage, the effect of these new teachers'
  gender bias measures in 11th grades on students' performance in 12th grade are estimated and the coefficients are stored.
  This process of two-step bootstrap sampling and estimation is repeated 1,000 times. The standard deviations in the
  sample of 1,000 observations of coefficients estimates from the second stage regression are the bootstrap standard errors
  of the point estimates of these coefficients. All specifications include the students' blind score as a control. All scores are
  standardized z-scores. The first panel "Core Subjects" includes all core subjects. The second panel "Classics Subjects"
  includes relevant exams from the core (history and modern Greek) and all the classics track subjects. The third panel
  "Science Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (Algebra, Geometry and physics) and all the science track
  subjects. The fourth panel "Exact Science Subjects" includes relevant exams from the core (Algebra, Geometry and
  physics) and all the exact science track subjects. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.




                                                              66
Table A10: Effect of 11th and 12th Grade Own Teacher's Bias (measured in the current class) on the Choice
                         of University Field of Study by Gender, Sample of 21 Schools
                   Dependent Variable: Dummy variable for the choice of University study
                                      (1)      (2)          (3)             (4)        (5)                        (6)
                                                          Boys                                         Girls

                                              I.   Stack 11th and 12th grades, and add grade FE (2003-2005)

                                        -0.007         -0.010           0.008           -0.031      -0.036        -0.040
                                        (0.017)        (0.019)          (0.025)         (0.017)*    (0.017)*       (0.026)

Sample Size                              7,947         7,947            7,947           9,973        9,973         9,973
                                                                  II.     12th grade (2003-2011)

                                         0.012         0.010            0.003           -0.030      -0.033        -0.048
                                        (0.019)        (0.019)          (0.027)         (0.019)     (0.019)*      (0.028)*

Sample Size                              5,201         5,201            5,201           6,616        6,616         6,616

Year FE
Major FE
Track FE
School FE
Class FE
  Notes: Each row presents estimates from a separate regression using an empirical Bayes estimation strategy. The dependent
  variable is the choice to study in Social Science, Science, Exact Science or Humanities. Students not enrolled in any
  university are not included in the sample. The subjects that we use for each field of study are the following: for exact
  science departments we use the blind score and the bias in algebra, geometry and physics in 11th grade, and mathematics
  and physics in 12th grade. For humanities departments we use the blind score and the bias in history and modern Greek in
  both 11th and 12th grades. For social science departments we use the blind score and the bias in history and modern Greek
  in 11th , and economics in 12th grade. For science departments we use the blind score and the bias in algebra, geometry and
  physics in 11th grade, and biology in 12th grade. For other departments we use the blind score and the bias in algebra and
  geometry in 11th grade, and mathematics in 12th grade. The scores are standardized and have a zero mean and a standard
  deviation of one. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.
 Table A11: Effect of 11th and 12th Grade Own Teacher's Bias on the Choice of University Field of Study by
                                               Gender, Sample of 21 Schools
                      Dependent Variable: Dummy variable for the choice of University study
                                      (1)        (2)          (3)              (4)          (5)                          (6)
                                                  Boys                                      Girls

                                                   I.   Stack 11th and 12th grade, and add Grade FE (2003-2005)

                                         -0.001          -0.000         0.003              -0.029         -0.033         -0.037
                                         (0.012)          (0.013)       (0.018)            (0.011)**     (0.012)***     (0.018)**

Sample Size                              9,998            9,998         9,178              12,547         12,547         12,547
                                                                      II.   12th grade (2003-2011)

                                         -0.028          -0.031         -0.033             -0.038         -0.045         -0.036
                                        (0.012)*         (0.012)**      (0.019)           (0.010)***     (0.011)***      (0.017)*

Sample Size                              6,721            6,721         6,721               8,537          8,537          8,537


Year FE
Major FE
Track FE
School FE
Class FE
  Notes: Each row presents estimates from a separate regression using an empirical Bayes estimation strategy. The dependent
  variable is the choice to study in Social Science, Science, Exact Science, Humanities and vocational departments. Students not
  enrolled in any university are not included in the sample. The subjects that we use for each field of study are the following: for
  exact science departments we use the blind score and the bias in algebra, geometry and physics in 11th grade, and mathematics
  and physics in 12th grade. For humanity departments we use the blind score and the bias in history and modern Greek in both
  11th and 12th grades. For social science departments we use the blind score and the bias in history and modern Greek in 11th ,
  and economics in 12th grade. For science departments we use the blind score and the bias in algebra, geometry and physics in
  11th grade, and biology in 12th grade. For other departments we use the blind score and the bias in algebra and geometry in 11th
  grade, and mathematics in 12th grade. The scores are standardized and have a zero mean and a standard deviation of one. *, **,
  and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.
               Table A12: Summary Statistics for Sample Used to Estimate Value-Added Models
                                                             Observations         Mean      Std. Dev.        Min.       Max.
I.     Student Characteristics
Age (in Years)                                                      50,970        17.363        0.813          16         42
Born in the First Quarter of Birth Year                             50,970         0.240        0.427           0          1
(Yes=1)
Gender (Female=1)                                                   50,970         0.553        0.497           0          1
Test Scores (s.d.)                                                  50,970        -0.001        0.997        -3.365     2.988
Special Interest in:
Classics                                                            50,970         0.338        0.473           0          1
Science                                                             50,970         0.235        0.424           0          1
Exact Science                                                       50,970         0.427        0.495           0          1
Number of Subject-School Combinations per                           50,970         9.766        5.758           1         22
Student
Lagged Test Scores (s.d.)                                           50,970         0.019        0.965        -6.535     2.867
Missing Lagged Test Score                                           50,970         0.058        0.233           0          1
II.   Class/School/Neighborhood Char-
acteristics
Class Size                                                          50,970        20.672       4.684            4        31
School Grade Enrollment size                                        50,970        91.283       46.097           4        187
Neighborhood Income (in Euro)                                       50,970        19,679        3691         12,266    26,586
Urban Locality (yes=1)                                              50,970         0.869        0.337           0          1
III. Teacher Characteristics
Teacher Gender (Female=1)                                           50,970         0.478        0.500           0          1
No. of other Classes a Teacher Taught (Expe-                        20,650        18.331       10.710           2         45
rience)
     Notes: All statistics reported are for the sample used in estimating the baseline VA model, following the procedure
     described in Chetty et al 2014. This sample includes only students who have non-missing baseline controls. Student data
     are from the administrative records of 21 schools in Greece. The sample period of 2003-2005 is used to obtain the VA
     estimates. All test scores are standardized. Summary statistics (number of observations, mean, s.d., min., and max.)
     for the baseline variables are reported in the table. Outcome test scores are measured in 11th and 12th grade and the
     prior test scores are measured in 10th and 11th grade. The variables are weighted by the number of students in the
     school-year-class-subject-year cell. Only the "Number of other Classes a Teacher Taught " is weighted by the number of
     teachers in the school-year-class-subject-year cell. The age is measured in years for students the day they start the 11th
     or 12th grade class. Born in First Quarter of Birth Year is a dummy that takes the value of one if a student is born in
     the first quarter of the calendar year, and zero otherwise. Students who are born in the first quarter of the calendar year
     are eligible to enroll a year earlier in the 1st grade. Special interest in Classics, Science or Exact Science is derived by
     the track they followed in each grade. The school grade enrolment size denotes the number of 11th or 12th graders in a
     given school and year. The number of subject-school combinations per students is the number of subjects that students
     take. Each student takes on average 10 subjects. When prior test scores are missing, we set the prior score equal to 0 and
     include an indicator for missing data. On average, 6% of lagged scores are missing. The total number of observations used
     here is 50,970. In the last panel that reports teachers' characteristics, a class corresponds to a subject/class/year/grade
     combination.
                                                               69
       Figure A1: Evolution of Teacher Gender Bias by School Track, Sample of 21 Schools




Notes: The 11th grade bias in Classics is the average bias in ancient Greek, philosophy and Latin. The
11th grade bias in Science is the average bias in mathematics, physics and chemistry. The 11th grade bias
in Exact Science is the average bias in mathematics, physics and computer science. The 12th grade bias in
Classics is the average bias in ancient Greek, Latin, literature and history. The 12th grade bias in Science
is the average bias in mathematics, physics,biology and chemistry. The 12th grade bias in Exact Science
is the average bias in mathematics, physics, business administration and computer science. All teacher
biases that are used here are calculated based on all other classes that a teacher taught in the sample.




                                                    70
      Figure A2: Evolution of Teacher Gender Bias by Field of Study, Sample of 21 schools




Notes: These figures show the evolution (over time) of the teacher bias in terms of the fields of study at
the university level. These fields of study include departments in the following fields: humanities, social
science, science and exact science. The 11th grade bias (measured in all other classes) for humanities
and social science departments is the average bias in modern Greek and history in 11th grade. The 11th
grade bias (measured in all other classes) for Science and Exact Science departments is the average bias
in algebra and physics in 11th grade. The 12th grade bias (measured in all other classes) for exact science,
science, humanities and social science departments is the bias in mathematics and physics (average),
biology, modern Greek and history (average), and economics.




                                                    71
Figure A3: Proportion of University Students Enrolled By Field of Studies, Sample of 21 schools




Notes: This figure presents the proportion of enrolled students in each field of university study and
year. We consider four broad categories: humanities, science, social science and exact science. The
remaining students enroll in professional studies. Humanities include the departments of Liberal Arts,
Psychology, Journalism, Philosophy, Education, Greek Language, History, Foreign Languages, Home
Economics and Law. Social Science includes the departments of Economics, Statistics, Business and
Management, Accounting, Political and European studies. Exact Science includes the departments of
Mathematics, Engineering, Physics and Computer Science. Science includes the departments of Biology,
Chemistry, Medicine, Pharmacy, Veterinary Studies and Dentistry.




                                                 72
Figure A4: Proportion of University Students, By Field of Studies and Gender, by Year, Sample
                                              of 21 schools




Notes: The top figure presents the proportion of enrolled boys (out of enrolled students) in each field of
university study and year. The bottom figure presents the proportion of enrolled girls (out of enrolled
students) in each field of university study and year. We consider four broad categories: humanities,
science, social science and exact science.




                                                   73
Figure A5: Proportion of University Students Enrolled in STEM by Subject, Sample of 21 schools




Notes: This figure presents the proportion of enrolled students in each stem field and year. We use the
following five broad fields: mathematics, engineering, physics, computer science and architecture.




                                                  74
 Figure A6: Proportion of University Students in STEM fields by Gender, Sample of 21 schools




Notes: The top figure presents the proportion of enrolled boys in each STEM field and year. The bottom
figure presents the proportion of enrolled girls in each STEM field and year. Five broad fields are used:
mathematics, engineering, physics, computer science and architecture.




                                                   75
Figure A7: Evolution of Teacher Bias, All, Male and Female Teachers who Teach 8 or 9 Years in
                                              the Sample




Notes: We calculate the annual bias across subjects and classes for all teachers in the sample. We then
plot the evolution of teacher bias for male and female teachers who teach 8 or 9 years in the sample. We
consider years from 2003 up to and including 2011.



                                                  76
