                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DINING OUT AS CULTURAL TRADE

                                         Joel Waldfogel

                                       Working Paper 26020
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26020


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Dining Out as Cultural Trade
Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 26020
June 2019
JEL No. F14,L66

                                          ABSTRACT

Perceptions of Anglo-American dominance in movie and music trade motivate restrictions on
cultural trade. Yet, the market for another cultural good, food at restaurants, is roughly ten times
larger than the markets for music and film. Using TripAdvisor data on restaurant cuisines, along
with Euromonitor data on overall and fast food expenditure, this paper calculates implicit trade
patterns in global cuisines for 52 destination countries. We obtain three major results. First, the
pattern of cuisine trade resembles the "gravity" patterns in physically traded products. Second,
after accounting gravity factors, the most popular cuisines are Italian, Japanese, Chinese, Indian,
and American. Third, excluding fast food, the largest net exporters of their cuisines are the
Italians and the Japanese, while the largest net importers are the US ­ with a 2017 deficit of over
$130 billion ­ followed by Brazil, China, and the UK. With fast food included, the US deficit
shrinks to $55 billion but remains the largest net importer along with China and, to a lesser
extent, the UK and Brazil. Cuisine trade patterns appear to run starkly counter to the audiovisual
patterns that have motivated concern about Anglo-American cultural dominance.


Joel Waldfogel
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics
3-177 Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jwaldfog@umn.edu
        Despite a trend toward acceptance of free trade in goods and services, many countries

restrict trade in cultural products, largely as a reaction to US dominance in audiovisual products.

Concerns about US dominance in motion pictures are not unfounded. The US producers' share

of box office revenue exceeds the domestic share in most countries, and US movies' box office

revenue abroad ("exports") exceeded US revenue for foreign films ("imports") by over $10

billion in 2014.1 As a result, most European countries subsidize local motion picture production,

and a number of countries, including France and Canada, impose domestic content restrictions

on radio broadcasting. 2 Over the objections of US negotiators, the French introduced the

"cultural exception" into the Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations in the 1990s, excluding

cultural goods from the agreement. French President François Mitterrand argued that "no

country should be allowed to control the images of the whole world." 3

        While discussions of cultural trade tend to focus on audiovisual products, these products

do not exhaust the list of cultural products. 4 Perhaps the most ubiquitous ­ and most

economically important ­ cultural product is prepared food at restaurants. By sheer size, the

market for prepared food dwarfs markets for other cultural products. In the US, the motion

picture industry generates roughly $30 billion per year in the US, while recorded music revenue

accounts for another $10 billion. The US restaurant industry, by contrast, generated about $560

billion in annual revenue in 2017. To the extent that foreign cuisines are popular with consumers

in the US and elsewhere ­ and we will demonstrate that they are ­ then implicit cuisine trade will

be large in comparison with trade in other cultural products.




1
  See Section IV, below.
2
  See Richardson (2006).
3
  See Gordon and Meunier (2001), p. 47.
4
  See Waterman (2005) for evidence on motion pictures and Ferreira and Waldfogel (2013) for evidence on music.

                                                       1
        Concerns about consumption of foreign products as threats to local culture arise in the

culinary as well as audiovisual realms. For example, there was considerable controversy in 2013

when fast food consumption was said to have surpassed consumption of domestic cuisines in

France. 5 The spread of fast food, and the declining popularity of traditional French dining styles,

"mobilized the country to protect them" through taste education, "in which students are taught

how to savor foods, and about concepts like terroir" as "a formal part of the curriculum." In

2014 the French government unveiled "a national food policy that aims to make "high-quality

food and nutrition a foundational aspect of French citizenship."" 6 In a widely-cited essay in Le

Mond, Jean Michel Normand argued that "McDonald's ... commercial hegemony threatens our

agriculture and its cultural hegemony insidiously ruins alimentary behavior--both sacred

reflections of the French identity." Moreover, "Resistance to the hegemonic pretenses of

hamburgers is, above all, a cultural imperative." 7 It seems clear that cuisine, along with music

and movies, is an important cultural product.

        While the physical products of the restaurant industry are generally produced and

distributed locally, the cultural content of the products is often not local. Restaurant meals are

instead often prepared according to recipes from foreign countries. Because recipes and cuisines

are not eligible for intellectual property protection, the sale of food made according to a recipe

created by another requires no compensation. As a result, there is no formal world trade arising

from the sale of, say, Italian cuisine in Germany, or American cuisine in France. Still, as the

cited passages above suggest, interest in cultural trade reflects concerns that transcend balance of

trade and extend substantially into issues of cross-border cultural influence.



5
  See Samuel (2013).
6
  See Godoy and Beardsley (2015).
7
  See Gordon and Meunier-Aitsahalia (2001), p. 53.

                                                     2
       While many observers raise concerns about culinary imports ­ for example the spread of

the American hamburger ­ there seems to be little cognizance that cuisines are exported as well

as imported. Against the backdrop of these concerns about identity and foreign cultural

influence, the goal of this paper is to document patterns of world trade in cuisines. This requires

some source of comparable data on the distribution of available restaurants by cuisine for

countries around the world. I am aware of no such data, so I derive estimates using Euromonitor

data on aggregate and fast food restaurant expenditure by country, along with TripAdvisor and

Euromonitor data on the distribution of restaurants by cuisine. TripAdvisor maintains lists of

restaurants in hundreds of cities around the world, and users classify restaurants into 148

different cuisine categories, most of which (e.g. pizza, Italian, Greek, Japanese) can be identified

with particular origin countries. Euromonitor provides data on fast food expenditure for each of

a dozen fast food cuisines (hamburger, chicken, pizza, etc.) that we can match with TripAdvisor

data for 52 countries that account for 89 percent of world GDP.

       Combining these data sources, I calculate measures of trade flows between origin-cuisine

countries and destination markets, with and without fast food. These data are of interest in

themselves, as they allow me to calculate the origin-cuisine share of consumption in each

destination. I then use the data to estimate standard gravity models of bilateral trade flows. I

document both that cuisine trade follows patterns documented for other products. My goal in

estimating gravity models is to produce an index of origin-cuisine appeal that accounts for

distance between origin and destination, but I also explore the pattern of trade in cuisines by

linking origin country cuisine trade fixed effects to origin country migration and food trade

effects as well as origin country arable land. While all are related to cuisine origin country

effects, included together only migration bears a significant relationship with cuisine origin fixed


                                                 3
effects. Finally, I turn to the main task of the paper: I calculate implied cuisine trade deficits and

surpluses; and I contrast the patterns of origin country dominance in cuisine with patterns for

other cultural products.

       Cuisine trade patterns contrast rather sharply with the patterns for audiovisual products.

While the US is dominant in motion pictures, and the UK (and Sweden) are dominant in music,

neither is among the top sources of cuisine. The origin countries with the largest international

trade surpluses are Italy, Japan, and Mexico. Excluding fast food, the US has the largest cuisine

trade deficit, at $134 billion in 2017. Including fast food, the US deficit is $55 billion and still

the largest. Both US deficit measures far exceed the American trade surplus in other cultural

products, raising questions about whether the US, notwithstanding the success of its motion

picture industry, has disproportionate influence in cultural markets more generally.

       The paper proceeds in four sections. Section 1 presents background, including links to

the relevant literatures in cultural and trade economics. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3

presents results in five parts. First, I document bilateral trade patterns descriptively, showing

which countries consume which cuisines. Second, I estimate gravity models, which allow me to

characterize the appeal of origin country cuisines. Third, I explore some factors associated with

cuisine trade patterns, including migration, food trade, and arable land. Fourth, I calculate the

patterns of net exports by country which demonstrate the main point of the paper. Finally, I

explore robustness of various results to alternative assumptions. The concluding section presents

discussion of the results and comparison with other cultural goods. I also discuss potential data

weakness and directions for further research.




                                                  4
    I.      Background

            a. Cuisine "Trade"

         The quantification of cuisine "trade" based on, say, the consumption of domestically

produced food made according to foreign recipes is at odds with the way trade statistics are

calculated. Even if consumption of foreign cuisines occurred at foreign-owned restaurants

(presumably using local ingredients and labor), only a small share ­ the profit or licensing fees ­

would formally constitute trade. Still, the policy concerns attending cultural trade transcend the

current account balance and instead ­ in at least some countries ­ reflect concern that citizens of

a country are deriving the pleasure and sustenance that one obtains from food using foreign

intellectual property in the form of the recipes for non-domestic cuisines. In some ways the trade

documented in this study resembles foreign direct investment, in which home country ideas are

used to produce abroad with local inputs (Ramondo, Rodríguez-Clare, and Tintelnot, 2015).

         As a result, the quantification of "trade" as, say, the value of food sold by Italian

restaurants in the US does provide a useful indicator. If we were interested in, say, the consumer

surplus that Americans derive from food at Italian restaurants, the relevant calculation would

depend on the quantity of such meals purchased at the going price, or the total US spending on

Italian restaurant food, not just the component that would hypothetically be repatriated to Italy in

an alternative ownership regime.

            b. Cuisine as culture

         Because a goal of this paper is to juxtapose cuisine trade with recognized elements of

cultural trade, it is important to establish that cuisine is a cultural product. A full exploration of

this topic lies outside the ken of an economist. Still, it is clear that many countries take their


                                                   5
cuisines seriously and that cuisines are an important aspect of culture. As discussed in the

introduction, the French view their cuisine as an aspect of culture that requires preservation.

Others care, too. Notably, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural

Organization (UNESCO) shares the French concern for the preservation of important world

cuisines and has declared a number of cuisines to be "intangible cultural assets." These include

France's "multi-course gastronomic meal", traditional Japanese cuisine, known as washoku, and

traditional Mexican cuisine. 8

        Although the sales of a country's cuisine in restaurants abroad does not generate export

revenue, some countries ­ including Thailand, South Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia and even North

Korea ­ work actively to promote their cuisines abroad (see Karp, 2018).




            c. Relevant literature

        This paper is related to a few distinct extant literatures. First, there is a large amount of

theoretical work on cultural trade exploring possible rationales for protectionism. 9 Second, there

is a growing empirical literature on trade in cultural products. 10 Much of this work concerns

particular products, such as recorded music, motion pictures, or books. Some of the work is

instead about the spread of information or culture, such as Blum and Goldfarb (2006) on cross-

border Internet use or Disdier, Head and Mayer (2010) on media and the growth of foreign

names in France.


8
  See
http://www.unescobkk.org/fileadmin/user_upload/library/OPI/Documents/UNESCO_in_the_news_2013/131216Jap
ans_Cusine.pdf, Samuel (2010), and Peralta (2015).
9
  See Bernier (2003), Richardson (2006); and Bala and Van Long (2005).
10
   See Disdier, Tai, Fontagne, and Mayer (2010); Hanson and Xiang (2008); Ferreira and Waldfogel (2013);
Ferreira, Petrin, and Waldfogel (2017); Meloni et. Al. (2018); and Takara (2018)

                                                   6
         This paper also complements a small but growing literature on restaurant markets. For

example, Chossat and Gergaud (2003) find that cuisine quality matters more than restaurant

setting in the determinants of chef quality in the 2000 GaultMillau guidebook. Gergaud et al

(2007) document, among other things, that Michelin guide authors favor French cuisine over

others, among Paris restaurants. After accounting for a Paris restaurant's Zagat rating, Paris

restaurants serving French cuisine have more Michelin stars. This is consistent with a Michelin

"home bias" in favor of French cuisine. Gergaud et al (2015) document the impact of Michelin

stars on patron views of New York restaurants, as revealed in the Zagat guide. To my

knowledge, this is the only paper documenting cross-border patterns of culinary consumption.

Finally, this is also research on product variety that takes restaurants as its context (Schiff, 2015;

Berry and Waldfogel, 2010; Waldfogel, 2008).




   II.      Data

         As Acheson and Maule (2006) point out, "[c]ultural statistics of any kind are of generally

poor quality, and this includes those recording trade." As with other cultural products, getting

data on cuisine trade is not straightforward; but it is possible.   I combine data of three types

from two sources to create separate measures of cuisine trade for fast food and non-fast food at

restaurants.

            a. Total and Fast Food Restaurant Expenditure

         First, I have 2017 Euromonitor's Passport data on total restaurant expenditure as well as

total fast food restaurant expenditure for each of 52 countries that I can merge with other data




                                                   7
                   
sources. 11 Define  as total restaurant expenditure in country d. (All data below refer to

                                                                   
2017/2018, so notation omits time subscripts). Define  as fast food restaurant expenditure in

                                                                                     
country d, and define  as non-fast food restaurant expenditure in country d, so that  =

          
 +  . Fast food expenditure makes up an average of 20 percent of total restaurant

expenditure.



             b. Fast Food Expenditures by Cuisine and Origin

        Second, I have Euromonitor's country-specific measures of fast food restaurant

expenditure in each of twelve fast food cuisines: Asian, bakery, burger, chicken, convenience

store, fish, ice cream, Latin American, Middle Eastern, and pizza, as well as a generic "fast food"

category and "other." Given a mapping of cuisines to origin countries, I can create fast food

trade measures. Some of these cuisines are easy to map into origin countries, for example burger

as American, pizza as Italian, and Latin American and Middle Eastern apportioned to the

countries of the respective regions according to the shares of region GDP originating in each

country (more on this below). The chicken category includes fried chicken restaurants that

serve American cuisine (such as KFC), as well as restaurants serving chicken prepared according

to other cuisines. We classify the chicken cuisine as American understanding that this may tend

to overstate US restaurant exports. The remaining cuisines (bakery, etc) are classified as

domestic wherever they are observed. Burger accounts for an average of 30 percent of fast food



11
   Euromonitor describes itself as the "world's leading provider of strategic market research." They describe their
market research on the consumer foodservice industry as follows: "Standardised and cross-comparable total market
sizes, market share and share data, distribution and industry trends and category level information." They charge
$2,100 per country for a la carte purchase of reports. See http://go.euromonitor.com/passport.html,
http://www.euromonitor.com/about-us , and http://www.euromonitor.com/consumer-foodservice.



                                                         8
expenditure, chicken for 12 percent, Asian for 9 percent, Middle Eastern for 6 percent, pizza for

4, and Latin American for 2. (In the robustness section I explore the impact of classifying

chicken fast food as domestic rather than US-origin).



             c. Non-Fast Food Cuisine Shares

        To create non-fast food trade flows I need to determine the share of non-fast food

restaurant expenditure in each country occurs in each cuisine, along with a way to apportion

those cuisines to origin countries. For this I employ data from TripAdvisor. 12 TripAdvisor

maintains a website offering user-generated reviews and other information about restaurants,

hotels, and attractions in cities around the world. 13 Users are able to tag restaurants with cuisine

types, among 148 listed varieties. The site is popular and attracts 350 million visitors per

month. 14

        To get a characterization of the cuisines consumed in each country's restaurants, I obtain

the cuisine distributions for at least the top 60 cities in each of the study's 52 destination

countries. 15 For the larger countries, such as the US, China, Japan, South Korea, the major

European countries, I collect data on up to 160 cities. By collecting data on this many cities in

each country, I include not only the most prominent tourist destinations and most cosmopolitan

areas but also a much larger range of metropolitan areas. For each of 4,016 cities in 52 countries


12
   We use data from TripAdvisor rather than Yelp because TripAdvisor is more widely used around the world,
where as Yelp use is concentrated in the US. The Appendix compares TripAdvisor and Yelp and also shows that
Yelp and TripAdvisor data suggest similar cuisine shares within the US. I also compare TripAdvisor to Tabelog.com
for Japan, finding similar cuisine distributions from the two data sources.
13
   In contrast to Yelp, which is popular mainly in the US, and Tabelog, which is used in Japan, TripAdvisor is used
in a wide range of countries. See the Appendix for evidence on the geographic distribution of TripAdvisor usage.
14
   See Chesto (2016). Other research ­ including Mayzlin, Dover, and Chevalier (2014) - uses TripAdvisor data.
15
   I have fewer than 60 for some countries, such as New Zealand, that are too small to have 60 listed cities in
TripAdvisor.



                                                        9
­ or an average of 77 cities per country - I obtain two pieces of information for June of 2018.

First, I observe the total number of restaurants in the city that are listed in TripAdvisor. Many of

these listings are unpopulated, including only the name of the restaurant but no cuisine

information. Second, we observe the number of restaurants in the city reporting that it serves

food in one of the 148 listed cuisine types. Because restaurants can and typically do report more

than one cuisine type, the sum of the number of restaurants offering each cuisine does not equal

the total number of restaurants. In total, the TripAdvisor sample covers 3,220,420 restaurants in

the 52 countries; and the data include 5,236,180 underlying cuisine listings.

       If each restaurant had only one cuisine, then the number of listings for a particular cuisine

would provide a direct measure of the number of restaurants offering that cuisine. Moreover, we

could estimate the share of restaurant food in a cuisine as the share of restaurants offering that

cuisine. Because restaurants can list multiple cuisines, estimating each cuisine's share of

restaurants in an area requires a weight for each cuisine reflecting the share of the restaurant's

fare the cuisine accounts for when the cuisine is present at a restaurant. A simple example

clarifies the point. Suppose that the Italian restaurants serve only Italian food, so that the Italian

cuisine designation only appears alone. By contrast, suppose that all restaurants serving

Moroccan food also serve Algerian food and that all such restaurants therefore list two cuisines,

Algerian and Moroccan. A town with two restaurants, one Italian and one Algerian/Moroccan,

will have a total of three cuisine listings in the town: Italian, Algerian, and Moroccan.

According to raw listings, all three cuisines account for a third of what's available. But this is

misleading, since an Algerian or Moroccan listing actually reflects only one half of what's

available at a restaurant offering that cuisine. Hence, Algerian and Moroccan should each

receive a weight of one half, while Italian should receive a weight of one. So in the hypothetical



                                                  10
town, Italian accounts for half of the food, while Algerian and Moroccan each account for one

quarter.

        Apportioning restaurants to cuisines requires weights for each cuisine indicating the share

of a restaurant's cuisines typically accounted for by the cuisine when present at a restaurant.

Determining these weights for each cuisine c and destination country d, which we term

 , requires restaurant-level data on the cuisines listed rather than the metro-level data described

above. To accommodate the possibility that cuisine weights vary across countries, I obtain

restaurant-level data on the listed cuisines at each of the first 60 listed restaurants in (up to) each

of the 40 Trip-Advisor-listed cities in each country. The resulting dataset for calculating cuisine

weights by country is based on 63,577 restaurants in 52 countries, or on an average of 1,223

restaurants per country. I also calculate overall cuisine weights (pooling the data across

countries). Because the restaurant-level sample for calculating cuisine weights contains only a

subset of restaurants in the underlying sample, I am missing some cuisine weights for some

countries, as well as the weights for some cuisines everywhere. I replace missing country-

specific cuisine weights with common cuisine weights, and I replace other missing cuisine

weights with the average of the common cuisine weights for the cuisines where I observe a

weight. (Note that I explore the impact of weights on results in the robustness section, where I

consider the extreme case where all cuisines have a weight of one).

        Aggregated across countries, the mean (median) cuisine has a weight of 0.33 (0.32),

meaning that each cuisine typically appears as one of about 3 cuisines. There is variation across

cuisines in their tendency to be the only listed cuisine. Indian cuisine has among the highest

weights, at 0.50. This is followed fairly closely by Chinese, at 0.46. Italian is at 0.40.
                                                                  
Ukrainian and Armenian, by contrast, account for under 0.25. With  as the weight associated

                                                  11
                                            
with cuisine c in destination country d and  as the number of country d restaurants listing

cuisine c among their cuisines, the effective number of restaurants in cuisine c is then   
                                                                                            .


       The most common cuisines vary by country. In China, they are Chinese (30.0%), Asian

(6.7%), Cantonese (5.1%), and Japanese (4.7%). In France, they are French (25.7%), European

(14.5%), and Italian (5.8%). In the US they are American (17.9%), bar (6.8%), Asian (5.9%),

and Italian (5.4%). Many of the 148 cuisines are easy to associate with origin regions, as the

cuisine is literally the name of a country (Italian, Chinese, Slovakian, etc). In other cases the

cuisines are named for regions with countries (Wales, Scotland), which we can associate with the

country that includes the region. Some cuisines ­ pizza ­ have ready associations with their

origin countries.

       Of the 148 cuisines, eighteen are literally ageographic and cannot be associated with an

origin region. These include bar, barbecue, brew pub, café, contemporary, delicatessen, diner,

fusion, gastropub, grill, healthy, international, pub, seafood, soups, steakhouse, street food, and

wine bar. For restaurants whose cuisines are ageographic, we assign their locations as their

origins. Hence I label a bar in Italy as a restaurant with Italian-origin cuisine.

       Another sixteen are associated with a region and not a country. These are African,

Arabic, Asian, Caribbean, Central American, Central Asian, Central European, Eastern

European, European, Fast Food, Latin, Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, Polynesian,

Scandinavian, and South American. For each of these cuisines, we obtain lists of countries in the

group. We then apportion the imports to the countries that are group members, proportionally to




                                                  12
GDP. This is easier for some groupings (such as Africa) than for others (such as Mediterranean).

We rely on Wikipedia pages describing regions for lists of countries in the respective regions. 16

           For each country d in the sample we calculate the effective number of restaurants by

cuisine from above as  . Given our mapping of cuisines to origin countries, we can calculate


the effective number of restaurants by origin country o in each destination country d,  (where

we replace the cuisine subscript c with the origin subscript o and continue to denote destination

countries by d). In some cases cuisines map directly and uniquely to origin countries. In other

cases, multiple cuisines map to a single country (e.g. pizza and Italian to Italy). In still other

cases, a particular cuisine (e.g. African) maps to multiple countries.

           Our goal is to estimate the volume of restaurant consumption from each origin country in

each destination country. We calculate origin o cuisines' share of restaurants in country d as

            
 =                . We can treat this as an estimate of the share of consumption associated with the
            


origin country, an approach that, perforce, assumes that restaurants have the same volume and

prices across cuisines.

           TripAdvisor includes "fast food" among its cuisines. While fast food makes up a fifth of

restaurant expenditure across the 52 sample countries according to aggregate expenditure in the

Euromonitor data, fast food makes up just two percent of restaurants according to the method

above. I therefore exclude fast food from the TripAdvisor shares and scale the remaining shares

up to sum to one within each country. I then apply the TripAdvisor shares to aggregate non-fast

food expenditure in each destination to calculate non-fast food trade flows.




16
     See, for example. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mediterranean_Sea .

                                                          13
            In the end I have separate measures of restaurant expenditures for fast food and non-fast

food in each of the 52 destination countries and (up to) 169 origin countries. For total restaurant

expenditure we observe positive trade for 8,616 of the country pairs among the 8,788 possible

pairs with 52 destinations and 169 origins. I denote the total restaurant expenditure on o-country

origin cuisine in destination country d as  . I calculate an analogous total excluding fast food,

and these two measures are the bases for trade flow calculations as well as the dependent

variables in the gravity regressions.

            In addition to data on cuisine trade derived from TripAdvisor in conjunction with

Euromonitor, I have measures from three additional sources. First, I obtain "gravity" variables ­

distance between countries and whether they share language, etc. ­ from CEPII (Head and

Mayer, 2013). Second, I obtain data on bilateral trade in food products from the COMTRADE.

In particular, I observe product trade between origin and destination country by year (4 digit,

bilateral) based on the BACI data which in turn are derived from the UN Comtrade data for

2014. 17 Third, I obtain data on the migrant stock by origin and destination country from United

Nations (2015). 18 Fourth, I obtain data on the total arable land in each country from the World

Bank. 19




     III.      Results




17
   I obtain these data from https://atlas.media.mit.edu/static/db/raw/year_origin_destination_hs07_4.tsv.bz2 I
classify as food all of the product codes between 101 and 2209, except for the following codes: 501, 502, 505, 506,
507, 508, 510, 511, 601, 602, 603, 604, 1211, 1302, and 1401. The underlying data source is
http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=1.
18
   United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2015). Trends in International Migrant Stock:
Migrants by Destination and Origin (United Nations database, POP/DB/MIG/Stock/Rev.2015).
19
   http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=2&series=AG.LND.TOTL.K2&country=#

                                                        14
             a. Trade patterns

        Table 1 describes patterns of cuisine trade among selected origin and destination markets,

excluding fast food. For example, the table shows that 56.8 percent of the restaurant cuisine

consumed in our Argentine sample is domestic. A few features of the data are notable. First, the

high shares along the main diagonal are reminiscent of analogous figures in other trade studies

documenting home bias. Countries with particularly high domestic shares include Turkey

(where 80.9 percent of consumption is domestic), China (78.4%), Italy (78.0%), and Japan

(69.0%). Other countries are far more open to foreign cuisines and therefore have lower shares

on the main diagonal. Examples include Germany (34.0%), Russia (40.7%), and France

(49.7%). Second, some cuisines ­ notably Japanese, Italian, Chinese, French, Indian, and US ­

are popular in many destination markets.

        Table 2 revisits the exercise for all restaurant expenditure (including fast food). The US

share of many destination markets is larger when fast food is included. Home shares in many

markets fall. The Chinese home share falls from 78.4% to 70.8% when fast food is included in

the trade measures.

             b. Gravity Models
        Large volumes of existing research on trade document that bilateral trade flows obey the

gravity model. 20 That is, the extent of trade between two countries tends to be smaller as the

geographic distance between them is larger, and the volume of trade tends to be higher if the

countries share a language or colonial ties. Domestic products are disproportionately consumed.

Beyond the domestic home bias documented above, do cuisine trade patterns follow these



20
  See Anderson (1979) and Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) for theoretical gravity derivations; and see e.g.
Disdier and Head (2008) for additional empirical evidence.

                                                       15
patterns? On one hand, one might not expect cuisine trade to obey gravity since there are no

physical products being traded. Hence, one might expect less of a role for distance. On the other

hand, other research documents gravity relationships in information trade, including attention to

distant websites (Blum and Goldfarb, 2006).

        To explore whether cuisine trade obeys gravity- and to ascertain origin cuisine popularity

controlling for trade determinants - we regress the log of trade volumes (measured as the share

of a destination's restaurant offering cuisines from each origin) on the log of distance between

origin and destination, an indicator for whether the origin and destination are the same country,

indicators for whether the pair shares a language and whether the pair were ever in a colonial

relationship. We also include both origin and destination fixed effects.    The model takes the

form:

                                                         
ln( ) =  ln( ) +  +                                   +   +  +  +  (1)


In this equation,  is the trade volume calculated above,  is the distance between origin

                                                                                          
(o) and destination (d) countries,  is an indicator for observations where o=d, 

                                        
is 1 for countries sharing a language,   is 1 for countries sharing colonial

heritage, and  and  are origin and destination fixed effects, respectively.

        The destination fixed effects can be thought of as controlling for destination price levels

or other destination-specific factors. The origin fixed effects are more substantively interesting

for this exercise: they show the appeal of each origin's cuisine(s), after accounting for its

proximity, language, and colonial relationships.

        One shortcoming of estimating (1) via OLS is that the procedure drops country pairs with

zero trade. The absence of trade is informative; and it is important to include the zero-trade pairs

                                                 16
in the estimation. Santos and Tenreyro (2006) develop a method for including all pairs, and we

report the estimates resulting from the use of Poisson pseudo maximum likelihood (PPML).

        Table 3, column 1, reports OLS estimates of the gravity model including all food. As in

many models of trade, distance matters: a one percent increase in distance reduces trade by about

1 percent. There is substantial home bias. On average domestic cuisines have market shares that

are about 14 times higher (e2.6.14) than their shares elsewhere. Common language and

common colonial heritage also matter. Column (2) excludes fast food, with similar implications

for the gravity coefficients. Columns (3) and (4) repeat the exercise of the first two columns

using the PPML approach. Distance coefficients become smaller, common language effects

become small and insignificant, and the former colony coefficient shrinks.

        The gravity estimates in Table 3 are interesting in the sense that the results recall gravity

estimates from many other contexts (see, for example, Disdier and Head (2008)). Distance

matters, even though the products here are not being shipped, as with the information trade in

Blum and Goldfarb (2006). There is substantial home bias, and common language and colonial

ties are positively related to the trade studied here.

        Which cuisines are most appealing after accounting for rudimentary gravity factors?

Figure 1 reports the origin fixed effects from the OLS model excluding fast food, while Figure 2

reports the origin fixed effects from the estimation that includes fast food. Excluding fast food,

the ten most appealing origins are Italy, China, and Japan, which all have similar levels of

appeal, followed by the US, India, France, Mexico, Thailand, Spain, and Turkey. When fast

food is included, the US rises to the top, and the others remain in the same order. Figures 3 and

4 report analogous origin fixed effects from PPML models. Most results are similar, although a



                                                   17
few orderings change. Brazil moves into the top 10 in both Figures 3 and 4, and Italy displaces

the US in cuisine appeal when fast food is included.

           c. Exploring Gravity

       The exercises above reveal which origin countries have the most appealing cuisines, but

they provide no explanation for the patterns. Here we explore a few possible explanations for

patterns of trade in cuisine, including patterns of migration, trade in food products, and

agricultural production capability (as measured by arable land in origin countries). Two of these

variables, migration and food trade, are bilateral, while arable land is simply an origin country

characteristic. We can include the bilateral variables but not an origin-country measure (such as

arable land) directly in gravity models.   Hence we do two kinds of exericses to explore the

relationship between these additional factors and the patterns of cuisine trade. First, we include

the bilateral variables in augmented gravity regressions. The coefficients on the additional

variables are potentially interesting, as are the cuisine origin fixed effects from these models that

include the additional explanatory variables. Second, we obtain origin fixed effects from simple

gravity models of migration and food trade which we can then compare with the cuisine origin

fixed effects as well as the arable land measure.

                           1. Augmented gravity

       Table 4 presents a comparison of gravity models. The first two columns report cuisine

gravity models, for total cuisine and cuisine excluding fast food, respectively. These

specifications exclude domestic consumption, since the migration and food trade data do not

include domestic consumption. The third column presents a gravity model of migration, and the

fourth column presents a gravity model for food trade. Distance effects are larger for migration


                                                 18
and, especially food, than for cuisine. Common language effects are particularly large for

migration and are larger for food than for cuisine. Finally, the former colony coefficients are

larger for food than cuisine and especially large for migration.

       Columns (5) and (6) include measures of migration and food trade directly in gravity

models for overall and non-fast-food cuisine. The additional explanatory variables are highly

significant in the regressions. Interestingly, the resulting cuisine origin fixed effects (after

controlling for migration and food trade) are quite similar to the cuisine origin fixed effects

without controlling for these factors. See Figures 5 and 6.

                           2. Comparison origin fixed effects for cuisine and other factors

       It would be desirable to try to explain the cuisine origin fixed effects with the origin fixed

effects for migration and food trade, along with the arable land measure for origin countries.

Figures 7 and 8 report the origin fixed effects associated with the migrant and food trade models.

China, the US, Brazil, and Germany have the largest migrant origin fixed effects. The US,

Brazil, China, and New Zealand have the largest food fixed effects.

       The first three columns of Table 5 report regressions of cuisine origin fixed effects on the

three candidate explanations, food and migration origin fixed effects, along with origin arable

land area, respectively, as well as all three together in column (4). Columns (5)-(8) repeat the

exercise using the cuisine fixed effects without fast food. All regressions include the origin

country population measure to guard against simple scale effects. Each determinant is

significantly related to the cuisine fixed effect when entered alone. When all three enter

together, in columns (5) and (8), only migration remains significant. There are limits to what




                                                  19
one can infer from this sort of exercise, but it does appear than migration patterns play a role in

cuisine trade patterns.




             d. Balance of Cuisine Trade

          While the cuisine origin fixed effects indicate which cuisines consumers find most

appealing, they do not directly indicate the size of the cuisine trade balances. A cuisine

country's exports depend on its appeal abroad, but the country's net exports depend on the

conjunction of the cuisine's appeal at home at a country's willingness to consume cuisines from

abroad.

          Table 6 reports the "imports," "exports," and "net exports" for 44 selected countries,

excluding fast food in columns (1)-(3). 21 "Imports" are defined as home restaurant consumption

in non-domestic cuisines. "Exports" are the sum of an origin country's consumption abroad. Of

these selected countries, three are substantial net exporters: Italy (with net exports of $158

billion), Japan ($44 billion), and Mexico ($17 billion). Substantial net importers include the US

($134 billion), Brazil ($39 billion), the UK ($20 billion), and Spain ($20 billion).

          The second half of the table repeats the exercise including fast food, producing a few

interestingly different patterns. First, the US deficit falls substantially, from $134 billion to $55

billion, while many other countries' imports rise. This is particularly true for China and to lesser

extents for Germany and the UK. The surpluses of Italy and Japan are increased somewhat by

the inclusion of fast food because some of fast food trade includes their origin cuisines.



21
   We include countries that are a) among the 52 for which we have restaurant expenditure data and b) have a cuisine
in Trip Advisor that explicitly corresponds to the country.

                                                        20
         Interestingly, two of the countries most commonly implicated as global cultural

hegemons, the Anglophone US and UK, are net importers rather than exporters in cuisine trade.

For a sense of magnitudes, it is helpful to compare the implicit balance of payments in cuisine

with the overall balance of payments. The overall US balance of payments was roughly $500

billion per year, 2010-2016, roughly ten times the unmeasured cuisine deficit. 22 Many of the

other numbers are large in comparison with the measured balance of trade. For example, in 2015

Italy had a trade surplus of $50.1 billion, under half its cuisine surplus of $168 billion.23

             e. Robustness to assumptions

         The calculations in this paper embody a number of assumptions, including 1) the cuisine

weights for non-fast food and 2) whether chicken fast food is assumed to be American. Here I

explore the sensitivity of the basic results to different assumptions.

         One can map TripAdvisor cuisines into distributions of non-fast food restaurants by

cuisine in various ways. So far we have used country-specific cuisine weights. We can instead

use equal weights on all cuisines. This is not so much a plausible method as a test for how much

cuisine weighting schemes matter.

         The main results in the paper assume that chicken fast food is US in origin. While much

fast food chicken, such as KFC, is based on American cuisine, other chicken fast food around the

world is not. For example, the Malaysian-based Chicken Rice Shop serves "what it calls

"grandmother's traditional Hainanese secret recipe chicken rice." 24 Philippines-based Mang Insal




22
   https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/statistics/historical/gands.pdf
23
   https://www.statista.com/statistics/263624/trade-balance-of-goods-in-italy/
24
   See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Chicken_Rice_Shop .

                                                         21
serves chicken skewers. 25 It seems prudent to check how results change if we classify chicken

fast food as domestic rather than American.

          Figure 9 contrasts the cuisine origin fixed effects from the equal-weights and local

chicken approaches with the baseline cuisine origin FE (including fast food). The baseline

cuisine origin fixed effect is along the horizontal axis. The baseline estimate of the US cuisine

fixed effect is just over 6.5. The origin cuisine fixed effects for the top countries are close to

their baseline values on the 45 degree line, indicating that basic results (including fast food) are

not sensitive to these assumptions. Figure 10 compares baseline and equal-weight results

excluding fast food, with similar results. The rank orderings sometimes change, but the

magnitudes of the origin fixed effects are similar across specifications.

          Figures 11 and 12 summarize the net export measures based on these differing

approaches, compared with the baseline results (using country-specific cuisine weights and

assigning all chicken fast food to the US). Baseline net exports are depicted along the line,

while alternatives appear as symbols potentially away from the line. Countries are ordered from

those with the largest deficits to those with the largest surpluses, and the figures include all 44

countries included in Table 6. If chicken fast food were domestic rather than US-origin, the

overall US deficit in Figure 11 (including fast food) rises from $55 billion to roughly $90 billion.

Placing equal weight on cuisines increases the Chinese trade deficit by $18 billion. Otherwise,

the net export results are not very sensitive to the differing measurement approaches. Figure 12

repeats the exercise excluding fast food, with only small changes from the baseline results that

exclude fast food.



25
     See https://www.manginasal.com/menu/.

                                                  22
       IV.      Discussion and Conclusion

             It is instructive to compare our results on cuisine trade with analogous figures for the

audiovisual products that dominate most discussions of cultural trade, motion pictures and

recorded music. While analogous trade statistics are not readily available from, say, government

or industry sources, we can construct them from related research. US-origin movies generate

large shares of box office revenues in most countries around the world. Based on data in

Ferreira, Petrin, and Waldfogel (2017) one can calculate that in 2014 the US had a motion

picture box office surplus of roughly $10 billion. Similar rough calculations indicate that the UK

had a recorded music trade surplus on the order of $2 billion in 2015. 26

             In contrast to their audio-visual trade surpluses, the Anglo-American countries have

substantial cuisine trade deficits. Moreover, the magnitudes of these deficits dwarf the surpluses

in other cultural products. If we add the net exports across cuisine, movies, and music, we obtain

substantial trade deficits for the Anglo American countries. If one views cuisine as a cultural

good ­ and there is good reason to do so ­ then its inclusion reverses one of the standard stylized

facts that motivates much policy making around trade in cultural products.

             Not only is the cuisine category larger, but the patterns of trade are quite different. The

top 5 cuisines by export appeal are Italian, Chinese, Japanese, US, and Indian. The top 5 net

exporters are Italy, Japan, Mexico, Turkey, Thailand, and France. While the study's findings are

relatively clear, our approach has some inherent shortcomings that bear mention both for caution

as well as to guide further research. First, it is difficult to know how representative Trip Advisor


26
     See Waldfogel, Aguiar, and Gomez-Herrera (2017) as well as Ferreira and Waldfogel (2013).

                                                         23
data are for even non-fast food restaurants. Despite our evidence in the Appendix that

TripAdvisor is similar to Yelp for the US and similar to Tabelog for Japan, these data sources

may reflect tourist interests in ways that are unrepresentative of the underlying restaurant

population. Second, because we don't observe sales volumes, our approach treats each

restaurant as equally important, an implicit assumption that may introduce bias across cuisines.

Still, if one accepts the results as even rough approximations, the inclusion of cuisine as a

cultural good reverses the apparent dominance of Anglo-American cultural products.




                                                 24
References

Acheson, Keith & Maule, Christopher, 2006. "Culture in International Trade," In V.A.
Ginsburgh & D. Throsby (ed.). "Handbook of the Economics of Art and Culture," Handbook of
the Economics of Art and Culture, Elsevier, edition 1, volume 1, number 1, December.

Anderson, J.E. (1979). `A theoretical foundation for the gravity equation', American Economic
Review, vol. 69, pp. 106­16.

Anderson, J.E. and van Wincoop, E. (2003). `Gravity with gravitas: a solution to the border
puzzle', American Economic Review, vol. 93, pp. 170­92.

Bala, Venkatesh & Van Long, Ngo, 2005. "International trade and cultural diversity with
preference selection," European Journal of Political Economy, Elsevier, vol. 21(1), pages 143-
162, March.

Bernier, I. (2003). `Local content requirements for film, radio, and television as a means of
protecting cultural diversity: theory and reality', mimeo, Université Laval.

Berry, Steven and Waldfogel, Joel, (2010), "Product Quality and Market Size, Journal of
Industrial Economics, 58, issue 1, p. 1-31.

Blum, Bernardo S. & Goldfarb, Avi, 2006. "Does the internet defy the law of gravity?," Journal
of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 70(2), pages 384-405, December.

Chesto Jon. 2016. "Is TripAdvisor's revenue risk paying off?" Boston Globe, September 24,
2016 https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2016/09/23/tripadvisor-revenue-risk-paying-
off/eGhkegN3ZLdXHzDs7CpvVI/story.html
Chossat, V. and Gergaud, O., 2003. Expert opinion and gastronomy: The recipe for
success. Journal of Cultural Economics, 27(2), pp.127-141.
Disdier, A.C. and Head, K. (2008). `The puzzling persistence of the distance effect on bilateral
trade', Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 90, pp. 37­48.

Disdier, A.C., Head, K. and Mayer, T. (2010a). `Exposure to foreign media and changes in
cultural traits: evidence from naming patterns in France', Journal of International Economics,
vol. 80, pp. 226­38.

Disdier, A.C., Tai, S., Fontagne, L. and Mayer, T. (2010b). `Bilateral trade of cultural
goods', Review of World Economics (Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv), Springer, vol. 145, pp. 575­
95.

Fernando Ferreira & Joel Waldfogel, 2013. "Pop Internationalism: Has Half a Century of World
Music Trade Displaced Local Culture?," Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, vol. 123,
pages 634-664, 06.

                                                25
Ferreira, Fernando, Amil Petrin and Joel Waldfogel "The Growth of China and its Impact of
World Music Consumers and Producers." Unpublished paper, 2017.

Gergaud, O., Storchmann, K. and Verardi, V., 2015. Expert opinion and product quality:
Evidence from New York City restaurants. Economic Inquiry, 53(2), pp.812-835.
Gergaud, O., Guzman, L.M. and Verardi, V., 2007. Stardust over Paris gastronomic
restaurants. Journal of Wine Economics, 2(1), pp.24-39. Gergaud, O., Guzman, L.M. and
Verardi, V., 2007. Stardust over Paris gastronomic restaurants. Journal of Wine Economics, 2(1),
pp.24-39.
Godoy, Maria and Eleanor Beardsley. 2015. Liberte, Egalite, Gastronomie? France Rallies To
Defend Its Food's Honor. NPR.com, March 23.
http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2015/03/23/394346395/liberte-egalite-gastronomie-france-
defends-its-foods-honor.


Gordon, Philip H. and Sophie Meunier. "Globalization and French Cultural Identity." French
Politics, Culture & Society, Vol. 19, No. 1, Spring 2001

Gordon, Philip H. and Sophie Meunier-Aitsahalia, The French Challenge: Adapting to
Globalization. Brookings, 2001.

Hanson, G.H. and Xiang, C. (2008). `Testing the Melitz model of trade: an application to U.S.
motion picture exports', NBER Working Paper No. 14461, October 2008.

Head, K. and T. Mayer, (2013), "Gravity Equations: Toolkit, Cookbook, Workhorse."
Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4,eds. Gopinath, Helpman, and Rogoff, Elsevier.

Karp, Myles. 2018. "The Surprising Reason that There Are So Many Thai Restaurants in
America," VICE.com, March 29. https://munchies.vice.com/en_us/article/paxadz/the-surprising-
reason-that-there-are-so-many-thai-restaurants-in-america.

Mayzlin, Dina, Yaniv Dover and Judith Chevalier. 2014. "Promotional Reviews: An Empirical
Investigation of Online Review Manipulation." American Economic Review, 104(8): 2421-55.
Meloni, Gianpiero, Dimitri Paolini, and Juan de Dios Tena. "American beauty: trade flows and
export costs of US movies." Journal of Cultural Economics 42, no. 4 (2018): 701-716.
Nomura, Mona. 2017. "How to Find a Great Restaurant in Tokyo, No Matter Where You Are."
Eater, February 21. https://www.eater.com/2017/2/21/14686118/tokyo-tabelog-restaurant-
ratings.
Peralta, Eyder. 2015. "UNESCO Designates Traditional French And Mexican Cuisines Cultural
Treasures." NPR.com, November 17. https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-


                                               26
way/2010/11/17/131391343/unesco-designates-traditional-french-and-mexican-cuisines-cultural-
treasures.
Ramondo, Natalia, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Felix Tintelnot. 2015. "Multinational
Production: Data and Stylized Facts." American Economic Review, 105 (5): 530-36.

Richardson, M. (2006). `Commercial broadcasting and local content: cultural quotas, advertising
and public stations', Economic Journal, vol. 116, pp. 605­25.

Samuel, Henry. 2010. "UNESCO declares French cuisine 'world intangible heritage'" The
Telegraph, November 16.
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/france/8138348/UNESCO-declares-
French-cuisine-world-intangible-heritage.html.

Samuel, Henry. 2013. "Fast food overtakes traditional cuisine in France for the first time." The
Telegraph, February 28.
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/france/9900152/Fast-food-overtakes-
traditional-cuisine-in-France-for-the-first-time.html .

Santos, J.M.C. and Tenreyro, S. (2006). `The log of gravity', Review of Economics and
Statistics, vol. 88, pp. 641­58.

Schiff, Nathan. "Cities and product variety: evidence from Restaurants." Journal of Economic
Geography 15 (2015) pp. 1085­1123

Takara, Yuki. "Do cultural differences affect the trade of cultural goods? A study in trade of
music." Journal of Cultural Economics 42, no. 3 (2018): 393-417.
Waldfogel, Joel, (2008), The median voter and the median consumer: Local private goods and
population composition, Journal of Urban Economics, 63, issue 2, p. 567-582.

Waldfogel, Joel, Luis Aguiar, and Estrella Gomez-Herrera. "Does Digitization Threaten Local
Culture? Music in the Transition from iTunes to Spotify." Unpublished paper, 2017.

Waterman, David. 2005. Hollywood's Road to Riches. Cambridge, MA. Harvard University
Press, 2005




                                                27
Table 1: Cuisine trade excluding fast food




                                                                                                                          South Korea
                       Argentina




                                                             Germany




                                                                                                                                                                    Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                Thailand


                                                                                                                                                           Turkey
                                                                                                        Mexico
                                                    France




                                                                       Greece




                                                                                                                                                                    United


                                                                                                                                                                              United
                                                                                                                 Russia
                                                                                                Japan
                                   Brazil


                                            China




                                                                                                                                                                              States
                                                                                                                                        Spain
                                                                                India




                                                                                                                                                                    (UK)
                                                                                        Italy
 Argentina             56.8%        1.0%     0.0%    0.2%     0.2%      0.0%     0.0%    0.1%    0.0%    2.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.6%     0.1%      0.1%    0.1%      0.3%
 Brazil                  5.5%      55.6%     0.0%    0.3%     0.3%      0.1%     0.1%    0.1%    0.1%    2.4%     0.1%       0.1%        0.5%     0.1%      0.0%    0.2%      0.8%
 China                   1.3%       1.4%    78.4%    3.3%     5.0%      1.3%    23.5%    1.8%   11.5%    1.2%     2.4%    14.9%          2.7%     8.4%      0.7%    7.9%      6.3%
 France                  2.2%       1.4%     0.9%   49.7%     3.8%      6.9%     0.8%    3.7%    2.2%    2.0%     3.5%       0.5%        6.1%     2.5%      2.1%    2.0%      1.7%
 Germany                 0.7%       0.5%     0.2%    2.3%    34.2%      0.7%     0.3%    0.5%    0.1%    0.3%     3.5%       0.1%        1.9%     1.3%      0.5%    0.7%      0.3%
 Greece                  0.2%       0.7%     0.1%    0.5%     2.7%     59.9%     0.2%    0.7%    0.0%    0.5%     0.9%       0.1%        0.7%     0.2%      0.6%    0.6%      0.9%
 India                   0.8%       0.4%     1.7%    2.6%     2.8%      0.7%    53.7%    0.6%    3.2%    0.5%     0.7%       5.2%        1.3%     4.2%      0.4%    5.9%      2.4%
 Italy                 14.1%       22.7%     2.9%   11.3%    16.4%      9.6%     7.2%   78.0%    6.1%   10.4%    13.5%       5.3%       12.3%     7.1%      5.8%    9.5%      15.5%
 Japan                   3.3%       5.1%     6.8%    4.4%     3.2%      1.0%     1.7%    2.5%   69.0%    3.0%     7.1%    10.3%          2.5%     6.0%      0.5%    2.1%      4.6%
 Mexico                  1.4%       2.7%     0.2%    0.4%     0.8%      0.3%     0.9%    0.4%    0.1%   65.0%     0.3%       1.1%        0.9%     0.5%      0.3%    0.7%      5.7%
 Russia                  0.3%       0.2%     0.3%    2.2%     1.6%      0.7%     0.3%    0.4%    0.1%    0.2%    40.7%       0.1%        1.7%     1.2%      0.4%    0.9%      0.2%
 South Korea             0.2%       0.1%     2.0%    0.5%     0.5%      0.1%     0.5%    0.1%    0.7%    0.3%     0.3%    48.4%          0.2%     0.9%      0.1%    0.4%      0.7%
 Spain                   2.6%       0.6%     0.3%    2.4%     2.7%      4.0%     0.3%    2.3%    0.7%    3.0%     1.6%       0.1%       48.7%     0.8%      1.3%    1.3%      1.9%
 Thailand                0.2%       0.1%     0.7%    1.3%     2.1%      0.2%     1.6%    0.1%    1.1%    0.4%     0.3%       1.0%        0.5%   52.2%       0.1%    1.5%      1.6%
 Turkey                  0.7%       0.4%     0.2%    2.1%     3.2%      4.2%     0.4%    2.2%    0.1%    0.4%     2.5%       0.1%        3.7%     0.8%     80.9%    1.7%      0.7%
 United Kingdom (UK)     0.2%       0.2%     0.2%    1.6%     1.1%      0.7%     0.3%    0.3%    0.1%    0.2%     2.2%       0.1%        2.5%     1.1%      0.8%    51.6%     0.2%
 United States           1.4%       1.5%     0.9%    2.2%     2.3%      0.8%     1.7%    0.7%    1.2%    2.9%     3.3%       2.0%        1.5%     1.8%      0.9%    1.7%      48.7%



Note: author's calculation of cuisine trade between origin countries (on the rows) and destination countries (on the columns). Trade flows are based on
Euromonitor measures of aggregate restaurant spending in each destination country (less fast food), multiplied by the origin shares as inferred from TripAdvisor
data. See text for details.




                                                                                          28
Table 2: Cuisine trade overall (including fast food)




                                                                                                                                    South Korea
                   Argentina




                                                             Germany




                                                                                                                                                                                 Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                            Thailand



                                                                                                                                                                       Turkey
                                                                                                                Mexico
                                                   France




                                                                        Greece




                                                                                                                                                                                 United



                                                                                                                                                                                           United
                                                                                                                          Russia
                                                                                                      Japan
                               Brazil



                                         China




                                                                                                                                                                                           States
                                                                                                                                                  Spain
                                                                                  India




                                                                                                                                                                                 (UK)
                                                                                            Italy
 Argentina         59.4%          0.8%      0.0%      0.2%       0.1%      0.0%      0.0%      0.1%      0.0%      2.1%      0.0%         0.0%       0.6%       0.1%      0.1%    0.1%      0.5%
 Brazil                 4.3%   61.2%        0.0%      0.3%       0.2%      0.0%      0.1%      0.1%      0.0%      3.8%      0.1%         0.1%       0.5%       0.1%      0.0%    0.2%      1.8%
 China                  1.0%      1.2%   70.8%        3.0%       3.9%      1.1%   25.6%        1.7%      9.9%      1.1%      1.4%   12.3%            2.5%       6.5%      0.6%    6.3%      4.1%
 France                 1.7%      1.1%      0.8%   44.5%         2.7%      6.1%      0.6%      3.5%      1.7%      1.6%      1.9%         0.4%       5.8%       2.0%      1.8%    1.5%      1.0%
 Germany                0.5%      0.4%      0.2%      1.8%   35.5%         0.6%      0.2%      0.5%      0.1%      0.3%      1.9%         0.1%       1.8%       1.0%      0.4%    0.6%      0.1%
 Greece                 0.1%      0.5%      0.1%      0.4%       2.0%   62.7%        0.1%      0.7%      0.0%      0.4%      0.5%         0.1%       0.7%       0.2%      0.5%    0.4%      0.5%
 India                  0.6%      0.3%      4.1%      2.2%       2.2%      0.7%   48.2%        0.5%      2.9%      0.4%      0.4%         4.3%       1.3%       3.2%      0.3%    4.6%      1.6%
 Italy             11.1%       18.3%        2.4%      8.7%   11.9%         8.7%      6.6%   77.3%        4.7%   13.9%     11.3%           4.4%    11.7%         5.5%      5.2%    7.3%      9.3%
 Japan                  2.6%      4.1%      7.3%      3.5%       2.4%      0.8%      3.0%      2.4%   70.6%        2.3%      3.9%         8.5%       2.3%       4.7%      0.4%    1.6%      2.7%
 Mexico                 1.1%      2.1%      0.2%      0.4%       0.6%      0.3%      0.8%      0.4%      0.1%   59.0%        0.2%         0.9%       0.9%       0.4%      0.3%    0.6%      4.0%
 Russia                 0.3%      0.1%      0.2%      1.7%       1.2%      0.6%      0.3%      0.4%      0.1%      0.2%   42.0%           0.1%       1.6%       0.9%      0.4%    0.7%      0.1%
 South Korea            0.1%      0.1%      2.3%      0.5%       0.4%      0.1%      1.0%      0.1%      0.7%      0.2%      0.2%   48.5%            0.2%       0.7%      0.1%    0.3%      0.5%
 Spain                  2.0%      0.5%      0.2%      1.8%       2.0%      3.6%      0.2%      2.2%      0.5%      2.3%      0.9%         0.1%    48.1%         0.6%      1.1%    1.0%      1.1%
 Thailand               0.1%      0.1%      0.9%      1.0%       1.5%      0.2%      1.6%      0.1%      0.9%      0.3%      0.1%         0.8%       0.4%   59.8%         0.1%    1.2%      1.0%
 Turkey                 0.5%      0.5%      0.1%      2.6%       4.2%      3.8%      0.4%      2.2%      0.1%      0.3%      1.6%         0.1%       3.5%       0.6%   73.4%      2.5%      0.4%
 United Kingdom         0.2%      0.1%      0.2%      1.3%       0.8%      0.6%      0.3%      0.3%      0.1%      0.1%      1.2%         0.0%       2.4%       0.9%      0.7%   50.8%      0.1%
 United States          7.8%      3.9%      3.2%   14.9%     13.8%         2.0%      2.1%      2.4%      4.2%      6.4%   22.7%     10.5%            4.6%       4.5%      9.3%   10.0%     65.6%



Note: author's calculation of cuisine trade between origin countries (on the rows) and destination countries (on the columns). Trade flows are based on
Euromonitor measures of aggregate restaurant spending in each destination country (less fast food), multiplied by the origin shares as inferred from TripAdvisor
data, along with Euromonitor measures of fast food expenditure by country and cuisine allocated to cuisine origin countries. See text for details.




                                                                                             29
                                      Table 3: Gravity regressions, country specific cuisine weights
                                                        OLS, all              OLS, no fast              PPML, all               PPML, no fast
                                                          (1)                    (2)                      (3)                       (4)
                   log distance                          -1.0757                 -1.0609                  -0.7945                  -0.7835
                                                         (0.0166)**              (0.0166)**               (0.0547)**                (0.0565)**
                   common language                        0.4399                  0.4563                  -0.0422                  -0.0880
                                                         (0.0383)**              (0.0382)**               (0.1461)                  (0.1193)
                   home dummy                             2.5919                  2.5038                   1.7328                   1.9269
                                                         (0.1337)**              (0.1336)**               (0.1764)**                (0.1815)**
                   former colony                          0.4746                  0.4758                   0.2876                   0.1831
                                                         (0.0710)**              (0.0709)**               (0.1597)                  (0.1262)
                   R2                                   0.93                    0.93                     0.99                      0.99
                   N                                8,616                   8,616                    8,788                     8,788
                                                                           * p<0.05; ** p<0.01




Notes: Regressions of log trade on listed variables as well as origin and destination fixed effects. OLS in columns (1) and (3), PPML in columns (2) and (4). Fast food is
assumed to be domestic in each country in (1) and (2) and US-origin in (3) and (4). * p<0.05; ** p<0.




                                                                                   30
                                                           Table 4: Cuisine and other gravity
                                         Total               excl fast             Migrants              food exports               log total             excl fast
                                          (1)                  (2)                   (3)                     (4)                       (5)                  (6)
  log distance                         -1.0741                -1.0621               -1.1819                 -1.4296                  -0.7673               -0.7349
                                        (0.0159)**            (0.0158)**            (0.0324)**              (0.0377)**               (0.0240)**            (0.0240)**
  common language                       0.4191                 0.4329                1.2207                  0.6204                   0.2278                0.2678
                                        (0.0363)**            (0.0363)**            (0.0733)**              (0.0908)**               (0.0475)**            (0.0474)**
  former colony                         0.4210                 0.4323                2.1014                  0.9278                   0.1444                0.1244
                                        (0.0674)**            (0.0673)**            (0.1125)**              (0.1453)**               (0.0679)*             (0.0677)
  log migrants                                                                                                                        0.1361                0.1429
                                                                                                                                     (0.0092)**            (0.0091)**
  log food trade                                                                                                                      0.0426                0.0434
                                                                                                                                     (0.0078)**            (0.0077)**
  R2                                   0.94                  0.94                  0.78                    0.75                     0.94                  0.94
  N                                8,564                 8,564                 5,147                   6,154                    4,216                 4,216
                                                                           * p<0.05; ** p<0.01




Notes: Columns (1) and (2) report linear gravity regression of total cuisine and cuisine excluding fast food on listed variables as well as origin and destination fixed
effects. Columns (3) and (4) use log migrants and log food trade as the dependent variable in analogous gravity regressions. Columns (5) and (6) agg the log migrant
and log food trade variables to the gravity regressions of columns (1) and (2).




                                                                                    31
                                                           Table 5: Explaining cuisine appeal
                                                      All (including fast)                                                   Excluding fast food
                                      (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)
 Population (mil)                     0.0031            0.0010           0.0024             0.0012           0.0030            0.0009           0.0027            0.0016
                                   (0.0011)**          (0.0009)          (0.0020)           (0.0013)      (0.0011)**          (0.0009)          (0.0020)          (0.0012)
 food origin FE                       0.6157                                                0.0821           0.5982                                               0.0744
                                   (0.0610)**                                               (0.0749)      (0.0603)**                                              (0.0740)
 migration origin FE                                    1.3813                              1.2757                             1.3504                             1.2707
                                                     (0.0873)**                           (0.1366)**                        (0.0864)**                         (0.1349)**
 Arable land                                                             0.0407            -0.0022                                              0.0355           -0.0068
                                                                      (0.0133)**            (0.0089)                                          (0.0131)**          (0.0088)
   2
 R                                     0.49              0.68              0.20               0.68             0.48             0.68              0.18              0.68
 N                                    152               152               152                152              152              152               152               152
                                                                            * p<0.05; ** p<0.01


Notes: regression of cuisine origin fixed effects from linear gravity models on food and migration origin fixed effects as well as population and arable land area of origin
country. The first four columns include all cuisines; the second four columns exclude fast food.




                                                                                     32
Table 6: Cuisine net exports, country-specific cuisine weights
                              Excluding fast food                  Including fast food
 country            exports        imports     net exports   exports    imports     Net
                                                                                    exports
 Argentina                4,206        6,119       -1,913       6,838       7,403         -565
 Australia                1,394       16,463      -15,069       1,394      25,286      -23,892
 Austria                  1,392        8,304       -6,912       1,392       9,207       -7,815
 Belgium                  1,922        5,715       -3,793       1,922       6,200       -4,277
 Brazil                   7,243       46,138      -38,895      16,541      50,570      -34,029
 Canada                     295       15,510      -15,215         295      25,276      -24,982
 Chile                    1,241        1,396         -155       2,363       2,600         -238
 China                  114,822      110,351        4,471     130,528     182,937      -52,409
 Colombia                 2,127        5,038       -2,911       3,993       6,216       -2,223
 Czech Republic           3,467        3,070          397       3,467       3,586         -119
 Denmark                  1,265        3,417       -2,152       1,265       4,256       -2,991
 Egypt                    7,971        1,934        6,038      10,489       2,567        7,922
 France                  40,353       21,391       18,962      40,353      30,508        9,844
 Germany                 12,208       22,483      -10,276      12,208      30,530      -18,323
 Greece                   9,772        4,096        5,676       9,772       4,264        5,508
 Hungary                  2,614        1,619          995       2,614       2,133          481
 India                   46,607       50,841       -4,233      66,756      67,136         -381
 Indonesia                8,335       18,462      -10,127      16,498      19,819       -3,321
 Ireland                  2,035        3,703       -1,669       2,035       4,414       -2,380
 Israel                   3,337        2,038        1,300       4,815       3,280        1,535
 Italy                  176,219       17,945      158,274     187,744      19,544     168,200
 Japan                   91,447       47,564       43,883     105,770      57,975       47,796
 Malaysia                 2,990        4,855       -1,865       5,118       6,047         -929
 Mexico                  29,251       12,276       16,975      34,632      18,730       15,902
 Morocco                  2,561        1,419        1,143       2,561       1,872          689
 New Zealand                172        3,653       -3,481         172       4,815       -4,643
 Norway                   1,869        3,444       -1,575       1,869       3,940       -2,070
 Peru                     2,202        2,322         -119       3,231       4,161         -930
 Poland                   2,852        4,057       -1,204       2,852       5,657       -2,804
 Portugal                 3,131        4,043         -912       3,131       4,787       -1,656
 Russia                  11,740        6,292        5,448      11,740      11,292          448
 South Korea             18,048       32,739      -14,691      23,799      39,538      -15,738
 Spain                   21,358       41,649      -20,290      21,358      44,551      -23,193
 Sweden                   1,926        7,754       -5,828       1,926      10,155       -8,229
 Switzerland              1,739        7,978       -6,239       1,739       9,464       -7,725
 Taiwan                   5,287        9,551       -4,264       8,453      12,025       -3,573
 Thailand                21,409       10,309       11,101      24,463      11,176       13,287
 The Netherlands          2,498        5,688       -3,190       2,498       7,398       -4,900
 Turkey                  18,676        2,021       16,655      22,677       3,234       19,443
 Ukraine                  1,398        1,716         -319       1,398       2,042         -644



                                                    33
 United Kingdom           9,928    30,064     -20,137     9,928     40,056    -30,129
 (UK)
 United States          26,919    160,698    -133,778   136,888    191,663    -54,776
 Venezuela               1,785        236       1,549     3,232        304      2,928
 Vietnam                10,282      8,957       1,325    11,944      9,545      2,398


Notes: Estimates for 2017, in milions of dollars. The table includes countries for which we have
both a measure of restaurant expenditure as well as a Trip Advisor cuisines that corresponds
directly to the country.




                                               34
                                                                   Cuisine appeal - excluding fast food
                                                         origin FE from gravity model, country-specific w eights
                   6




                   4
      origin FE




                   2




                   0
                                                                                                        a
                                                         t




                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                  y




                                                                                                                                                            e


                                                                                                                                                                       a




                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                     e




                                                                                                                                                                                                  na
                                                                                                         )




                                                                                                                                     nd


                                                                                                                                                o
                                                                          am




                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                        y
                                                                    il




                                                                                                                                                                                                           ly
                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                        of




                                                        m
                                                      yp




                                                                                                      th
                                                                  az




                                                                                                               ke
                                                                                                     si




                                                                                                                                                                     di
                                                                                                    an




                                                                                                                                              ic




                                                                                                                                                                                      pa
                                                                                                                        ai




                                                                                                                                                         nc
                                  ec




                                                                                                    tio




                                                                                                                                                                              ic




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ita
                                                     do




                                                                                                                                                                                                hi
                                                                                                                                  ila
                                           ic




                                                                                                  ou
                                                                                 ne




                                                                                                                                            ex
                                                   Eg




                                                                                                                      Sp




                                                                                                                                                                 In

                                                                                                                                                                            er
                                                                         N
                                                                Br




                                                                                                                r




                                                                                                                                                       a
                               re




                                                                                                  m

                                                                                                 ra




                                                                                                                                                                                    Ja
                                         bl




                                                                                                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                             Tu
                                                  ng




                                                                                                                                a




                                                                                                                                                    Fr




                                                                                                                                                                         Am
                                                                                               (S




                                                                                                                                          M
                                                                               do
                                                                        et




                                                                                               er

                                                                                              de
                             G


                                        u




                                                                                                                             Th
                                                Ki
                                     ep




                                                                      Vi




                                                                                            a 

                                                                                            G
                                                                             In




                                                                                           Fe




                                                                                                                                                                       of
                                                                                    re
                                              d
                                    R




                                                    te




                                                                                  Ko




                                                                                        an




                                                                                                                                                                     s
                                 ic




                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                  ni
                                m




                                                                                      si




                                                                                                                                                                at
                                                 U
                             la




                                                                                    us




                                                                                                                                                            St
                         Is




                                                                                   R




                                                                                                                                                           d
                        n,




                                                                                                                                                       te
                   Ira




                                                                                                                                                     ni
                                                                                                                                                    U




Figure 1
Notes: Origin fixed effects from a gravity regression of log non-fast food trade on log distance, a home dummy,
common language and colonial ties dummies, along with origin and destination fixed effects.


                                                                Cuisine appeal - including fast food
                                                         origin FE from gravity model, country-specific w eights
                  8



                  6
   origin FE




                  4



                  2



                  0
                                                                                             a
                                                            t




                                                                                                               n


                                                                                                                         y




                                                                                                                                                        e


                                                                                                                                                                   a

                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                     na
                                                                                              )




                                                                                                                                  nd


                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                 am




                                                                                             n
                                                                                             y
                                                                                             il




                                                                                                                                                                                                ly


                                                                                                                                                                                                           a
                                            of


                                                    m

                                                           yp




                                                                                           th
                                                                                         az




                                                                                                                      ke
                                                                                          si




                                                                                                                                                                 di
                                                                                         an




                                                                                                                                            ic




                                                                                                                                                                           pa
                                                                                                           ai




                                                                                                                                                     nc
                                                                                         tio
                                ec




                                                                                                                                                                                                         ic
                                                                                                                                                                                            Ita
                                                 do




                                                                                                                                                                                   hi
                                                                                                                               ila
                                         ic




                                                                                       ou

                                                                                       ne




                                                                                                                                          ex
                                                         Eg




                                                                                                         Sp




                                                                                                                                                                In




                                                                                                                                                                                                       er
                                                                N

                                                                                      Br




                                                                                                                       r




                                                                                                                                                     a
                             re




                                                                                       m




                                                                                      ra




                                                                                                                                                                         Ja
                                       bl




                                                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                    Tu
                                                 ng




                                                                                                                              a




                                                                                                                                                  Fr




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Am
                                                                                    (S




                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                    do
                                                              et




                                                                                    er




                                                                                   de
                         G


                                     u




                                                                                                                           Th
                                               Ki
                                  ep




                                                            Vi




                                                                                 a 
                                                                                 G




                                                                                  n

                                                                               Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                  of
                                                                                I
                                                                              re
                                            d
                                 R

                                          te




                                                                           Ko




                                                                           an




                                                                                                                                                                                               s
                              ic




                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                        ni
                            m




                                                                         si




                                                                                                                                                                                           at
                                       U
                         la




                                                                       us




                                                                                                                                                                                          St
                        Is




                                                                      R




                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                   n,




                                                                                                                                                                                     te
                  Ira




                                                                                                                                                                                   ni
                                                                                                                                                                                  U




Figure 2
Notes: Origin fixed effects from a gravity regression of log total cuisine trade on log distance, a home dummy,
common language and colonial ties dummies, along with origin and destination fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                         Cuisine appeal - excluding fast food
                                      origin FE from PPML gravity model, country-specific w eights

              5


              4
  origin FE




              3


              2


              1


              0
                                                                              a
                         t




                                                                                                  n


                                                                                                           y




                                                                                                                               e




                                                                                                                                               a

                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                     e




                                                                                                                                                                   na
                                                                             h)




                                                                           nd




                                                                                                                   o
                                                                              n




                                                                          am
                                ia


                                           y




                                                                                      il




                                                                                                                                                                         ly
                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                             m
                        yp




                                                                                    az




                                                                                                        ke
                                                                          si




                                                                                                                                             di
                                        an




                                                                                                                 ic




                                                                                                                                                      pa
                                                                                             ai




                                                                                                                            nc
                                                  ec




                                                                         tio




                                                                                                                                     ic




                                                                                                                                                                        Ita
                                 l




                                                                        do


                                                                           t
                              ra




                                                                                                                                                                 hi
                                                                        la
                                                                       ou




                                                                       ne




                                                                                                               ex
                      Eg




                                                                                           Sp




                                                                                                                                   er


                                                                                                                                           In
                                                                       N




                                                                                  Br




                                                                                                         r




                                                                                                                          a
                                               re
                                        m




                                                                      ra




                                                                                                                                                    Ja


                                                                                                                                                                C
                                                                                                      Tu
                           st




                                                                      ai
                                                                     ng




                                                                                                                       Fr

                                                                                                                                Am
                                                                    (S




                                                                                                               M
                                                                   do


                                                                    et
                                     er




                                                                  de
                                               G
                         Au




                                                                 Th
                                                                 Ki




                                                                 Vi
                                                                 a 
                                 G




                                                                In
                                                               Fe




                                                                                                                              of
                                                           re
                                                   d
                                                  te

                                                         Ko

                                                            an




                                                                                                                          e s
                                                ni




                                                          si




                                                                                                                       at
                                               U




                                                        us




                                                                                                                       St
                                                       R




                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                  te
                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                               U



Figure 3
Notes: Origin fixed effects from a PPML gravity regression of non-fast food trade on distance, a home dummy,
common language and colonial ties dummies, along with origin and destination fixed effects.




                                                         Cuisine appeal - including fast food
                                      origin FE from PPML gravity model, country-specific w eights
              6




              4
  origin FE




              2




              0
                                          a




                                                                                     n


                                                                                                y

                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                       a
                                          a




                                                                                                                                                n

                                                                                                                                                       na
                                           )




                                        nd




                                                                                                                   o
                                          n

                                       am
                                          a
                                          y




                                          a




                                                                                                                            il




                                                                                                                                                                         ly
                                                                                                                                                                    a
                                         m

                                        th




                                                                                                                          az
                                                                                             ke
                                        si




                                                                                                                                     di
                                      an




                                                                                                                 ic




                                                                                                                                             pa
                                                                                    ai
                                       bi




                                                                                                        nc
                                      tio
                                       in




                                                                                                                                                                  ic
                                      ad




                                                                                                                                                                        Ita
                                     do




                                                                                                                                                     hi
                                     la
                                    ou




                                   ne




                                                                                                               ex
                                                                                  Sp




                                                                                                                                   In




                                                                                                                                                                er
                                    ra




                                    nt




                                    N




                                                                                                                        Br
                                                                                              r

                                                                                                         a
                                   m




                                   ra




                                                                                                                                           Ja
                                  an




                                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                           Tu
                                  ai
                                 ng




                                                                                                      Fr
                                ge
                                iA




                                                                                                                                                            Am
                                ( S




                                                                                                               M
                                do
                                et
                                er




                               de




                              Th
                               C




                              Ki




                              Vi
                             Ar
                  G

                         ud




                             In
                            ea

                           Fe




                                                                                                                                                           of
                           d
                       Sa




                          r
                        te

                       Ko

                       an




                                                                                                                                                       es
                      ni




                     si




                                                                                                                                                    at
                    U




                   us




                                                                                                                                                   St
                  R




                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                              te
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                           U




Figure 4
Notes: Origin fixed effects from a PPML gravity regression of total cuisine trade on distance, a home dummy,
common language and colonial ties dummies, along with origin and destination fixed effects.




                                                                                                                            36
                                                                                Cuisine excl fast origin FE
                                                                     controlling for migrants and food exports
                 5


                 4
   origin FE




                 3


                 2


                 1


                 0
                                              a




                                                                                              t




                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                y




                                                                                                                                                           e


                                                                                                                                                                   a




                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                              e




                                                                                                                                                                                       na
                                                )




                                                                                                                         nd




                                                                                                                                              o
                                           am




                                                                                                       n
                                              y
                                               il




                                                                                                                                                                                                         ly
                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                             of




                                             m




                                                                                             yp
                                            th
                                           az




                                                                                                             ke
                                            si




                                                                                                                                                                 di
                                           an




                                                                                                                                            ic




                                                                                                                                                                                     pa
                                                                                                                                ai




                                                                                                                                                        nc
                                           ec




                                                                                                    io




                                                                                                                                                                             ic




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ita
                                          do




                                                                                                                                                                                     hi
                                                                                                                      ila
                            ic




                                         ou
                                         ne




                                                                                                                                          ex
                                                                                           Eg




                                                                                                                              Sp




                                                                                                                                                                In

                                                                                                                                                                           er
                                                                                                    at
                                         N
                                        Br




                                                                                                              r




                                                                                                                                                       a
                                        re


                                        m




                                                                                                                                                                                   Ja
                          bl




                                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                           Tu
                                       ng




                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                  er




                                                                                                                                                    Fr




                                                                                                                                                                       Am
                                      (S




                                                                                                                                         M
                                     do


                                      et




                                     er
                                      G
                          u




                                                                                                                  Th
                                                                                                d
                                   Ki
                       ep




                                   Vi


                                   a 




                                   G
                                  In




                                                                                             Fe




                                                                                                                                                                      of
                                re
                                 d
                      R




                                     te




                              Ko




                                                                                           an




                                                                                                                                                                 s
                  ic




                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                   ni
                  m




                                                                                         si




                                                                                                                                                               at
                                  U
               la




                                                                                       us




                                                                                                                                                            St
          Is




                                                                                      R




                                                                                                                                                           d
      n,




                                                                                                                                                       te
  Ira




                                                                                                                                                     ni
                                                                                                                                                    U
Figure 5
Notes: Origin fixed effects from a gravity regression of log non-fast food trade on log distance, a home dummy,
common language and colonial ties dummies, as well as log migration and log food trade measures, along with
origin and destination fixed effects.




                                                                                  Cuisine total origin FE
                                                                     controlling for migrants and food exports
                 6




                 4
   origin FE




                 2




                 0
                                                                                      a


                                                                                              t




                                                                                                                  n




                                                                                                                                   y

                                                                                                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                                   a




                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                        e




                                                                                                                                                                              na
                                                                                       )




                                                                                                                         nd




                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                       am




                                                                                                       n
                                                  y




                                                                  il

                                                                                      s




                                                                                                                                                                                                ly


                                                                                                                                                                                                           a
                              m




                                                                                             yp
                                                                                    th
                                                                az




                                                                                                                                ke
                                                                                   te




                                                                                   si




                                                                                                                                                                 di
                                               an




                                                                                                                                                       ic




                                                                                                                                                                                     pa
                                                                                                             ai




                                                                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                    io
                                     ec




                                                                                                                                                                                                         ic
                                                                                                                                                                                            Ita
                           do




                                                                                                                                                                            hi
                                                                                                                      ila
                                                                                ou

                                                                               ne




                                                                                                                                                     ex
                                                                                           Eg




                                                                                                           Sp




                                                                                                                                                                In




                                                                                                                                                                                                       er
                                                                                                    at
                                                                               ira
                                                      N

                                                              Br




                                                                                                                                 r

                                                                                                                                            a
                                  re


                                               m




                                                                                                                                                                                   Ja
                                                                                                                                                                           C
                                                                                                                              Tu
                         ng




                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                  er




                                                                                                                                         Fr




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Am
                                                                             (S




                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                            do
                                                     et




                                                                     Em
                                            er
                                  G




                                                                                                                  Th
                                                                                                d
                       Ki




                                                   Vi




                                                                          a 
                                       G




                                                                         In




                                                                                             Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                  of
                                                                           re
                                                                    ab
                      d
                  te




                                                                         Ko




                                                                                           an




                                                                                                                                                                                                s
                                                                  Ar




                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                ni




                                                                                         si




                                                                                                                                                                                           at
               U




                                                             d




                                                                                       us




                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                             te




                                                                                      R
                                                           ni




                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                                                      te
                                                          U




                                                                                                                                                                                    ni
                                                                                                                                                                                   U




Figure 6
Notes: Origin fixed effects from a gravity regression of log total cuisine trade on log distance, a home dummy,
common language and colonial ties dummies, as well as log migration and log food trade measures, along with
origin and destination fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                        37
                                                                                                Migrant origin FE
                                                                                         origin FE from gravity model
                      3
   mean of estimate




                      2




                      1




                      0
                                        ru




                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                            e

                                                                     nd




                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                                                                        na
                                                                                                        )
                                                                             am


                                                                                                     ne




                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                  a




                                                                                                      lia




                                                                                                                                                                        y
                                                                                                        a




                                                                                                                                                                                 il
                                a




                                                                                                        s




                                                                                                                                            ly




                                                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                       m




                                                                                                     th




                                                                                                                                                                               az
                                                                                                                                                            di

                                                                                                                                                                     an
                                                                                                    ne




                                                                                                    pa
                                                         nc




                                                                                                                                                    io
                              bi




                                                  in




                                                                                                                                                                                           ic
                                                                                                    ad




                                                                                                                                           Ita
                                      Pe




                                                                                                  do




                                                                                                   ra




                                                                                                                                                                                                      hi
                                                                                                   ai
                                                                     la




                                                                                                 ou




                                                                                                                                                           In




                                                                                                                                                                                         er
                                                                                                                                                   at
                             om




                                               nt




                                                                            N




                                                                                                                                                                             Br
                                                          a




                                                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                Ja
                                                                                                an




                                                                                                 pi
                                                                   Po




                                                                                                                                                                                                     C
                                                                                                st
                                                                                                kr

                                                                                               ng




                                                                                                                                                 er
                                                       Fr
                                             ge




                                                                                                                                                                                     Am
                                                                                              (S
                                                                            et




                                                                                            ilip




                                                                                                                                                                  er
                                                                                           Au
                                                                                             U
                           ol




                                                                                             C




                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                           Ki
                                                                          Vi
                                           Ar




                                                                                           a 




                                                                                                                                                                G
                          C




                                                                                                                                             Fe
                                                                                        Ph




                                                                                                                                                                                    of
                                                                                        re
                                                                                         d
                                                                                      te




                                                                                     Ko




                                                                                                                                            an




                                                                                                                                                                                es
                                                                                    ni




                                                                                                                                          si




                                                                                                                                                                             at
                                                                                   U




                                                                                                                                        us




                                                                                                                                                                            St
                                                                                                                                       R




                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                       te
                                                                                                                                                                     ni
                                                                                                                                                                    U
Figure 7
Notes: Origin fixed effects from a gravity regression of log migrant stock on log distance, a home dummy, common
language and colonial ties dummies, along with origin and destination fixed effects.




                                                                                         Food export origin FE
                                                                                         origin FE from gravity model

                      8
   mean of estimate




                      6


                      4


                      2


                      0
                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                            le
                                                                      n

                                                                                   a




                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                s




                                                                                                                                               d

                                                                                                                                                                                na
                                                                                                                    nd
                                                                                        am




                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                             lia
                                                                                                            y




                                                                                                                                               a
                                r




                                                   a




                                                                                                                                                                                             il
                                                              ly




                                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                         m
                              do




                                                                                                                                                                                           az
                                                                                                                                           nd




                                                                                                                                             si
                                                                                 di




                                                                                                         an
                                                                     ai




                                                                                                                                           an
                                                                                               nc
                                                 si




                                                                                                                                            in




                                                                                                                                                                                                       ic
                                                                                                                                           ad
                                                         Ita




                                                                                                                          hi
                                      do




                                                                                                                                          ra




                                                                                                                                                                              hi
                                                                                                                ila




                                                                                                                                        ne
                                               ay




                                                                   Sp


                                                                            In




                                                                                                                                                                                                     er
                                                                                                                                         nt
                                                                                       N
                            ua




                                                                                                                                                                                         Br
                                                                                                                         C
                                                                                                a

                                                                                                         m




                                                                                                                                       rla




                                                                                                                                        al
                                                                                                                              an




                                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                                       st
                                      ng




                                                                                                                a
                                                                                             Fr




                                                                                                                                      ge




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Am
                                             al




                                                                                                                                      do
                                                                                    et




                                                                                                                                     Ze
                                                                                                      er
                          Ec




                                                                                                                                    Au
                                                                                                             Th




                                                                                                                                     he
                                                                                                                             C
                                    Ki


                                           M




                                                                                  Vi




                                                                                                                                   Ar
                                                                                                    G




                                                                                                                                   In
                                                                                                                                  et




                                                                                                                                  ew




                                                                                                                                                                                                of
                                  d




                                                                                                                                 N
                               te




                                                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                 N




                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                             ni




                                                                                                                                                                                         at
                            U




                                                                                                                                                                                     St
                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                te
                                                                                                                                                                              ni
                                                                                                                                                                             U




Figure 8
Notes: Origin fixed effects from a gravity regression of log food trade on log distance, a home dummy, common
language and colonial ties dummies, along with origin and destination fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                  38
                           Cuisine origin FE including fast food
                                                                                                                  United States of America
               6.5


                6

                                                                                   Italy
                                                                               Japan
               5.5                                                               China
   origin FE




                5


               4.5                                 India

                                        France                                                                                  equal weights
                                                                                                                                chicken local
                4                  Mexico
                       Spain
                       Turkey
                             Thailand                                                                                           45 deg

                           4               4.5             5             5.5               6             6.5
                                            baseline origin cuisine FE



Figure 9
Note: cuisine origin fixed effects from gravity models embodying different assumptions. "Equal weights" means
that each cuisine obtains the same cuisine weight of one. "Chicken local" means that the fast food chicken cuisine is
assigned to the destination country rather than the US.


                           Cuisine origin FE excluding fast food
               5.5                                                                                            Japan
                                                                                                                  Italy
                                                                                                               China




                5
                                                                                   United States of America
   origin FE




               4.5

                                                        France       India



                4
                                               Mexico
                                   Spain Thailand

                               Turkey                                                                                           equal weights
                                                                                                                                45 deg
               3.5
                     3.5                    4                  4.5                   5                  5.5
                                            baseline origin cuisine FE




Figure 10
Note: cuisine origin fixed effects from gravity models embodying different assumptions. "Equal weights" means
that each cuisine obtains the same cuisine weight of one.




                                                                                                                39
                                 Net export measures including fast food
                       200000




                       100000
   millions of $




                            0

                                                                           baseline
                                                                           equal weights
                                                                           chicken local
                       -100000
                                            N Z elg aia
                                                      neark
                                             ch ngccel




                                                           es
                                                       n la



                                                       ub i a




                                               C Notugru


                                                             d
                                                  n reeypt




                                                   g In ile




                                              et e i n
                                             Swhe al um




                                                         ana
                                                     om a l




                                                          nd



                                               do a ra in

                                            ni B(UKa
                                                     a xic y

                                              Ve G g c e




                                               Ar Ch lic
                                                  Uentdia




                                                  do m d




                                                Gh Kedeia




                                              te Cra )
                                                   Murkan




                                                          ce
                                                M Is a m




                                                      r ea


                                                D P lania




                                                 itzrlaand




                                                        at a
                                                             o
                                                       an d




                                                R Ru aro
                                                   ep ss y




                                                      ay e



                                                    Ire b y
                                                   al aina




                                                       or n
                                                        la s



                                            ng C st a y
                                                   m a lia

                                                     St i n l
                                                    T ap ly




                                                  ol rw a




                                                 d h zi
                                                     er nd
                                                      e e




                                                          e


                                                          d
                                               In enolan
                                                   Fr ilan




                                                          si
                                                M kr in
                                                     et e
                                                     J Ita




                                                    or r a




                                                          s




                                               ut w str
                                          e ew B ai w
                                                 Viezu




                                          Ki Au Sp
                                                 Po P
                                                       o




                                                     rm


                                                       n
                                            So SAu
                                                      E



                                          ze Hu




                                      Th N T
                                                Th




                                                   e



                                           U
                                        C




                                        d
                                     te
                                  ni
                                 U




Figure 11
Notes: net exports including fast food incorporating differing assumptions. The line shows the baseline estimate.
Baseline means that cuisine weights are country specific, and fast food chicken is assumed to be American in origin.
Equal weights means that all cuisines are weighted equally. Chicken local assigns fast food chicken to its location
country rather than the US.


                                 Net export measures excluding fast food
                        200000



                        100000
       millions of $




                             0



                       -100000
                                                                           baseline
                                                                           equal weights
                                                                           chicken local
                       -200000
                                          e ew B aiwsia
                                      Th N T neark
                                             ch n ccel




                                                           es
                                                       n la



                                                       ub i a




                                               C Notugru


                                                             d
                                                  nereeypt




                                                   geIndile




                                              et e i n
                                                he al um




                                                         ana
                                               do a ral in
                                                     a xic y

                                              Ve GEg ce




                                               Ar Ch lic
                                                  U nt ia




                                                     om a l




                                               ut w str d




                                            ni B(UKa
                                                  do m d




                                                Gh Kedeia




                                              te Cra )
                                                   Murkan




                                                 Vi zu ce
                                                M Is a m




                                                      r ea


                                                D Polania




                                                 itzrlaand




                                                        at a
                                                             o
                                                       an d




                                                R ugaro
                                                   ep ss y




                                                      ay ne



                                                         by
                                                   al ai a




                                                     rm ren


                                                   m na ia
                                                        la s



                                            ng C st a y



                                                     St i n l
                                                    T ap ly




                                                  ol rw a




                                                 d h zi
                                                     er nd
                                                      e e




                                            N Z elg a


                                                          n




                                                          d
                                               In en lan
                                                   Fr ilan




                                                          si
                                                M kr in
                                                     et e
                                                     J Ita




                                                    or r a




                                          Ki Au Sp
                                                 Po P




                                                       o
                                                       o




                                            So SAu
                                                    Ire
                                                    R
                                          ze Hu
                                                Th




                                                   e
                                             Sw




                                           U
                                        C




                                        d
                                     te
                                  ni
                                 U




Figure 12
Notes: net exports including fast food incorporating differing assumptions. The line shows the baseline estimate.
Baseline means that cuisine weights are country specific, and fast food chicken is assumed to be American in origin.
Equal weights means that all cuisines are weighted equally. Chicken local assigns fast food chicken to its location
country rather than the US and so is by construction the same as the baseline for non-fast food.



                                                                     40
Appendix: TripAdvisor vs Yelp and Tabelog.
TripAdvisor is not the only source of restaurant information. Yelp is another major source of
information, and Yelp is popular in the US. Tabelog.com, by contrast, is popular in Japan. Here
we compare cuisine distributions between TripAdvisor and Yelp, in the US, and between
TripAdvisor and Tabelog, for Japan.
               1. TripAdvisor vs Yelp
Like TripAdvisor, Yelp classifies restaurants into roughly 120 cuisines, of which 61 match
exactly across sources.
Almost half - 61 - cuisines match directly across the two data sources. These matching cuisines
account for just over half of the US cuisine listings, 47.3 percent in TripAdvisor and 50.5 in
Yelp. The shares are highly correlated across data sources (correlation=0.94), as figure A1
shows, which plots the TripAdvisor share against the Yelp share, confirms. For example,
Mexican restaurants account for 5.2 percent of the cuisines in TripAdvisor and 6.8 percent in
Yelp. Italian accounts for 5.4 percent in TA and 3.5 percent in Yelp, but pizza is 5.2 in TA and
6.8 percent in Yelp, perhaps reflecting a different distinction between pizza and Italian in the two
data sources. We take the high correlation as evidence supportive of the validity of the
TripAdvisor data.

                              US cuisine shares on TripAdvisor and Yelp
                         .1
                        .05                                                                                 Italian Pizza
                                                                                                                    Mexican
                                                                                                               Chinese
                                                                                                         Seafood
                                                                                                        Japanese
                                                                                                        Cafe
                                                                                                     Sushi
                                                                                     Spanish     Mediterranean
                                                                                                  Barbecue
                                                                                                Thai
                                                                                             Steakhouse
                        .01                                                               Middle
                                                                                         Greek
                                                                                        French
                                                                                              Diner
                                                                                                 Eastern
                                                                                             Indian
                                                                                                Vietnamese
  TripAdvisor share




                                                                                                  Korean
                                                                                              Caribbean
                                                                                 Irish
                                                                                    Hawaiian
                                                                                    Cuban
                                                                                      Gastropub
                                                                                     Peruvian
                                                                              Turkish
                                                                              African
                                                                             German
                                                                             Brazilian
                                                                       British
                       .001                                                  Ethiopian
                                                                      Argentinean
                                                                             Persian Filipino
                                                                                Pakistani
                                                                    Moroccan
                                                                     Polish
                                                                       Portuguese
                                                                          Russian
                                                                    Malaysian    Taiwanese
                                                                         Mongolian
                                                                     Belgian
                                                     Australian
                                                            Scandinavian
                                                                     Armenian Afghani
                                                      Austrian Arabic
                                                                Indonesian
                                                                     Cambodian
                                                      Czech
                      .0001                        Ukrainian Bangladeshi
                                                   Hungarian     Burmese
                                       Scottish   Sri Lankan
                                                         Uzbek




                                                                                                                              share
                                                                                                                              yshare

                                       .0001                     .001                      .01              .05 .1
                                                       Yelp share



Figure A1




                                                                                                           41
    2. TripAdvisor vs Tabelog


An article at Eater (Nomura, 2017) describes Tabelog as "the definitive catalog of restaurants in
Japan." According to Nomura (2017), the crowd-sourced site "might sound a lot like Yelp, but
there's a key difference: it is much, much better (even if it looks uglier)."
I obtained data on 1,000 restaurants from each of Tokyo, Osaka, Fukuoka, and Kyoto, as well as
200 restaurants from each of the remaining 41 cities listed at Tabelog.com. Each of these
restaurants lists up to three cuisines at Tabelog. I then mapped these cuisines into 9 categories:
French, Indian, Italian, Mexican, American, Japanese, and other (non-Japanese). I did the same
thing for the listed cuisines for the restaurants from the 158 Japanese cities in the TripAdvisor
data. This gives me 39,612 cuisines listings from Tabelog and 1,362,828 from TripAdvisor.
Table A2 shows the resulting cuisine distributions. Japanese cuisines (including ageographic
cuisines such as "bar") account for 86.31 percent in the Tabelog data, compared with 81.81
percent in the TripAdvisor data. French accounts for 1.56 percent in Tabelog and 1.89 percent in
TripAdvisor. Italian accounts for 5.76 percent in Tabelog and 4.68 percent in TripAdvisor. We
take the similarity of these cuisine distributions, along with the Yelp evidence for the US, as
evidence supporting the use of TripAdvisor.


Table A2: Cuisine distributions for Japan cities, Tabelog.com vs TripAdvisor
                    Tabelog TripAdvisor
 France               1.56%      1.89%
 India                0.24%      1.28%
 Italy                5.76%      4.68%
 Korea                0.73%      0.81%
 Mexico               0.14%      0.15%
 Thailand             0.27%      0.51%
 United States        0.23%      1.13%
 Japan               86.31%     81.81%
 other                4.76%      7.73%

 total              100.00%        100.00%


Note: these are the distributions of listed cuisines for the top 1,000 listed restaurants in each of
Tokyo, Osaka, Fukuoka, Hokkaido and Kyoto, along with the top 200 from each of 41 additional
Japanese cities listed at Tabelog, compared with the TripAdvisor listings in the paper's dataset
for Japan.




                                                42
   3. TripAdvisor, Yelp, and Tabelog usage
Based on the volume of Google searches for the terms Yelp and TripAdvisor, it is clear that Yelp
is more popular in the US than is TripAdvisor. Yelp has twice as many US searches as
TripAdvisor, as Table A2 shows. Outside of the US, TripAdvisor is far more popular. Yelp
accounts for a third of the searches to one of the two sources in Guam, just over a quarter in
Pakistan, about a fifth in Bangladesh, just under a fifth in Canada, Kosovo, and Syria.
Among the major countries in Europe, Yelp accounts for 10 percent in Germany, 2 percent in
France, one percent in Spain and the UK, and less that a percent in Italy. Usage in Asia is
similarly, although slightly less, skewed toward TripAdvisor: Yelp accounts for 13 percent of
searches for either Yelp or TripAdvisor in South Korea, 10 percent in China, Taiwan, and Japan.
We take the relatively low usage of Yelp outside of the US as an obstacle to its use as a source of
information on the distribution of restaurant cuisines around the world. Despite that drawback,
the Yelp data are useful to us as a check on the TripAdvisor data. It would be reassuring if the
two sources indicated similar cuisine distributions in a country they both cover extensively, the
US.
Tabelog, which is indexed in Google trends as kakaku.com, is searched only in Japan, where its
searches account for 71 percent of the searches for the three sites.




                                                43
Table A2: Countries with the Highest Yelp Search Intensity relative to TripAdvisor
 Country               TripAdvisor: Yelp:
                       (6/25/13 -   (6/25/13 ­
                       6/25/18)      6/25/18)
 United States                 36%       64%               0.5625
 Guam                          67%       33%               2.0303
 Pakistan                      73%       27%               2.7037
 Bangladesh                    78%       22%               3.5455
 Canada                        81%       19%               4.2632
 Kosovo                        82%       18%               4.5556
 Syria                         82%       18%               4.5556
 Puerto Rico                   85%       15%               5.6667
 U.S. Virgin Islands           86%       14%               6.1429
 Afghanistan                   86%       14%               6.1429
 South Korea                   87%       13%               6.6923
 Iraq                          88%       12%               7.3333
 Mongolia                      89%       11%               8.0909
 Ghana                         89%       11%               8.0909
 Nigeria                       89%       11%               8.0909
 Germany                       90%       10%               9.0000
 China                         90%       10%               9.0000
 Taiwan                        90%       10%               9.0000
 Japan                         90%       10%               9.0000


Source: Google Trends.




                                              44
45
