                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FOOD STAMPS AND AMERICA'S POOREST

                                         Dean Jolliffe
                                         Juan Margitic
                                        Martin Ravallion

                                      Working Paper 26025
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26025


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




No financial support was received beyond salaries of the researchers. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Dean Jolliffe, Juan Margitic, and Martin Ravallion. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Food Stamps and America's Poorest
Dean Jolliffe, Juan Margitic, and Martin Ravallion
NBER Working Paper No. 26025
June 2019
JEL No. I32,I38

                                         ABSTRACT

The paper provides the first assessment of: (i) America's progress in lifting the lower bound--the
floor--of the distribution of real income; (ii) whether the country's largest antipoverty program,
SNAP ("food stamps"), helped do so. An operational method of estimating the floor is
implemented on micro survey data spanning 30 years, with various robustness and significance
tests. SNAP partially compensated the poorest, and helped stabilize the floor. Nonetheless, the
floor has been sinking over the last 30 years. The efficiency of SNAP in lifting the floor has
declined over time. Full coverage of the poorest would lift the floor appreciable.


Dean Jolliffe                                   Martin Ravallion
Development Data Group                          Department of Economics
World Bank                                      Georgetown University
Washington, DC                                  ICC 580
djolliffe@worldbank.org                         Washington, DC 20057
                                                and NBER
Juan Margitic                                   mr1185@georgetown.edu
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
Washington, DC
jfm114@georgetown.edu
1.       Introduction

         While it is well-known that top incomes in the US have risen appreciably over the last 30
years, it is unclear if this has come with gains to the country's poorest. One might look for
evidence in the official poverty measures. In 1988, 13% of the US population were deemed poor
based on official thresholds (U.S. Census Bureau, 1991). In 2016, almost 30 years later, the
poverty rate was still about 13% (U.S. Census Bureau, 2017a). 1 However, such comparisons tell
us nothing about how the worst-off families are doing. By definition, the poorest live at the
floor--the lower bound to the distribution of real income. 2 As commonly measured, the poverty
rate (or other "higher-order" measures) could show no change while the floor has been lifted, or
has even fallen.
         It is an open question as to whether the type of economic growth we have seen in the US
in recent decades has helped the poorest. Given the initial inequalities in human capital, growth
stemming from external trade expansion or technological change could well have adverse effects
on less skilled wages, putting further downward pressure on already low incomes. 3 Rising down-
side risk over time could also be a greater threat to poor families, especially the poorest. 4 From
what we know it remains unclear whether rising top incomes in the US have lifted the floor.
         Concerns that the poorest might be left behind have prompted social-policy responses in
the US as elsewhere. There are continuing public debates as to whether such programs are
having much impact on poverty. The lack of longer term progress in reducing the country's
poverty rate has led some observers to argue that America's antipoverty programs have failed,
which is seen to strengthen the case against those programs. 5 Of course, the observed measures

1
  The official poverty rate was 13.0% in 1988 and 12.7% in 2016 based on official poverty thresholds which are kept
constant in real terms. This difference is not statistically significant--the test of equality has a p-value of 0.25. The
official measures do not include the value of non-cash programs such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program. We return to this issue.
2
  This should not be confused with the biological minimum for survival; the floor is hopefully above that.
3
  For example, Ebenstein et al. (2014) find evidence that wages for relatively unskilled occupations in the US fell in
response to greater trade openness and outsourcing over the period 1984-2002. They attribute this to a shift in
employment out of higher-wage manufacturing sectors to less remunerative occupations. Autor et al. (2003) and
Goos et al. (2014) also argue that technological change in many rich countries (including the US) has displaced
labor in more routine tasks, also putting downward pressure on wages for less skilled workers.
4
  Hardy and Ziliak (2014) provide evidence of rising income volatility at both the bottom and top of the US income
distribution.
5
  Various reasons are heard including a lack of political will (possibly due to high and rising inequality), weak
administrative capacity for policy implementation (especially in poor places), lack of awareness among poor people
of their rights, incentive effects (discouraging work or savings), and social stigma associated with targeted
programs.

                                                           2
do not tell us about the counterfactual of what would have happened in the absence of the
programs. The bulk of the academic literature using some form of counterfactual analysis
suggests that America's antipoverty programs have typically reduced the incidence of poverty,
though there has been debate on the extent of this impact. 6 Yet the gains to the poorest remain
unclear. Furthermore, rising high-end inequality of income and wealth can come with greater
lobbying against welfare programs. Even if the programs are deemed effective--in the specific,
albeit narrow, sense that participants tend to be poor--political pressure from rich donors and
their lobbyists can entail weak coverage, which limits the impact on the poor, including the
poorest.
        This paper aims to assess the gains to America's poorest from the country's largest
antipoverty program, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), colloquially
referred to as "food stamps." 7 Over the last 20 years or so, food stamps have become one of the
most important elements of America's social safety net (Ziliak, 2016). While the paper's focus
on the poorest is a novel feature in the context of the literature on poverty in America, that focus
has deep roots in theories of distributive justice whereby a society's progress is judged in part by
its ability to enhance the economic welfare of the least advantaged group. Famously, this is one
of the principles of justice proposed by Rawls (1971).
        Assessing the impact of any social program on the floor poses methodological
challenges, given that conventional surveys are not designed for this purpose. Even in high
quality surveys, the tails of the distribution are not likely to be measured accurately. Recorded
incomes in surveys can be very low for some household in a survey response period, but this can
be deceptive about living standards. 8 Our method recognizes that there are both measurement
errors and smoothable transient income effects in the observed survey data. Some averaging is
called for. The idea is to measure the floor as a weighted mean of those deemed to be poor, with
higher weight on observationally poorer people, following Ravallion (2016).
        We implement an operational approach to measuring the floor in the US using cross-
sectional national surveys spanning 30 years, and we use it to study the impact of SNAP. We
estimate the level of the floor before and after recorded receipts from SNAP at the household


6
  See, for example, Meyer and Sullivan (2012) and the comment by Hoynes (2012).
7
  Spending on SNAP overtook the next largest program, the Earned Income Tax Credit, in 2010 (Hoynes, 2012).
8
  See, for example, the analysis by Meyer et al. (2019) of the claims made about the numbers of people in the US
living below $2 a day (Edin and Shaefer, 2016).

                                                         3
level. This requires some potentially strong assumptions, so we provide various robustness tests,
including tests of alternative weighting schemes, possible behavioral responses to SNAP among
the poorest and the sensitivity of our results to including non-positive incomes. We also provide
confidence intervals for the floor, taking account of survey design.
         The paper finds that America's poorest gained from SNAP. Their mean gain exceeded
mean spending on SNAP--implying that the program has historically done better than a
universal basic income (UBI) with the same budget (and ignoring any differences in
administrative cost, which could well be lower for a UBI). Alarmingly, we find that America's
floor has been on a long-term decline, although SNAP helped prevent further decline in some
periods, notably during the 2008-11 financial crisis. However, the efficiency of SNAP in raising
the floor has also fallen over time, such that the per capita amount received by the poorest in
2016 is about the same as mean spending per capita.

2.       Background on SNAP

         SNAP is a Federal program (administered by the US Department of Agriculture) that
aims to help targeted poor families purchase food. Prior to around 2000, paper coupons ("food
stamps") were provided but the program switched over time to Electronic Benefit Transfer
(EBT). 9 In (fiscal) 2016, SNAP covered about 44 million Americans (14% of the population) at
a cost of $71 billion, representing $125 per person per month for food stamp beneficiaries. The
program aims to reach families with gross income below 130% of the poverty line (with net
income, allowing for certain admissible deductions, less than the poverty line), and to provide
larger benefits to poorer families. 10 (There is some variation in eligibility criteria across states.)
         Much has been written about SNAP. While it is unclear how effective the program is in
reaching the poorest, there is ample evidence that the beneficiaries are largely poor (Bartfield et
al. 2016). 11 However, there appears to be a reasonably high rate of nonparticipation among those
eligible for the program (Gundersen and Ziliak, 2018). The take-up rate of the benefits is

9
  EBT entailed that SNAP recipients paid for food using a "debit card." (If the pin code is verified and the account
balance is adequate then payment is accepted.)
10
   For further information and analysis on SNAP see Bartfeld et al. (2016), Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2016) and
Gunderson and Ziliak (2018). On the benefits to children from poor families see Jolliffe et al. (2005). For a broader
overview of antipoverty policies in the US, including SNAP, see Ben-Shalom et al. (2012).
11
   A positive correlation has been found between SNAP participation and food insecurity; the causal interpretation is
unclear, but the correlation is consistent with the view that families that face an income shock, creating food
insecurity, turn to the program for help (Gundersen and Oliveira, 2001; Wilde and Nord, 2005).

                                                         4
difficult to estimate in national surveys largely due to the complexity of the eligibility criteria. 12
That same complexity generates transaction costs for applicants associated with establishing and
maintaining eligibility, and naturally those costs tend to lower participation in the program
among those eligible. 13 Falk et al. (2015) estimate that about 30% of people who are eligible for
SNAP are not participating, which is close to earlier estimates reported in Ways and Means
Committee (2000, p.884). The existence of exclusion errors has also been noted in the media. 14
In addition to the high nonparticipation rate in general, there is some evidence that poorer
families among those eligible have fallen off the rolls of SNAP with cuts to this and other
programs. 15 And there is evidence that those in need often find it most difficult to register for the
program (Currie and Gahvari, 2008).
         Two specific SNAP policy changes are worth noting. First, a series of reforms in 1996-98
put emphasis on reducing perceived "leakage" to those not considered eligible, including by
imposing work requirements, which can reduce participation by eligible participants. 16 Time
limits and recertification became stricter. Legal immigrants were variously eligible, then
ineligible, then eligible again, but growing concerns about status likely reduced their
participation. Able-bodied adults without dependents found it harder to access SNAP.
         Second, spending on SNAP surged in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis and the
subsequent rise in unemployment and poverty. As a part of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA), SNAP benefits increased by 14% in April 2009. 17 This "SNAP
stimulus" echoes a longer-term pattern of (countercyclical) co-movement between SNAP
spending and the unemployment rate (Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2016; Ganong and Liebman,


12
   See Zedlewski and Giannarelli (2015) for an example of modelling SNAP eligibility with the TRIM3 model, and
a discussion of the various data inputs required to estimate eligibility.
13
   As an example of transaction costs, Ponza et al. (1999) estimate that the average time to apply for the program is
approximately five hours and two trips to a program office, and recertification of eligibility takes on average 2.5
hours and at least one trip. Currie (2003) synthesizes the literature on nonparticipation of those eligible, including,
for example, a discussion of the potential stigma associated with program participation (Haider et al., 2003).
14
   See, for example the discussion in The Economist (2011).
15
   Many SNAP participants are automatically eligible with enrollment in other social assistance programs. The
reduction of other assistance programs had adverse spillover effects on enrollment in SNAP.
16
   The first reform was the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunities Reconciliation Act of 1996 (with most
provisions effective from mid-1997), followed by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 and the Agricultural Research,
Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998 (USDA, 2017). For further discussion of these reforms to SNAP and
their implications see Currie and Grogger (2001).
17
   For example, the maximum SNAP benefit for a household of three rose from $463 to $526 per month. Under
ARRA, states could suspend time limits for unemployed able-bodied adults. Subsequent legislation imposed an
expiration date of November 2013 for the 13.6% SNAP benefit increase.

                                                           5
2018). Anderson et al. (2015) present evidence that SNAP participation and benefit levels rose
among America's poor during the recession starting in 2008.

3.       Measuring the floor and the impact of SNAP

         We need a measure that can be implemented with repeated cross-sectional surveys, while
recognizing the uncertainty as to whether the lowest observed consumption or income in any one
survey is in fact the floor. Following Ravallion (2016) we postulate that any observed income
level within a stratum of poor people has some (non-zero) probability of being the true floor,
once the transient effects and measurement errors are eliminated. One might consider simply
taking the ordinary (equally-weighted) mean income of a subset of people that is considered
highly likely to include the poorest, such as those living below the poverty line. However, it is
not plausible that all incomes below some point (above which the probability is zero) are equally
likely to emerge as the lowest level of living if one could remove the transient effects and errors.
Of course, the relevant probabilities are not data, and assumptions will be required in lieu of the
missing data (as in all areas of economic statistics). The key assumption in Ravallion (2016) is
that the probability of being the poorest household declines as the observed measure of income
rises. While we are uncertain as to whether the lowest observed value is the floor, it is assumed
that this value has the highest probability of being the floor--that our data are sufficiently good
to believe that the probability is highest for the person who appears to be the worst off, though
the probability may be well below unity. Beyond some income level there is no chance of
finding the true floor.
         A potentially important qualifier in this context is that we are measuring the floor using
data on incomes not consumption. (We describe our data more fully below.) Incomes in a given
year can be zero (or negative) due to an income shock in that year, although this need not be
indicative of current living standards given the scope for drawing on savings or credit. This is an
instance of the transient effects one would like to average out. In this respect, consumption is
preferable. 18 For developing countries over a 30-year time period, Ravallion (2018) tests the
sensitivity of estimates of the floor to using consumption instead of income, and finds a slightly

18
   There has been a debate on the choice between consumption and income as measures of economic welfare,
including in the US (Slesnick, 2001; Meyer and Sullivan, 2012). We do not take a position on this issue here, as we
have little choice for the present purpose given both the data available and the fact that (unlike consumption) income
is additive with respect to SNAP spending.

                                                          6
higher floor using consumption, but with a very similar evolution over time. Nonetheless, given
the possible concerns about the non-positive incomes, we test the effect on our estimates of
dropping them. In other words, we assume instead that the lowest observed positive income has
the highest probability of being the poorest, and the probability declines as observed income
rises above that point.
       Derivation of the floor: Let the observed distribution of household income be  , i=1,...,
n. We postulate a corresponding (unobserved) distribution  , after eliminating the ignorable
transient effects and measurement errors. Let the floor of the  distribution be denoted 
                                                                                          =

min( ,  = 1, ... ). We treat 
                               as a random variable, with a probability distribution given
                                                                 
the data such that our estimate of   is =1  ( ) where  ( ) = ( =  ) is the

probability that person i, with  , is the worst off person. Following Ravallion (2016), we assume
the following functional form satisfying these assumptions:
                                       
                                    1-  
                                         
                           ( ) =                 for  > 0                                    (1)
                                    1- 
                                      

Here  = 1 if    and  = 0 otherwise. For  > 0,  ( ) attains its maximum value for
 = min( ,  = 1, ... ) and then falls monotonically with  , until it reaches zero at some
value z, above which there is no chance of someone with that income being the poorest. Under
this assumption, it can be readily shown that:
                            
                           (   ,  = 1, ... ) =  (1 - +1 / )                                  (2)

             1             
where     (1 -  ) is the Foster-Greer-Thorbecke (FGT) (1984) class of poverty

measures. However, notice that the parameter  has a different interpretation to the FGT index;
here  is the key curvature parameter for the probability function used for weights in estimating
the floor, instead of being an ethical inequality-aversion parameter as in the FGT index.
       Empirical implementation: As our benchmark case for the empirical implementation, we
set  = 1. Then the estimate of the floor is (1 -  / ) where SPG is the squared poverty
gap index (2 ) and PG is the poverty gap index (1 ). Since this is the expected value of the lower
bound, after averaging out transient effects and measurement errors, we will observe incomes
below this number in any survey. For the floor to rise over time, SPG must fall faster (in
proportionate terms) than PG.


                                                 7
         We assume that the poorest household has an observed income below the official US
poverty threshold, which is fixed in real terms over time. However, the official poverty
thresholds vary by family size and composition. 19 It is thus simpler to express the floor as a
proportion of the threshold, though to aid interpretation we provide some illustrative calculations
for a family of four with two children. We refer to the ratio of the floor to the poverty line as the
floor ratio.
         We consider two variants of this approach. In a first variation, we test robustness to using
 = 2 (so that the probability declines as a quadratic function as income rises until z is reached)
instead of the linear probability function ( = 1). In the second, we set z at the population-
weighted 20th percentile, which we denote as  (0.2). 20 The difference here is that we fix the
proportion of the population who define the reference group for calculating the floor, rather than
fixing this group according to the official poverty line, whereby the size of the reference group
changes. 21
         Benefit incidence: We make the standard assumption in benefit-incidence analysis of
estimating the post-transfer distribution by adding transfers received at the household level. The
official poverty measures for the US do not reflect the impact of SNAP because such income
sources are omitted from the income aggregates used for the official measures. 22 To obtain our
"post-SNAP" income distribution, we add in the face value of the food stamps or in later years,
the credit value on the EBT card. Thus, we can estimate the impact of SNAP receipts on the floor
by calculating the SPG and PG measures before and after those receipts. Note that this is not just
for SNAP recipients. We are automatically factoring in incomplete coverage of the poorest.
         While it is standard practice in the literature on benefit incidence to assume that the
nominal cash transfers reflect the real income gains, we acknowledge that this practice ignores
behavioral responses such as through savings, labor supply or private transfers. It might be
argued that strong behavioral responses are unlikely among the poorest, who presumably have a


19
   The thresholds can be found here.
20
   Note that  =  () is the quantile function, obtained by inverting the cumulative distribution function. So the
median is (0.5).
21
   For computational convenience, the quantile for p=0.2 is fixed prior to adding SNAP receipts.
22
   The literature has pointed to a number of limitations of the official poverty measures, related to both the income
concept and the poverty lines; for further discussion see Citro and Michael (1995), Blank (2008) and Meyer and
Sullivan (2012). The Census Bureau has introduced a "supplemental" measure that addresses some of these
concerns (Short, 2011). Here we only address the problem related to the exclusion of SNAP from the official income
aggregates based on the CPS.

                                                         8
strong incentive to maintain their (low) income. However, behavioral responses cannot be ruled
out even for the poorest. For example, there is evidence of responses to SNAP through labor
supply among single female-headed households (Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2012). 23
        In response to this concern, we provide a partial test of our assumption that the post-
SNAP distribution is obtained by adding SNAP receipts to income at the household level. As
usual, the test requires identifying assumptions. To explain the test, let  denote the value of
                                                                  
the food stamps received by the poorest, while  and  are the true pre-SNAP and post-
SNAP levels of the floor respectively. By definition:

                                      
                          =  +  -                                                                     (3)

                                                                                           
where   0 denotes the behavioral response. Let  denote the estimate of  that is
                                                       
obtained by assuming that  = 0, i.e.,    -  . If there are behavioral responses
                                                                                       
by the poorest ( > 0) then clearly  will underestimate the true value,  , i.e.,  =
                                                                                                       
 -  is the error due to ignoring behavioral responses. Our test assumes that: (i) 
is a continuous function of a vector of observed covariates x, namely () (the function can
include an innovation error term); (ii) x does not include mean SNAP spending per capita , i.e.,
the true level of the floor in the absence of SNAP does not depend on aggregate SNAP spending;
and (iii) the behavioral effect b is a function (presumably non-decreasing) of . Thus:
                           
                          = () - ()
                                                                                                      (4)

The test is then to see if there is a partial correlation between the estimated pre-transfer floor and
mean spending at a given x. This can be thought of as a consistency check on our empirical
analysis. Note that a spurious correlation could arise if SNAP spending is correlated with
excluded determinants of the pre-transfer floor, so the test depends crucially on the inclusion of
suitable controls for the pre-SNAP floor.
        We also measure what we term Floor Transfer Efficiency (FTE), defined as the increment
to the floor due to SNAP as a share of mean spending on SNAP for the population, i.e.,
                                                
                          = ( -  )/                                                                   (5)


23
  Using quasi-experimental methods and exploiting cross-county variation, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2012) find
evidence of a reduction in labor supply by single female-headed households due to SNAP, though no significant
effect is evident for their sample as a whole.

                                                      9
As a benchmark, under a budget-neutral UBI,  = 1.
           Data: To implement our measure of the floor and various tests, we use the micro data
from the Annual Social and Economic (ASEC) Supplement to the Current Population Survey
(CPS). 24 We use 29 years of CPS-ASEC data from 1989 to 2017, which allows us to estimate the
floor and SNAP benefit levels from 1988 to 2016. The CPS is administered by the Census
Bureau for the Bureau of Labor Statistics and collects data from a nationally representative
sample of households on employment, unemployment, earnings, occupation, and hours of work.
           The CPS is the data source for the official poverty estimates in the US and therefore
particularly well suited to our task. However, there are two caveats to note in our use of these
data. First, the CPS sample is primarily people living in single-family houses, apartments, and
non-institutional "group quarters," but it excludes any homeless people who are not living in
shelters (U.S. Census Bureau, 2017a). The homeless are likely to be living at levels somewhere
around our estimated floor (Burt et al., 1999). Their under-representation in the sample probably
biases our estimated floor upwards.
           A second concern is item non-response for the SNAP participation and benefits
questions. The documented under-reporting of SNAP benefits in the CPS data suggests that our
estimate of the effectiveness of SNAP in lifting the floor is biased downwards, though there are
differing assessments of the level of under-reporting (compare, for example, Meyer et al., 2015,
2019, with Kang and Moffitt, 2019, who find a reasonably good match between survey responses
and administrative records n SNAP). Given the paucity of data to address these concerns, we do
not attempt to estimate their effect on our estimates, but simply note these caveats.
           The measure of family income we use is the same as that for the US official poverty
estimates. This includes money income before taxes from several sources (such as wages, salary,
net-income from self-employment, social security payments, pensions, interest, dividends,
alimony, other forms of periodic monetary income), but excludes capital gains and non-cash
benefits such as fringe benefits or noncash social assistance programs.
           The proportion of the population (summing CPS individual expansion factors) with non-
positive incomes recorded in the CPS has been on a rising trend (Figure 1). Note also that a
population share for non-positives of around 2% in recent years represents about 15% of the
poor, as judged by the official thresholds (Figure 1). Most of the non-positives are zeros, and we

24
     Further information on the CPS can be found in U.S. Census Bureau (2017b).

                                                         10
have coded any negatives as zeros. 25 We expect that most of these non-positive observations
reflect real hardships, but not all. Mechanically, the rising share of zeros puts downward pressure
on the estimated floor.
         The CPS public-release measure of income imposes top-codes on income components,
and the methodology for top-coding changed over our time period in a manner that affects a
small number of observations in our analytical sample. Because top-coding is done by income
components and not total income, and because it has not (typically) been based on winsorizing
but rather using a hot-deck method, it is possible for poor families to have public-release income
estimates that are greater than the poverty threshold. We implement a correction using other
information on these households available in the CPS public-release data. 26

4.       The estimated floor and the impact of SNAP

         Table 1 provides summary statistics and our estimates of the floor over time. We begin
by focusing on SNAP spending. Figure 2a plots spending per capita of the US population over
time while Figure 2b gives spending per recipient and the participation rate. 27 We see that
spending per capita fluctuated over time, due mainly to participation rates, which closely tracked
spending (comparing Figures 2a and 2b). There was a marked increase in spending per capita in
the 2000-11 period; spending doubled between 2006 and 2012, but has tended to fall in recent
years. Spending per recipient grew over time, with a growth rate of 1.34% per annum
(s.e.=0.14%). Mean spending per recipient family rose from $2.89 per person per day in 1988 to
$4.15 in 2016.



25
   This only affects a small share of the data; on average, only 0.09% of the population (and 0.09% of the sample)
have negative incomes. This average ranges from 0.01% to 0.16% of the population (and 0.01% to 0.18% of the
sample) over the 1989 to 2017 CPS data files.
26
   We refer to the variable povll in the CPS public-release data, which creates a series of bins based on the ratio of
family income (as measured by the confidential data) to the family's poverty threshold. For example, in the 2008
CPS data there are nine sample observations (from a total of more than 206,000) where income as reported in the
public-release files, is greater than the poverty threshold, but these are poor families as identified by povll (which is
based on the confidential income data). In the 2008 CPS files, all nine of these observations had income that was
less than the poverty line, but greater than 75 percent of this line. For these nine observations, we re-assign their
income to be the mid-point of their bin. This re-assignment occurs in nine of our years. The number of re-
assignments made in any given year is less than 24, with a total count of 90 re-assignments overall years from the
more than four million total observations we examine.
27
   The CPS gives the value of food stamps received last year, and the number of months covered for each family.
We have divided by the number of months, and then normalized by the number of people in the family covered by
food stamps and the CPI. The "per recipient" series is just the "per capita" series averaged over all positives.

                                                           11
        As noted in the introduction, the literature has often pointed to the existence of exclusion
errors for SNAP, meaning that not all those with reported income below the poverty threshold
are receiving SNAP benefits. Figure 3 provides our calculations of the proportion of those who
are found in various intervals of the threshold who are receiving SNAP according to the CPS.
(As elsewhere, the calculations are population weighted.) Three points are notable. First, SNAP
coverage tends to be higher for poorer families. Second, coverage of the poor declined sharply
from the mid-1990s, and did not start to recover until 10 years later. Third, a large share of the
poor (40-60% depending on the time period) are not receiving the program.
        Recall that consistency with our assumption of no behavioral responses for the poorest
                                                       
implies that the estimated pre-transfer floor ( ) should be uncorrelated with the level of
mean SNAP transfers () once one controls for the determinants of the true pre-transfer floor. In
testing for this, we allow for two features of our estimated time series in Table 1, namely that the
floor has a negative trend and that it is serially correlated. On including a time trend and the
lagged dependent variable to accommodate these features of the data, we see in Table 2 that the
test passes comfortably for various controls (the remainder of the vector x in equation 4). The
lack of a partial correlation with SNAP spending evident in Table 2 is consistent with our
assumption that those responses are negligible at the floor, as required by our method of
estimating the post-transfer floor. (This also holds using the positives only to measure the floor.)
        We find that the program raised the floor (as a proportion of the poverty thresholds) by
about 3% points on average. For the benchmark case, the post-SNAP floor ratio for 2015 is
almost exactly 30% of the official threshold, which was $24,036 a year in that year for a family
of four (two adults and two children) or $16.46 per person per day or $15.15 in 2010 prices. So
the post-SNAP floor in 2015 was $4.93, while the pre-transfer value was $4.55. The quadratic
probability function ( = 2) naturally gives a lower estimate of the floor (since it attaches higher
relative weight to lower observed incomes). For 2015, the post-SNAP floor was $2.97, while it
was $2.71 pre-SNAP.
        The floor for the US is about the level of the highest floors in developing countries when
converted at Purchasing Power Parity and evaluated assuming a linear probability function. 28



28
 Based on the estimates by Margitic and Ravallion (2019) of the post-transfer floor in developing countries, the
mean of the 10 highest values is $5.60 a day.

                                                        12
         Changes over time in the floor and confidence intervals: Figure 4 plots the floor ratio
before and after food stamps using the official threshold (panels (a) and (b)) and our estimates
using the poorest 20% as the reference group (panel (c)). 29 To reduce cluttering in the graphs, we
only give the 95% confidence intervals (CI's) in panel (b) for the benchmark case ( = 1 and the
official thresholds), and for this case we re-scale the graph to enhance visibility. The CI's are
based on variance estimates that correct for non-independence using a sandwich estimator
(Wolter, 2007). 30 (The statistical addendum provides standard errors for other specifications.)
While the floor is lower for  = 2, the trajectories are similar, and r = 0.998 for the official
threshold and 0.997 for the poorest 20%. We continue to focus on  = 1 as the benchmark.
         For all years except 2000, we found no overlap between the post-SNAP CI and pre-
SNAP CI implying that the gain in the floor due to SNAP is statistically significant; the overlap
for 2000 is very small (0.001). While food stamps lifted the floor, there has been a trend decline
over the period as a whole in both the pre-transfer and the post-transfer floors. In the benchmark
case, the growth rate of the pre-SNAP floor over the period is -1.28% per annum (s.e.=0.06),
while it is -1.32% (s.e.=0.11) for the post-SNAP floor. Using the poorest 20% instead, the
annual rates of decline are slightly lower but still significantly negative (-0.83% and -0.81%
respectively, with s.e.= 0.04% and 0.03%).
         The decline in the floor is statistically significant over the period as a whole in that the
95% CI's do not overlap either pre- or post-SNAP. For 1988, the 95% CI for the pre-SNAP floor
ratio is (0.368, 0.386), while it is (0.261, 0.276) for 2016; for the post-SNAP floor, the CI's are
(0.409, 0.430) and (0.284, 0.300) for 1988 and 2016 respectively.
         Of course, overlaps in CI's are found within sub-periods (though that does not preclude
significant differences). The upper panel of Figure 4(b) gives the number of years before CI's
cease to overlap. For example, for the pre-SNAP floor, it is nine years from the beginning of the
series in 1988 before the CI's cease to overlap, though for the post-SNAP floor it is six years. By
the mid-1990s, after which the floor falls quickly, the CI's cease to overlap within just a few
years. This changes in 2001 after which declines continue but CI's overlap substantially for
longer periods. (For example, the 2001 post-SNAP CI overlaps for all years up to 2014.)


29
   As an indication of the $ value in 2010 prices, one can simply multiply by 15 (recalling that the poverty line for a
family of four is $15.15 per person per day).
30
   Standard errors are estimated by passing synthetic strata and clusters as described in Jolliffe (2003) to
Stata's "svy: ratio estimator," which can account for covariance of  and  ( ).

                                                          13
Significant declines in both the pre-SNAP and post-SNAP floor then re-emerge over the last four
years of the series.
           About half (53% using the official threshold) of the overall decline in the level of the
floor was in the period 1996-2001, coinciding with the aforementioned policy reforms. However,
the sharp decline in the floor 1996-2001 cannot be attributed to the SNAP policy changes alone
since we also see a similar decline in the pre-SNAP floor, though less than we find post-SNAP.
There are signs that the post-SNAP floor stabilized from the early 2000s.
           There is no significant trend in the post-SNAP floor from around 2003, though the fall in
the pre-SNAP floor continued, albeit at a slower pace (Figure 4). The pre-SNAP floor fell during
the crisis years, 2008-11, but the post-SNAP floor did not. The difference-in-difference (DD) is a
little less than 1% of the poverty line, i.e., if the post-SNAP floor had maintained the same
downward trajectory as the pre-SNAP floor during 2008-11 then the former would have been
about 1% of the poverty line lower. 31 The last few years of the series have seen a resumption in
the floor's decline (Figure 4).
           Recall that the proportion of non-positive incomes recorded in the CPS has been rising
over time (Figure 1). As noted, the non-zeros are presumably transient effects, including some
households who are not normally poor. There is no sound basis for excluding the non-positives,
but it is of interest to see if the downward trend in the floor is robust to doing so. Figure 5 shows
the pre-SNAP floor over time excluding the non-positives, for both linear and quadratic
probability weights. 32 At the end of the period, the pre-SNAP floor ratio rises from 0.27 to 0.32
for  = 1 and from 0.16 to 0.19 for  = 2. The downward trend is less pronounced, but still
evident if one drops the zeros; on only using the positive incomes, the growth rate (for  = 1) is
-0.80% per annum (s.e.=0.04) for the pre-SNAP floor and -0.85 (0.09) for the post-SNAP floor.
Our finding that the floor has been falling cannot be attributed to a rising share of non-positive
incomes in the CPS.
           Comparisons with other distributional statistics: Standard poverty measures are not
highly correlated with the changes in the floor over time. As noted in the introduction, the
poverty rate has remained roughly stationary over the period as a whole, though rising in some
periods (notably in the early 1990s and during the financial crisis starting in 2008) and falling in


31
     Using 2008 as the base year and 2011 as the final year, DD=0.0085; using 2012 instead one obtains DD=0.0090.
32
     This is the prior floor estimate deflated by 1 minus the proportion of poor households with non-positive incomes.

                                                           14
others (the rest of the 1990s and in recent years) (Table 1). Figure 6 gives three standard
measures. The periods 1993-2000 and 2012-16 saw declining poverty measures but a sinking
floor (Figure 4). And the sharp rise in poverty measures in the crisis period (2008-10) came with
a relatively stable floor post-SNAP, as noted. The proportionate changes over time in the floor
are roughly orthogonal to those for the (post-SNAP) headcount index (r = 0.041) and not highly
correlated for the two poverty gap indices (r = -0.268 for changes in PG and r = -0.492 for SPG).
Tracking standard poverty measures alone is clearly not very informative about what is
happening to the floor.
        The real growth rate in mean income is 0.88% per annum (s.e.=0.16), but that is
appreciable higher than for the median which had an annual growth rate of 0.53% (s.e.=0.12). 33
 (0.2) shows essentially zero growth while the median has a small positive growth rate. The
median increased with the mean, but the ratio of the median to the mean has been falling over
time, from around 0.78 to 0.71 (Table 1). In other words, the median has tended to rise with the
mean, but with an elasticity less than unity. 34 This decline in the median relative to the mean as
the latter increases is another aspect of the inequitable growth process of the US. The Gini index
of inequality in family income rose from 0.40 to 0.48 over this period (Table 1).
        There is an evident disconnect between the evolution of the floor and the upper quantiles
of the US income distribution. Figure 7 plots the overall mean and various quantiles--the
median ( (0.5)) and top income quantiles,  (0.9),  (0.95) and  (0.99). While the floor has
been on a downward trend, the incomes of the top quantiles show a strong positive trend, though
with fluctuations. The growth rate of  (0.99) is 1.63% per annum (s.e.=0.32). For a family of
four people, the floor fell from about 9.2% of  (0.99) in 1988 to 3.9% in 2016.
        So we see a marked divergence between the top incomes and the mean, median and
(especially) the floor. Note also that these are quantiles based on the CPS. There is a likely bias
in the CPS at the high end, associated with under-reporting and selective compliance (Korinek et




33
   Growth rates are estimated here by regressing the log of that variable on time.
All standard errors are robust to residual autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity, using the method in Newey and
West (1987). We used the automatic lag specification with the degrees of freedom adjustment.
34
   The OLS regression coefficient of the log median on the log mean is 0.611 with a standard error of 0.037. One can
reject the null that the coefficient is unity with t = 10.64.

                                                        15
al., 2006). The bias is unlikely to be confined to the top 1%, or even 10%, so the quantiles will
be affected, implying that correcting for the bias would show even greater divergence. 35
        The effect of SNAP on the floor: When the government spends more on SNAP, the floor
tends to rise. This can be seen in Table 3, which gives regressions of the log of the gain in the
                        
floor (( -  )) on log spending per capita, again allowing for both serial dependence
in the floor and a time trend. The elasticity of the floor to SNAP spending is around 0.5.
        To explore this further, note that mean spending on SNAP is the product of the program
participation rate and spending per recipient. By relaxing the assumption that the logs in these
two variables have the same effect on the floor, we can assess which has been more important to
the extent to which SNAP has raised the floor. Figure 8 plots the gain in the floor over time and
both the SNAP participation rate and SNAP spending per recipient; all variables are in logs and
the graph gives the deviations from mean. We see a much stronger co-movement between the
extent of the gain in the floor and the participation rate (especially so from the early 1990s) than
                                                                                                        
we see for spending per recipient. In the levels, the correlation coefficient between ( -
     
 and the log participation rate is 0.605, while it is -0.463 for the log spending per recipient.
In the latter case, the (negatively-correlated) trends account for the correlation; the correlations
between the first differences over time are 0.637 and 0.134 respectively. It is SNAP's
participation rate that matters to its impact on the floor rather than its spending per recipient.
        Table 3 also provides regressions of the log of the gain in the floor due to SNAP on the
log of the participation rate and the log of spending per recipient, controlling for the dynamics of
the floor impact and its time trend. It is also clear from these partial effects that the more
important factor in explaining the variation over time has been the participation rate. Indeed,
spending more per recipient has done very little toward raising the floor at a given SNAP
participation rate. Separately to this, we find a downward trend over time in the contribution of
SNAP to lifting the floor at given levels of spending.
        Consistently with the last finding, our estimates reveal that there has been a decline in
FTE--the ratio of the gain in the floor that we attribute to SNAP to spending per capita on the
program (Figure 9). The mean gain in the floor exceeds mean spending on food stamps; the


35
  See, for example, the estimates combining CPS with income tax and national accounts data in Piketty et al. (2018)
and Worldwide Inequality Database. Also see the state-level estimates by Sommeiller and Price (2018). Of course,
such adjustments to survey data require a great many assumptions.

                                                        16
difference between the two is $0.12 a day (in 2010 prices) and this is significantly different from
zero (s.e.=0.04). The program is reaching the poorest more than a UBI with the same budget.
However, the program's efficiency in raising the floor has declined appreciably over time. In the
late 1980s, the gain in the floor was about 2.5 times mean spending, but by the last five years of
the series it had fallen to about the same level, i.e., an FTE of unity.
           Thus, in recent years, SNAP is not having any larger impact on the floor than one would
expect from a budget-neutral UBI. In the past, SNAP was much more effective in reaching the
poorest, although the reform period in the mid-1990s came with a slower rate of decline in FTE
(Figure 9). Note also that the decline in FTE largely preceded the expansion in SNAP under
ARRA, but the "SNAP stimulus" did not come with better performance in reaching the poorest.
           Exclusions errors and the poorest: The calculations so far have not been conditional on
SNAP participation; for example, Figure 4 gives means over the relevant population whether
receiving SNAP or not. Our results indicate that an important reason why SNAP has not raised
the floor more is the extent of the exclusion errors among the poorest. As a quantitative
indication of just how much this matters, Figure 10 plots the floor that is implied if all the
poorest received the mean SNAP spending per SNAP recipient (so simply adding the date-
specific mean SNAP per recipient to the pre-SNAP floor). 36 We call this "full coverage." The
floor has been calculated for a family of four, with two adults (giving the aforementioned
poverty line of $15.15 per person per day in 2010 prices).
           Two things are notable from Figure 10: First, with full coverage the floor would have
risen to about $8 per day, and (second) the floor would have been roughly stable over the
period--almost fully negating the decline in the pre-SNAP floor that we find. The increment to
the post-SNAP floor associated with full coverage rises from $1.63 in 1988 to $3.26 in 2016.
                                                                                                             
           The size of these gains to the floor from full coverage reflect a high elasticity of  -
     
 to SNAP coverage of those living below (say) half the threshold. The regression
                                    
coefficient of ( -  ) on the log of the share of SNAP recipients among those living
at less than 0.5z is 1.57 (s.e.=0.13). As one would expect, we also find that the extent to which
SNAP lifts the floor is far more responsive to coverage of those living below 0.5z than it is to
coverage among other eligible groups. In particular, if we add the (logs) of the three other
coverage rates in Figure 3 (while controlling for the coverage rate of those living below 0.5z), we
36
     In making this calculation we use the number of months of participation recorded by each participant.

                                                           17
find that their coefficients are small and statistically insignificant, while the elasticity w.r.t. the
coverage rate for those under 0.5z remains high (1.94; s.e.=0.20).
        It should be noted, however, that expanding coverage to all of those living at or near the
floor would have required either a higher aggregate disbursement on the program, or a change in
the allocation away from those living above the floor, many of whom are still poor. Lifting the
floor this way will almost certainly come with trade-offs.

5.      Conclusions

        The rise in "top incomes" in the US has received much recent attention. We have focused
here on what has been happening at the other tail of the distribution, and how effective the
country's largest antipoverty program, SNAP (popularly known as "food stamps"), has been in
reaching the poorest. We do not argue that policymakers should only focus on the poorest, but
we contend that efficacy in reaching them is an important, but neglected, metric of progress.
        We have estimated the lower bound to the distribution of income--the "floor"--as a
weighted mean of observed survey-based incomes below the poverty line, with higher weight on
lower observed incomes. In estimating the income gains from SNAP we have ignored any
behavioural responses by the poorest, though we have provided a test for such responses that is
consistent with our assumption that such responses are negligible. We acknowledge that our
measures might be improved with better data (notably on the living standards of the poorest), but
our main qualitative results have stood up well to various tests of our assumptions.
        We find nothing to suggest that the rise in top incomes has lifted the floor. Indeed, our
results indicate that the floor was higher 30 years ago than today. The floor fell markedly in the
1990s, then it began to stabilize in the 2000s, but it appears now to be back on its prior
downward trajectory. In 2016, the floor was about 30% of the official poverty line, or about $5
per person per day. The decline in the floor is accountable in part to a rising share of non-
positive incomes recorded in the data, but a downward trend is still evident if one only uses the
positives. The rising gap between top incomes and the floor is another instance of the pattern of
rising absolute inequality that has been observed globally (Ravallion, 2018).
        Food stamps raised the floor, with a gain to the poorest that is significantly greater than
mean spending on SNAP, though substantially less than mean SNAP receipts per recipient. The
financial crisis emerging in 2008 put downward pressure on the pre-SNAP floor, but the

                                                   18
expansion of the program in the wake of the crisis was able to prevent a fall in the floor despite
the underlying inequality-increasing growth process. Thus, SNAP partly compensated for the
downward pressure on the pre-transfer floor. The program helped assure that the poorest could at
least maintain their (low) living standards during a period of inequitable growth. The changes
over time in the program's efficacy in raising the floor are accountable to changes in the overall
participation rate rather than spending per recipient.
        However, we find a marked longer-term decline in the extent to which SNAP has raised
the floor, associated with declining efficacy of food stamps in reaching America's poorest since
the mid-1990s. This could have been almost entirely avoided if the poorest had fully participated
in SNAP, even at the mean transfer receipts per participant. The extent to which SNAP lifts the
floor responds elastically to the program's coverage rate among those living well below the
official poverty lines. Our calculations indicate that if all of those living at or near the floor had
received even the mean SNAP payment per person the post-SNAP floor would have risen to
about $8 per person per day, and stayed fairly stable over the period 1988-2016, in contrast to the
sinking floor that we actually observe.




                                                  19
References

Anderson, Patricia, Kristin Butcher, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, 2015, "Changes in
       Safety Net Use During the Great Recession," American Economic Review Papers and
       Proceedings 105(5): 161-165.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane, 2003, "The Skill Content of Recent
       Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration," Quarterly Journal of Economics
       118(4): 1279-1333.
Bartfeld, Judi, Craig Gundersen, Timothy M. Smeeding, and James Patrick Ziliak, eds., 2016,
       SNAP Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Wellbeing. Studies in Social
       Inequality. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.
Ben-Shalom, Yonatan, Robert Moffitt and John Karl Scholz, 2012, "An Assessment of the
       Effectiveness of Antipoverty Programs in the United States," in Philip Jefferson (ed.) The
       Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Poverty, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blank, Rebecca M., 2008, "How to Improve Poverty Measurement in the United States," Journal
       of Policy Analysis and Management 27(2): 233-254.
Burt, Martha R., Laudan Y. Aron, Toby Douglas, Jesse Valente, Edgar Lee, and Britta Iwen.
       1999. "Homelessness: Programs and the People They Serve: Findings of the National
       Survey of Homeless Assistance Providers and Clients." Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
       https://www.urban.org/research/publication/homelessness-programs-and-people-they-
       serve-findings-national-survey-homeless-assistance-providers-and-clients.
Citro, Constance, and Robert Michael, 1995, (eds.) Measuring Poverty: A New Approach.
       Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives. 2000. 2000 Green Book:
       Background Material and Data on Programs within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on
       Ways and Means. 106th Congress, Second Session. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
       Printing Office. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GPO-CPRT-
       106WPRT61710/pdf/GPO-CPRT-106WPRT61710-1.pdf.
Currie, Janet. 2003. "U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs." In Means-Tested Transfer Programs in
       the United States, edited by Moffitt, Robert. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Currie, Janet, and Firouz Gahvari, 2008, "Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory Meets the
       Data." Journal of Economic Literature 46 (2): 333­83.

                                               20
Currie, Janet, and Jeffrey Grogger, 2001, "Explaining Recent Declines in Food Stamp Program
       Participation." Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs: 203­44.
Daponte, Beth Osborne, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor. 1999. "Why Do Low-Income
       Households Not Use Food Stamps? Evidence from an Experiment." Journal of Human
       Resources 34 (3): 612­28. https://doi.org/10.2307/146382.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan and Shannon Phillips, 2014,
       "Estimating the Impact of Trade and Offshoring on American Workers using the Current
       Population Surveys," Review of Economics and Statistics 96(4): 581-595.
Economist, The, 2011, "The Struggle to Eat," Economist Magazine, July 14.
_____________, 2015, "Just a Little Bit Richer," Economist Magazine, April 4.
Edin, Kathryn, and H. Luke Shaefer, 2016, $2.00 a Day: Living on Almost Nothing in America,
       First Mariner.
Falk, Gene, Alison Mitchell, Karen E. Lynch, Maggie McCarty, William R. Morton, Margot L.
       Crandall-Hollick. 2015. "Need-Tested Benefits: Estimated Eligibility and Benefit Receipt
       by Families and Individuals." CRS report no. R44327. Washington, D.C.: Congressional
       Research Service. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44327.
Foster, James, J. Greer, and Erik Thorbecke, 1984, "A Class of Decomposable Poverty
       Measures," Econometrica 52: 761-765.
Ganong, Peter, and Jeffrey B. Liebman, 2018, "The Decline, Rebound, and Further Rise in SNAP
       Enrollment: Disentangling Business Cycle Fluctuations and Policy Changes," American
       Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (4): 153-76.
Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons, 2014, "Explaining Job Polarization:
       Routine-Biased Technological Change and Offshoring," American Economic Review
       104(8): 2509-26.
Gundersen, Craig, and Victor Oliveira, 2001, "The Food Stamp Program and Food
       Insufficiency," American Journal of Agricultural Economics 83(4): 875- 887.
Gundersen, Craig, and James Ziliak, 2018, "Food Insecurity Research in the United States:
       Where We Have Been and Where We Need to Go." Applied Economic Perspectives and
       Policy 40 (1): 119­35.
Haider, Steven J., Alison Jacknowitz, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2003. "Food Stamps and the
       Elderly: Why Is Participation so Low?" Journal of Human Resources 38: 1080.


                                              21
Hardy, Bradley, and James Ziliak, 2014, "Decomposing Trends in Income Volatility: The 'Wild
       Ride' at the Top and Bottom," Economic Inquiry 52(1): 459-476.
Hoynes, Hilary, 2012, "Comment (on Meyer and Sullivan, 2012)," Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, Fall: 133-183.
Hoynes, Hilary, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, 2012. "Work incentives and the Food
       Stamp Program," Journal of Public Economics 96(1): 151-162.
_____________ and _________________________, 2016, "U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs",
       in Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the U.S. Volume I, edited by Robert
       Moffitt, University of Chicago Press.
Jolliffe, Dean, 2003, "Estimating Sampling Variance from the Current Population Survey: A
       Synthetic Design Approach to Correcting Standard Errors." Journal of Economic and
       Social Measurement 28(4): 239­61.
Jolliffe, Dean, Craig Gundersen, Laura Tiehen, and Joshua Winicki, 2005, "Food Stamp Benefits
       and Child Poverty," American Journal of Agricultural Economics 87(3): 569-581.
Kakwani, Nanak, 1993, "Statistical Inference in the Measurement of Poverty," Review of
       Economics and Statistics 75(4): 632-639.
Kang, Kyung Min and Robert Moffitt, 2019, "The Effect of SNAP and School Food Programs
       on Food Security, Diet Quality, and Food Spending: Sensitivity to Program Reporting
       Error," Southern Economic Journal, in press.
Korinek, Anton, Johan Mistiaen and Martin Ravallion, 2006, "Survey Nonresponse and the
       Distribution of Income," Journal of Economic Inequality 4(2): 33­55.
Margitic, Juan and Martin Ravallion, 2019, "Lifting the Floor? Economic Development, Social
       Protection and the Developing World's Poorest," Journal of Development Economics, in
       press.
Meyer, Bruce, and James Sullivan, 2012, "Winning the War: Poverty from the Great Society to
       the Great Recession," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall: 133-183.
Meyer, Bruce, Wallace K. C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan. 2015. "Household Surveys in Crisis."
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (4): 199­226.
Meyer, Bruce, Derek Wu, Victoria R. Mooers and Carla Medalia, 2019, "The Use and Misuse of
       Income Data and Extreme Poverty in the United States," NBER Working 25907.



                                               22
Newey, Whitney and Kenneth West, 1987, "A Simple, Positive Semidefinite, Heteroskedasticity
       and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica 55: 703­708.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman, 2018, "Distributional National
       Accounts: Methods and Estimates for the United States," Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 133(2): 553-610.
Ponza, Michael, James C. Ohls, Lorenzo Moreno, Amy Zambrowski, and Rhoda Cohen. 1999.
       "Customer Service in the Food Stamp Program." Mathematica Policy Research Report,
       No. 19806d533df943278178d9cf1. Washington, D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research.
       https://ideas.repec.org/p/mpr/mprres/19806d533df943278178d9cf1d42f38f.html.
Ravallion, Martin, 2016, "Are the World's Poorest Being Left Behind?," Journal of Economic
       Growth 21(2): 139­164.
______________, 2018, "What Might Explain Today's Conflicting Narratives on Global
       Inequality?" WIDER Working Paper 2018/141.
Short, Kathleen, 2011, "The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2010." Current
       Population Reports no. P60-241. Washington: U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Slesnick, Daniel, 2001, Consumption and Social Welfare, Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press.
Sommeiller, Estelle, and Mark Price. 2018. The New Gilded Age: Income Inequality in the U.S.
       by state, metropolitan area, and county. Economic Policy Institute, July 2018.
United States, Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), undated, Current Population Survey: Handbook
       of Methods. United States, Bureau of Labor Statistics
U.S. Census Bureau. 1991, Income and Poverty in the United States: 1988 and 1989, Current
       Population Reports, P60-171. Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
______________, 2017a, Income and Poverty in the United States: 2016, Current Population
       Reports, P60-259. Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
______________, 2017b. Current Population Survey, 2017 Annual Social and Economic (ASEC)
       Supplement,Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), 2017, "A Short History of SNAP," United
       States Department of Agriculture.
Wilde, Parke, and Mark Nord, 2005, "The Effect of Food Stamps on Food Security: A Panel
       Data Approach," Review of Agricultural Economics 27(3): 425­432.


                                              23
Wolter, Kirk. 2007. Introduction to Variance Estimation. 2nd edition. New York: Springer.
Zedlewski, Sheila R., and Linda Giannarelli. 2015. "TRIM: A Tool for Social Policy Analysis."
       Washington, DC: Urban Institute. https://www.urban.org/research/publication/trim-tool-
       social-policy-analysis.
Ziliak, James, 2016, "Why Are So Many Americans on Food Stamps," In: Bartfeld et al. (eds.)
       SNAP Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Wellbeing. Studies in Social
       Inequality. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.




                                               24
                                           Figure 1: Non-positive values for incomes recorded in CPS


                                               Non-positives as % of population                                    16
                                               Non-positives as % of poor
                                                                                                                   14
Non-positive incomes in CPS (%)




                                  2.4                            % poor                                            12
                                  2.0                          (right axis)                                        10
                                  1.6                                                                              8
                                                                                   % of population
                                  1.2                                                                              6
                                                                                      (left axis)
                                  0.8                                                                              4
                                  0.4
                                  0.0
                                        1988     1992        1996       2000       2004    2008      2012   2016
 Note: "% of population" is based on the count of the US population for which poverty is estimated, i.e.,
 sum of individual expansion factors in CPS unit record data.




                                                                              25
                              Figure 2: Public spending on SNAP and participation rates


                                              (a) Spending per capita of US population

                              16

                              14
SNAP spending per capita




                              12
  (monthly; 2010 prices)




                              10

                               8

                               6

                               4

                               2

                               0
                                    1988      1992      1996      2000      2004      2008    2012     2016




                                              (b) Spending per recipient and participation rates




                                                                                                                      SNAP participation rate (%)
                                                                                                                 12


                                                                                                                 10
                                                                SNAP participation rate
                              140                                   (right axis)                                 8
SNAP spending per recipient
  (monthly in 2010 prices)




                              130                                                                                6
                              120
                                                                                                                 4
                              110

                              100                              SNAP spending per recipient
                                                                       (left axis)
                              90

                              80
                               1984    1988      1992    1996      2000     2004     2008    2012    2016     2020




                                                                  26
                                                                                     Figure 3: SNAP coverage of the poor
                          (% of group for various threshold intervals)   60

                                                                         50
SNAP participation rate




                                                                         40

                                                                         30

                                                                         20

                                                                         10                          <0.5z                 (0.5z, 0.74z)
                                                                                                     (0.75z, 0.99z)        (z, 1.24z)
                                                                         0
                                                                              1988   1992     1996    2000      2004   2008        2012    2016




                                                                                                           27
                                            Figure 4: Floor in the United States 1988-2016 before and after food stamps


                                                          (a) Official poverty threshold for alternative values of 
   Floor as a proprotion of the threshold




                                            .4



                                            .3



                                            .2


                                                           Floor post SNAP (alpha=1)
                                            .1             Floor pre SNAP (alpha=1)
                                                           Floor post SNAP (alpha=2)
                                                           Floor pre SNAP (alpha=2)
                                            .0
                                                   1988     1992     1996     2000      2004     2008   2012     2016



                                                           (b) Official poverty threshold for  = 1 with 95% CI

                                                                                                                               12




                                                                                                                                    Years to not overlap
                                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                                               4
                                             .45
Floor ratio and 95% CI




                                                                                                                               0
                                             .40

                                             .35

                                             .30

                                             .25
                                                   1988      1992     1996       2000     2004      2008    2012        2016
                                                                       Floor pre SNAP          Floor post SNAP
                                                                       Years pre SNAP          Years post SNAP




                                                                                  28
                                                                     (c) Floor anchored to quantile of 20th percentile for alternative values of 


                           Floor as a proportion of the threshold   .4



                                                                    .3



                                                                    .2


                                                                                     Floor post SNAP (alpha=1)
                                                                    .1               Floor pre SNAP (alpha=1)
                                                                                     Floor post SNAP (alpha=2)
                                                                                     Floor pre SNAP (alpha=2)

                                                                    .0
                                                                           1988       1992      1996       2000      2004       2008       2012        2016




                                                                                Figure 5: Effect of excluding non-positives on the floor


                                                                    .5
Floor as a proportion of the threshold




                                                                    .4


                                                                    .3                                                                                        alpha=1


                                                                    .2
                                                                                                                                                              alpha=2
                                                                                     Pre-SNAP (alpha=1)           Pre-SNAP using (+) only (alpha=1)
                                                                    .1               Post-SNAP (alpha=1)          Post-SNAP using (+) only (alpha=1)
                                                                                     Pre-SNAP (alpha=2)           Pre-SNAP using (+) only (alpha=2)
                                                                                     Post-SNAP (alpha=2)          Post-SNAP using (+) only (alpha=2)
                                                                    .0
                                                                         1988      1992       1996         2000     2004        2008        2012        2016




                                                                                                            29
                                                                 Figure 6: Poverty measures


                                               .16

                                               .14

                                               .12
                                                                                                                                       H pre SNAP
Poverty measure




                                               .10                                                                                     H post SNAP
                                                                                                                                       PG pre SNAP
                                               .08                                                                                     PG post SNAP
                                                                                                                                       SPG pre SNAP
                                                                                                                                       SPG post SNAP
                                               .06

                                               .04

                                               .02

                                               .00
                                                     1988     1992      1996     2000      2004     2008      2012      2016


                                                 Note: H: head count index; PG=poverty gap index; SPG=squared poverty gap index



                                                 Figure 7: Floor relative to overall mean and various quantiles


                                               500
Income per capita in $ per day (2010 prices)




                                                                                                                               quantile 99%

                                               400



                                               300

                                                                                                                               quantile 95%
                                               200
                                                                                                                               quantile 90%


                                               100
                                                                                                                               mean
                                                                                                                               median

                                                 0                                                                             floor
                                                      1988     1992      1996      2000      2004     2008      2012      2016




                                                                                     30
Figure 8: Gain in the floor due to SNAP compared to SNAP participation rate and
spending per recipient


                                   .6                         Gain in the floor due to SNAP
                                                              SNAP participation rate
                                   .4                         SNAP spending per recipient
      Deviation from mean (logs)




                                   .2

                                   .0

                                   -.2

                                   -.4

                                   -.6
                                         1988   1992   1996      2000      2004     2008      2012   2016




                                                                  31
                                                                                      Figure 9: Floor transfer efficiency for SNAP


                                                                         3.0
            FTE: Ratio of the gain in the floor due to SNAP



                                                                         2.5
                  to spending on SNAP per capita




                                                                         2.0


                                                                         1.5


                                                                         1.0


                                                                         0.5


                                                                         0.0
                                                                                   1988   1992      1996    2000     2004     2008     2012    2016

Note: FTE calculated for a family of four, two adults, two children, i.e., using a poverty threshold of $15.15 a day in
2010 prices.



         Figure 10: Hypothetical floor on eliminating exclusion errors among the poorest


                                                                               9
                                                                               8
                                                                               7
         Floor for a family of four
                                                      ($ per person per day)




                                                                               6
                                                                               5
                                                                               4
                                                                                                 Floor pre-SNAP (z=$15.15)
                                                                               3
                                                                                                 Floor post-SNAP (z=$15.15)
                                                                               2                 Floor pre-SNAP + mean SNAP per recipient
                                                                               1
                                                                               0
                                                                                   1988    1992      1996     2000     2004     2008        2012   2016



                                                                                                            32
Table 1: Summary statistics and estimates of the floor ratio before and after SNAP
                          Quantile              SNAP          SNAP         Poverty     Poverty rate    Floor ratio    Floor ratio
                           of 99th      Gini   spending     participa-    rate (pre-      (post-      (pre-SNAP;     (post-SNAP;
          Mean     Median percentile   index   per capita    tion (%)    SNAP; %)       SNAP; %)         = 1)            = 1)
 1988     65.23    50.83   275.58      0.404     7.40           8.41        13.04         12.58          0.377          0.420
 1989     66.44    51.44   287.74      0.406     7.68           8.43        12.82         12.25          0.376          0.419
 1990     64.25    49.82   273.77      0.404     8.70           9.17        13.51         12.91          0.384          0.427
 1991     63.63    49.84   272.16      0.407     8.71           9.26        14.22         13.57          0.372          0.415
 1992     63.25    49.72   268.72      0.410     9.25           9.88        14.52         13.86          0.364          0.405
 1993     62.98    48.87   268.17      0.417     11.26         10.61        15.14         14.42          0.363          0.401
 1994     64.28    49.82   279.59      0.416     10.09         10.15        14.55         13.78          0.361          0.398
 1995     68.84    50.78   345.17      0.444     10.47          9.51        13.81         13.07          0.363          0.395
 1996     69.99    50.74   353.06      0.448     9.81           8.95        13.72         13.10          0.361          0.396
 1997     73.00    52.91   381.59      0.450     8.33           7.75        13.25         12.69          0.338          0.368
 1998     75.38    54.96   393.40      0.448     7.30           6.71        12.72         12.22          0.330          0.352
 1999     75.98    55.99   375.40      0.438     6.34           6.11        11.79         11.35          0.334          0.356
 2000     78.54    56.77   405.29      0.451     5.71           5.56        11.25         10.91          0.331          0.351
 2001     79.18    56.68   407.80      0.457     6.24           5.65        11.69         11.31          0.308          0.327
 2002     77.32    56.10   388.82      0.456     6.60           6.03        12.12         11.74          0.311          0.332
 2003     77.53    56.21   386.92      0.458     7.48           6.57        12.46         12.02          0.298          0.320
 2004     76.59    55.30   393.36      0.460     7.87           6.80        12.73         12.18          0.298          0.322
 2005     77.90    55.94   410.52      0.463     8.42           7.01        12.60         12.05          0.295          0.318
 2006     80.08    57.40   433.98      0.466     7.39           6.51        12.30         11.75          0.299          0.321
 2007     78.52    57.18   403.24      0.457     7.56           6.79        12.48         11.94          0.302          0.325
 2008     78.93    57.13   397.86      0.461     9.93           8.08        13.23         12.54          0.298          0.321
 2009     75.88    54.50   391.44      0.468     13.80          9.91        14.34         13.24          0.294          0.322
 2010     74.89    53.97   370.96      0.468     14.90         11.29        15.11         13.91          0.291          0.319
 2011     75.50    53.22   399.13      0.476     15.06         11.43        14.99         13.80          0.286          0.318
 2012     76.00    53.94   393.30      0.477     14.79         11.47        14.97         13.80          0.292          0.325
 2013     76.55    54.64   395.07      0.475     14.03         11.43        14.48         13.39          0.287          0.317
 2014     79.30    56.30   409.17      0.479     15.34         11.87        14.77         13.67          0.274          0.302
 2015     82.80    59.27   426.71      0.476     14.81         11.24        13.54         12.58          0.276          0.300
 2016       85.40       60.59      451.60      0.478      13.37      10.60           12.70          11.88           0.269          0.292
 Mean       73.94       54.17      366.88      0.449      9.95        8.73           13.41          12.71           0.322          0.351
St. dev.     6.39        3.15      56.70       0.025      3.15        2.04            1.13          0.92            0.036          0.043
Note: Monetary values in real 2010 $US per day except SNAP is per month. Gini index is for families (as usually calculated for the US). Poverty rate as %
of population. Floor as a proportion of the threshold using  = 1 and official poverty threshold. Authors' calculations based on CPS micro data.




                                                                       34
Table 2: Test regressions for the pre-SNAP floor ratio

                           Using official poverty line to define       Using quantile of the 20th percentile
                                  the reference group                     to define the reference group

 SNAP spending per                0.027                0.035                -0.004                0.002
 capita (log)                    (0.042)              (0.040)               (0.033)              (0.030)

 Lagged dep. var.               0.388***              0.299*                 0.287               0.294*
                                (0.140)               (0.171)               (0.172)              (0.171)
                                -0.008**              -0.006               -0.007**              -0.005
 Year
                                 (0.004)              (0.004)               (0.003)              (0.003)
                                14.995**              10.580               12.388**              9.304
 Constant
                                 (6.524)              (8.489)               (4.801)             (6.414)
                                                  Log mean, log                             Log mean, log
                                                    median, log                               median, log
 Other controls                Log mean                                   Log mean
                                                   Gini, Global                              Gini, Global
                                                  Financial Crisis                          Financial Crisis
 R2                              0.971                 0.975                 0.957               0.964
Note: Dependent var.=log pre-SNAP floor. N=28 (1988 lost due to lag). HAC standard errors in parentheses.
***: 1% significance;**: 5%; *10%. Floor ratio is used. Monetary variables are daily per capita. The control for
the Global Financial Crisis is a dummy variable for 2009-11.




                                                                               35
Table 3: Regressions for the log gain in the floor due to SNAP as a function of SNAP spending

                           Using official poverty line to define the reference            Using quantile of the 20th percentile to define the
                                                 group                                                    reference group
 SNAP spending per          0.473***               n.a.                n.a.               0.566***                n.a.                 n.a.
 capita (log)                (0.155)                                                       (0.146)
 SNAP participation            n.a.             0.785***            0.912***                 n.a.              0.821***             0.911***
 rate (log)                                      (0.225)             (0.085)                                    (0.195)              (0.078)
 SNAP spending per             n.a.              -0.233              -0.418                  n.a.                0.034               -0.062
 recipient (log)                                 (0.347)             (0.309)                                    (0.270)              (0.238)

 Lagged dep. var.            0.414**              0.126                n.a.                0.327**               0.092                 n.a.
                              0.157              (0.193)                                   (0.144)              (0.163)
                            -0.019***          -0.017***            -0.019***             -0.015***            -0.011**            -0.012***
 Year
                              (0.006)            (0.005)              (0.005)               (0.004)             (0.004)              (0.004)
                           35.994***            32.472**            35.308***            27.447***             19.806**              20.342
 Constant
                            (10.578)            (10.494)             (9.675)              (7.174)               (7.836)              (7.772)
 R2                           0.904               0.918               0.921                 0.908                0.920                0.920
Note: Dependent var.=log (post SNAP floor - pre-SNAP floor). N=28 (1988 lost due to lag). HAC standard errors in parentheses. ***: 1% significance;**: 5%;
*10%. Monetary variables are daily per capita.
