                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE IMPACT OF MEDICAID ON MEDICAL UTILIZATION IN A VULNERABLE POPULATION:
                      EVIDENCE FROM COFA MIGRANTS

                                        Timothy J. Halliday
                                         Randall Q. Akee
                                          Tetine Sentell
                                           Megan Inada
                                          Jill Miyamura

                                        Working Paper 26030
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26030


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2019




  We thank the University of Hawaii Economic Research Organization for providing funding to
  purchase data from the Hawaii Health Information Corporation. We would also like to thank
  Marcella Alsan, Marianne Bitler, Carl Bonham, Patrick Button, David Card, Anita Hofschneider,
  Lester Lusher, Gregory Maskarinec, Craig McIntosh, Teresa Molina, Judy Mohr Peterson,
  Ranjani Starr, and Seiji Yamada for useful comments and discussions. We also acknowledge
  seminar participants at the University of Hawaii Applied Micro Workshop,the NBER Workshop
  on the Economics of Indigenous Peoples and Institutions, the Trans-Pacific Labor Seminar, and
  Kokua Kalihi Valley Comprehensive Family Services. Victoria Fan contributed to an earlier draft
  of this paper. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
  not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2019 by Timothy J. Halliday, Randall Q. Akee, Tetine Sentell, Megan Inada, and Jill
  Miyamura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
  quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
  source.
The Impact of Medicaid on Medical Utilization in a Vulnerable Population: Evidence from
COFA Migrants
Timothy J. Halliday, Randall Q. Akee, Tetine Sentell, Megan Inada, and Jill Miyamura
NBER Working Paper No. 26030
July 2019
JEL No. I10,I14,J61

                                         ABSTRACT

In March 2015, the State of Hawaii stopped covering the vast majority of migrants from countries
belonging to the Compact of Free Association (COFA) in the state Medicaid program. COFA
migrants were instead required to obtain private insurance in the exchanges established under the
Affordable Care Act. Using statewide administrative hospital discharge data, we show that
Medicaid-funded hospitalizations and emergency room visits declined in this population by 69%
and 42% after the expiration of Medicaid eligibility. This decrease occurred despite the fact that
low-income COFA households were eligible for state-funded premium coverage for private
insurance. Utilization funded by private insurance did increase, but not enough to offset the
declines in Medicaid-funded utilization. Uninsured ER visits increased as a consequence of the
expiration of Medicaid benefits. Paradoxically, we also find a substantial increase in Medicaid-
funded ER visits by infants after the expiration of benefits.

Timothy J. Halliday                             Megan Inada
University of Hawaii at Manoa                   Kokua Kalihi Valley Comprehensive
2424 Maile Way                                  Family Services
Saunders Hall 533                               2239 N School St
Honolulu, HI 96822                              Honolulu, HI 96819
halliday@hawaii.edu                             minada@kkv.net

Randall Q. Akee                                 Jill Miyamura
Department of Public Policy                     Hawaii Health Information Corporation
University of California, Los Angeles           jmiyamura@hhic.org
3250 Public Policy Building
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
rakee@ucla.edu

Tetine Sentell
University of Hawaii at Manoa
tsentell@hawaii.edu
    I.       Introduction

    A principal question in health economics is how insurance coverage affects the demand for
health services. Those that lack financial resources are often those most in need of medical
services, and, in the absence of adequate insurance, low-income populations may forgo
necessary medical care. These concerns have been a driving force for the expansion of
government-provided or government-subsidized health insurance in many countries around the
world, including the United States. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 established
subsidies for low-income households to purchase private insurance in marketplaces and
incentives for states to expand coverage in their Medicaid programs. As a consequence of the
ACA, the percentage of uninsured people in the United States decreased by 41%, a reduction
from 48 to 28 million between 2011 and 2015 (Cohen et al, 2017). Importantly, the ACA had the
largest impacts on the poor and on minorities (Cohen et al, 2017).
    At a time when the United States was expanding health insurance coverage for its poorest
citizens, the State of Hawaii reduced health care coverage for a small, but vulnerable, portion of
its population. Until March of 2015, the State of Hawaii enrolled eligible migrants of countries
belonging to the Compact of Free Association (COFA) in a state-funded Medicaid plan. COFA
migrants are from the Republic of Palau, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Federated
States of Micronesia (FSM), three nation-states located in the Pacific Ocean. 1 At the time, the
State of Hawaii was estimated to have roughly 28,000 COFA migrants (commonly referred to as
"Micronesians"). Most COFA migrants are not US citizens, but under the terms of the federal
Compacts, are guaranteed certain prerogatives, such as free entry to the US and the right to work.
While the Compacts allow for these rights, their allowance for access to health care, particularly
Medicaid, has been a highly-contested issue.
    In general, Medicaid is jointly financed by federal and state governments. Federal welfare
reform in 1996 suspended federal funds for COFA populations through Medicaid. Despite a lack

1
  The Compact of Free Association was signed for the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the
Marshall Islands in 1986 (and in 1994 for Palau). Previously, these island groups were under part of the Trust
Territory of the Pacific which was administered by the U.S. after World War II. After these countries became
independent from the Trust Territory, the citizens of these countries elected to continue their close relationship with
the U.S. under a compact of free association (COFA). In exchange for U.S. military access to FSM's ocean
territories (an area of over 1 million square miles), the United States agreed to provide governmental funding for the
FSM over the course of 15 years; funding was extended beyond that initial time period and is set to expire in 2026.
Additionally, FSM citizens were allowed free entry into the United States at any time and, in theory, had access to
medical coverage such as Medicaid and other governmental and social services.

                                                           2
of federal Medicaid financing for COFA migrants, the State of Hawaii continued to provide
coverage via state-funded health insurance in various forms, including a state Medicaid plan
provided by the State of Hawaii Medicaid agency (called Med-QUEST). Following a court
ruling in April of 2014, state Medicaid program coverage for this population was suspended. 2 As
a consequence, most COFA migrants were ultimately denied access to the Medicaid program in
March of 2015. However, some COFA migrants were allowed to maintain Medicaid program
coverage. First, CHIPRA (Children's Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act) continued
to cover pregnant women and newborns. Second, the Aged, Blind and Disabled (ABD) program
continued to be available to eligible COFA migrants as well. The majority of COFA migrants,
however, needed to purchase private insurance in the health insurance exchanges established by
the ACA in order to continue their medical coverage; they were not eligible for the Medicaid
expansion created by the ACA (McElfish, et al. 2015). COFA migrants were required to select
private insurance from the state of Hawaii's health insurance exchange -- with the state paying
the premium for insurance for households with incomes less than 100% of the FPL provided that
they chose a Silver-level plan and could verify income (Hawaii DHS, 2014).
       In this paper, we employ statewide administrative data of all hospital discharges in Hawaii to
estimate the effects of expiring Medicaid program coverage on medical utilization among COFA
migrants. The data are close to a census of all hospitalizations in Hawaii over the period 2014-
2015. The data also contain a unique patient identification number which enables us to track
individual utilization over time. Using these data, we construct an individual-level panel that
covers the 24 months from January 2014 to December 2015, which includes months before and
after the expiration of Medicaid benefits. The discharge data contain an ethnicity variable. We
employ data for three ethnicities: COFA migrants as the treatment group, non-Hispanic whites as
the control group, and Japanese as the placebo group. To address omitted zeros for non-utilizers,
we include dummy observations and frequency weights corresponding to population numbers
obtained from the American Community Survey (ACS).
       To investigate the impact of the expiration of Medicaid program benefits on utilization
among COFA migrants, we use a difference-in-difference research design. We show that there
was a sharp reduction in the number of emergency and in-patient medical care admissions
charged to Hawaii Medicaid (hereafter referred to as `Medicaid') after the expiration of program

2
    For details, see McElfish, et al. (2015).

                                                   3
benefits for COFA migrants relative to the non-Hispanic white and Japanese populations in
Hawaii. In particular, Medicaid-funded ER visits and inpatient admissions declined by 69% and
42%, respectively. This sharp reduction in utilization is consistent with other studies that have
investigated the impact of the expiration of Medicaid benefits such as studies on Tennessee after
it discontinued Medicaid benefits (see DeLeire 2018, Tarazi 2017, Tello-Trillo 2016). At the
same time, there was a substantial increase in the number of emergency room (ER) visits and
inpatient admissions charged to private payers, indicating that there was a move towards private
insurance among COFA migrants after Medicaid program benefits expired. However, the
magnitude of this increase was smaller than the reduction in Medicaid-funded utilizations. As a
result, net inpatient admissions and emergency visits declined.
   Importantly, after Medicaid program benefits expired, there was an increase in uninsured ER
visits. In particular, for every three COFA migrants who had an ER visit that was paid by private
insurance after Medicaid benefits expired, there was a COFA migrant who had an uninsured ER
visit. In addition, about one-third of the decline in Medicaid-funded ER visits after the expiration
of benefits was made up for by an increase in uninsured ER visits. This is strongly indicative that
the effort to enroll COFA migrants in private insurance after the expiration of benefits was not
sufficient to make up for the loss of access to the Medicaid program itself.
   Another key finding of this study is that the expiration of benefits disproportionately
impacted infants. We show that inpatient utilization of infants declined dramatically after the
expiration of benefits. However, Medicaid-funded ER visits by infants increased by a large
margin. Due to limitations of the hospital discharge dataset, the precise mechanism underlying
this finding is unknown; as noted previously, CHIPRA was extended for this population over this
time period. We suspect that one plausible mechanism is that as a consequence of the expiration
of benefits, new mothers had fewer out-patient visits for their newborns and, instead, relied on
the ER (as opposed to pediatricians) for treating their sick newborns, potentially due to a
fundamental misunderstanding of which programs they would continue to be eligible for after
the March 2015 reduction in Medicaid program coverage. This reduced contact with
pediatricians ostensibly would have reduced inpatient admissions since pediatricians typically
refer their patients to surgeons and other specialists who work in hospitals.
       The main result of this paper is that the expiration of Medicaid program benefits reduced
utilization on-net for COFA migrants. There are two (related) mechanisms by which this could


                                                 4
have happened: increased cost-sharing and low take-up of private insurance. Note that while our
study cannot disentangle these mechanisms from each another, the outcome is similar in that
patients will consume less medical care when expected out-of-pocket expenses increase.
   First, expiration of benefits may have increased the per-unit cost of services since Medicaid
has a well-established fee schedule with generally lower reimbursement amounts than private
insurance, places restrictions on co-payments, and prohibits balance billing which is the practice
of providers charging patients for what insurers do not reimburse. Theoretically, this increase in
prices is expected to reduce the consumption of medical services. Indeed, much cited evidence
from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Manning, et al. 1987; Newhouse, et al. 1993;
Aron-Dine et al. 2013) and the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (Finkelstein et al, 2012)
shows that increased cost sharing results in lower utilization. There is also similar quasi-
experimental evidence from Card, et al. (2008) in the United States and Shigeoka (2014) in
Japan. A reduction in medical utilization as a consequence of an increase in out-of-pocket
expenditures without a corresponding underlying change in health status is termed ex post moral
hazard or just moral hazard in the health economics literature (Pauly 1968; Cutler and
Zeckhauser 2000).
   Second, moving COFA migrants from a relatively simple public insurance scheme to more
complicated exchanges might have resulted in lower insurance take-up rates (and hence
utilization) due to an increase in the complexity of obtaining insurance coverage. In the transition
from Medicaid enrollment to private insurance, COFA migrants might have gone uninsured after
the expiration of Medicaid program benefits, potentially resulting in an increase in out-of-pocket
expenses or at least medical charges to individuals that may have gone unpaid. Lower insurance
coverage take-up is likely, given that education levels and literacy rates are substantially lower
for this population compared to other ethnic groups. For example, Akee (2010) showed that
7.8% of adult male immigrants from the FSM have no education, 6.5% have between one and six
years of education, and 16.6% have between seven and eight years of education; the average
years of schooling in this population is 10 years. Baicker, et al. (2012) has also showed that take-
up rates of low-cost health insurance are low among those of lower income and education levels.
Despite considerable outreach by advocates during the transition from Medicaid program
coverage to state-subsidized private insurance coverage, this take-up issue was widely expected.



                                                  5
    As pointed out by Einav and Finkelstein (2018), how medical utilization responds to out-of-
pocket costs has been a source of debate for quite some time. Since the RAND Health Insurance
Experiment and subsequent studies, the prevailing evidence suggests that the demand for
medical care slopes downward. The bulk of our results are consistent with this view. However, a
competing view is that the demand for medical care at times slopes upwards so that people
facing the lowest cost sharing consume the least during the course of year (Einav and
Finkelstein, 2018). The idea is that consuming health care that is ostensibly preventive in nature
today, can forestall the need for costlier care in the future or that cheaper visits to a primary care
physician can substitute for more expensive ER visits. 3 Some ACA-related policy discussions
invoked the concept that expanded access to insurance would allow people to consume cheaper
preventive care rather seek treatment in the ER. 4 In contrast to this view, however, evidence
from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (Finkelstein et al, 2012) showed the opposite,
namely, that randomized access to Medicaid increases ER utilization. We also show that access
to Medicaid among COFA migrants increases ER utilization for everyone except for infants. For
the youngest COFA migrants, there was an increase in ER visits after Medicaid program benefits
expired for adults, even though the infants might have still been covered under the program,
which is a result that is new to the literature.
    We conclude that these results provide additional evidence on the responsiveness of the
demand for health services to the cost of services in a vulnerable migrant population. The
removal of access to the Medicaid program for this population (even when replaced by stated-
subsidized private insurance) resulted in only some shifting towards private insurance. However,
this shift does not fully compensate for the decline in utilizations previously financed by
Medicaid. In addition, we show that uninsured ER visits have increased as a consequence of the
expiration of Medicaid benefits. Overall, our results suggest that there are now COFA migrants
forgoing health care services.
    The balance of this paper is as follows. In the next section, we provide some institutional
background on the history of COFA migrants in Hawaii and their ability to access health
insurance. After that, we discuss the discharge data that we employed and how we used it to



3
 For example, the model presented in Goldman and Philipson (2007) is very much in this spirit.
4
 See Einav and Finkelstein (2018) for a discussion in the case of Michigan's expansion of its Medicaid program
after the implementation of the ACA.

                                                        6
construct an individual level panel. We then discuss the methods that we employ. After that, we
discuss our results and conclude.

   II.     Some Institutional Background

   Publicly-sponsored health care coverage for COFA migrants by the State of Hawaii has been
subject to various successive federal and state policy decisions. These policy changes resulted in
public confusion about the actual health programs and specific benefits for which COFA
migrants would be eligible. Such policy changes thus can also serve as a barrier to insurance
enrollment and to obtaining health care, further compounding the socioeconomic vulnerability
and linguistic and cultural barriers facing this community. Here, we provide a brief overview of
recent and relevant policies.
   In the 1996 Welfare Reform Act, certain non-U.S. citizens including citizens of COFA
nations were deemed ineligible for federal public assistance including Medicaid. Under this Act,
immigrants to the US were made ineligible for federal Medicaid assistance unless they have
completed a five-year waiting period following immigration in the U.S. However, most COFA
residents are classified not as immigrants, but instead as legal migrants and specifically
permanently classified as "non-qualified aliens." Thus, under this migration status, these
individuals are not qualified for federal assistance. To make up for the shortfall in the wake of
the 1996 welfare reform, the State of Hawaii began to provide comprehensive health coverage
for COFA residents for Medicaid beginning in 1997 using state funds only (Rilkon et al., 2010).
However, given that the agreement with COFA nations is a federal not a state policy, the
financial responsibility for providing these benefits has often been viewed as disproportionately
burdensome to the State of Hawaii, relative to limited federal support available (typically
provided through limited Department of Interior funds to different state and territorial
jurisdictions affected by COFA migration) (Hawaii DHS, 2009).
   After the passage of ACA in 2010, COFA residents along with other lawfully present
noncitizens were eligible to purchase health insurance through state health insurance exchanges.
However, Medicaid-ineligible noncitizens would not be eligible for federal subsidies for
premium-free assistance. Instead, the ACA required Medicaid-ineligible noncitizens with
incomes less than 100% of the federal poverty line (FPL) to pay the same premium for insurance
purchased on the exchange as a citizen who has income of 100% FPL (Hawaii DHS, 2014).


                                                 7
   In the same year, due to budgetary shortfalls the State of Hawaii elected to cancel the
Medicaid program eligibility for non-pregnant adult COFA residents. Instead, the State created a
limited medical assistance program called Basic Health Hawaii (BHH). Several court cases
contesting this change in policy were filed. Following a lawsuit, a federal court issued an
injunction "requiring the state to provide Medicaid-like benefits to all non-pregnant adult COFA
residents who would otherwise be eligible for Medicaid but for their citizenship status." The
State appealed this injunction to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, which ruled in favor of the
State of Hawaii in April 2014. The injunction remained in place until November 2014 when the
Supreme Court declined to hear the case, thus ending the plaintiffs' appeal of the Ninth Circuit
decision.
   Subsequently, the State created a policy in which non-pregnant adult COFA migrants who
were not ABD became ineligible for Medicaid program benefits beginning in March of 2015
(Hawaii DHS, 2014; McElfish et al, 2015). Medicaid program coverage effectively ended for
COFA migrants in the State of Hawaii except for children, pregnant women, and people who
were ADB. Infants and pregnant women remained eligible for Medicaid from CHIPRA and
those who were ABD were able to receive the same level of benefits as those available under
Medicaid.
   The non-pregnant, non-ABD COFA adults were instructed to buy private health insurance on
the Hawaii Health Connector, the state's health insurance exchange with premiums to be
subsidized. On the exchange, COFA migrants could choose from either of two private insurers
(Kaiser Permanente or Hawaii Medical Service Association (HMSA)), with the state paying the
premium for insurance purchased for those with incomes less than 100% of the FPL provided
that they chose a Silver-level plan and could verify household income (Hawaii DHS, 2014). The
premium assistance program, however, did not pay for any deductible, co-payment, co-
insurance, or other cost-sharing arrangements, in contrast to Hawaii Medicaid coverage.
However, Kaiser waived these costs for those meeting eligibility requirements by demonstrating
financial need.
   The final policy shift to insurance exchange plans was a source of much confusion in the
community. While outreach volunteers and workers held information sessions and went door-to-
door to share relevant information, enrollment on the exchange itself was confusing.
Compounding these challenges were the technical challenges troubling the Hawaii Health


                                                 8
Connector website. In 2015, only a few months after the enrollment period for the COFA
migrants to change to the private insurance, the Connector was closed down and to be replaced
by the federally-managed exchange. This meant that anyone who had been enrolled in the
connector had to re-enroll using Healthcare.gov, causing further confusion and additional
outreach to the COFA community (Princeton, 2017). Unlike the Hawaii Health Connector,
Healthcare.gov is not available in COFA languages, adding more challenges (Princeton, 2017).
In the year 2015 only, the State's Medicaid program did institute auto-enrollment so those being
dropped and those who had not chosen a plan were automatically placed into one of the two
private insurance plans, with an intended 50/50 split. A recent policy analysis estimated that
3,600 COFA Hawaii residents enrolled in coverage in Kaiser in 2015 and 5,500 in HMSA
(Princeton, 2017).

    III.     Data Description

The data used in this study are provided by the Hawaii Health Information Corporation (HHIC),
a private, not-for-profit organization that was based in Honolulu, Hawaii. HHIC collected data
from hospitals in Hawaii. Its catchment area included all hospitals in the State of Hawaii. 5
    We utilized raw data from HHIC that consisted of all utilizations of inpatient and emergency
medical services over the period January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2015 for all individuals with
Japanese, Caucasian, or Micronesian ethnicities. In total, we used data on 409,556 specific
utilizations. For our analysis, we only use utilizations for Hawaii residents (i.e. people with
addresses in the State of Hawaii). These data include information on the type of discharge (i.e.
inpatient or ER), admission and discharge dates, ethnicity (e.g. Micronesian, Japanese, or
Caucasian), gender, age, payer type (e.g. Medicaid, private insurance), total billed/charged, and
principal diagnosis and procedural codes. A critical feature of these data is that they include a
unique patient identification number which allows us to identify the same patient over time in the
raw data. This allows us to construct a panel in which we track utilization of a given individual
for each month between January 2014 and December 2015. If no admissions are reported in a




5
 The HHIC data for Tripler Army Medical Center do not include race information so we do not use hospitalizations
and ER visits for this hospital. Accordingly, the data were thus nearly a census.


                                                       9
given month in the raw data, this indicates that no utilization likely took place in that month
given the large catchment area of the HHIC data.
   One important feature of the raw HHIC data is that they contain exact birthdates and death
dates (for those who died during 2014-15 and provided that they died in a hospital). For people
who were born during 2014-15, the panel begins on the month and year of their birth. For people
who we know to have died during 2014-15, the panel ends on the month and year of their death.
   Descriptive statistics from the raw discharge data are reported in Table 1a. The bulk of the
sample is Caucasian comprising 65.6% of all utilizations, followed by Japanese (28.2%) and
Micronesians (6.3%). This sample has slightly more women (51.2%) than men (48.8%). Finally,
most of the utilizations in our sample were for people on private plans (32.4%), Medicare
(28.3%), and then Med-QUEST (28.0%). Roughly 4% of the utilizations in the raw data were
billed to the patient (as opposed to an insurer).
   To put the data in a format suitable for regression analysis, we created an individual-level
panel in which we tracked utilization for all months between January 2014 and December 2015.
To do this, we computed the total number of admissions and charges in a given month for a
given individual. We used the discharge date from the raw data to date the utilization. If no
utilization took place for an individual in a month, we entered a zero for the cost and utilization
variables. Next, we dropped all individual/month observations for which total charge exceeded
one million dollars. This resulted in a final panel data set containing 205,691 individuals and
4,782,091 month/individual observations.
   The HHIC data and the resulting panel described herein only include individuals with at least
one admission to a hospital or an ER during 2014-15. The sample excludes people who had no
such contact with the medical system during this time (i.e. people who had no inpatient
admission or emergency room visit during this time period). Importantly, if we did observe data
for these individuals, the dependent variables (most likely) would have been a 24-month period
string of zeros given HHIC's almost universal catchment area.
   Table 1b presents population counts from the American Community Survey (ACS). The five-
year counts from the ACS from 2011-2015 correspond to people who report Micronesian
(excluding Guamanian/Chamorro), Japanese, or White as one of their ethnicities. Our estimates
of ACA-based population of Micronesians, Japanese, and Whites are, respectively, 27,890,
310,595, and 604,474, whereas corresponding counts in the HHIC data are 11,530, 63,160, and


                                                    10
131,327 indicating that there are many missing zeros from our panel indicating that they did not
use any acute care services.
    The solution to this is fairly simple. For each of the three ethnicities considered and for each
age/gender category, we added a single dummy observation in which all of the outcome
variables were coded as zeros. We then created a set of frequency weights as follows. All
individuals in the initial HHIC panel received a weight of unity since they represent exactly one
population unit. For each of the dummy observations, which correspond to the omitted zeros
from the HHIC data, we set the weight equal to the difference between the population counts for
the ethnicity/age/gender category from the ACS and the corresponding ethnicity/age/gender
category from the HHIC data. This procedure ensures that the denominators in our means
correspond to the population counts as opposed to those who were merely present in the HHIC
data (see Appendix A for additional details). 6 Summary statistics on utilization and charges
from the panel are reported in Tables 1c and 1d. All statistics use the frequency weights and
address the issue of omitted zeros. Table 1c reports statistics for all individuals and Table 1d
reports statistics for COFA migrants for the period prior to March 1, 2015. In each of these
tables, descriptive statistics are reported for individuals of all ages in the top panel, people under
65 years in the middle panel, and people 65 and over in the bottom panel. Utilization and charges
are broken down by inpatient admissions and ER visits. We also report statistics for all
utilization under the heading "all payers," utilization charged to Medicaid, utilization charged to
private insurance, and utilization not charged to any payer, "uninsured."
    In the top panel of Table 1c, we see that on average there were 0.0042 inpatient admissions
and 0.0135 emergency room visits per patient-month. This translates to an inpatient admission
about every 19 years and an ER admission about every 6 years for entire population. On average,
total charges per patient-month for all admissions (i.e. inpatient and ER) were $176.48. The
average amount charged to Medicaid was $33.51 and to private payers was $47.48. The
remainder was paid by other payers such as Medicare.
    Table 1d provides descriptive statistics from the COFA population for the period prior to
March 2015. We do this to provide the reader with a baseline to which they should compare the
treatment effects that we will compute. The table shows that COFA migrants are sicker than the


6
 Note that the counts of many groups in the US Census are not perfect. This is particularly true of marginal groups,
who may be undercounted. Accordingly, we do conduct some sensitivity analysis.

                                                         11
overall study sample. For example, the mean of hospital admissions per patient-month among
COFA migrants under 65 was 0.0075, whereas it was 0.0032 for the entire sample under age 65
in the previous table. Accordingly, the hospitalization rate for COFA migrants is more than twice
that of the study sample. Similarly, the lower health status among COFA migrants is also
reflected by the observation that Micronesians accounted for 6.3% of the study discharges for the
three ethnicities, but 3.0% of the state's population of the corresponding ethnicities.
   In Figure 1, we display histograms depicting total admissions per patient-month charged to
Medicaid, private insurance, Medicare, and the individual by ethnic group for the entire sample
period over 2014-2015. The top panel shows inpatient admissions and the bottom panel shows
ER visits. The left panel shows utilizations for people under 65 years and the right panel
corresponds to people 65 years and older. Several observations are apparent. First, for the
duration of our sample, COFA migrants are substantially more likely to have their utilizations
charged to Medicaid than either the Japanese or Caucasians. Second, we see a discontinuous
jump in total charges to public insurance for people 65 years and older. However, while
utilizations of the Japanese and Caucasians are charged to Medicare, COFA migrants are by-and-
large covered by Medicaid when they are elderly which is consistent with the discussion in the
previous section. Third, COFA migrants visit the ER at much higher rates than the other two
groups. Fourth, there is a much higher rate of uninsured COFA migrants in ER usage than either
the Japanese or Caucasians (see bottom row of the figure).
         Finally, we can use the statistics in Table 1d for COFA migrants to estimate the total cost
of providing Medicaid benefits to this population for the State. For all COFA migrants, the State
was charged $234.13 per patient/month for inpatient and ER services. Table 1b indicates that
there were 27,890 Micronesians in the State. Accordingly, over the course of a year, this sums to
$78,358,628.40 that was charged to the State for inpatient and ER services. A typical assumption
on the payment-charge ratio for Medicaid is 2/3 which results in a total cost of about $52.5
million to provide inpatient and ER services to COFA migrants. Note that total expenditures by
the State of Hawaii in 2014 were about $10.7 billion (Rosewicz 2018). Accordingly, the cost of
providing medical services to COFA migrants for the State constituted approximately 0.5 % of
the State's budget in 2014.

   IV.      Methods


                                                 12
To identify the effects of the expiration of Medicaid benefits on medical utilization among
COFA migrants, we employ a difference-in-difference (DD) research design with individual
fixed effects. We let  denote a particular outcome for individual  at month . The time period
in our study is the 24 months between January 2014 and December 2015. The main outcomes
that we consider are the total number of inpatient admissions or ER visits in a month and the
corresponding total amount charged. We further disaggregate visits by charges to Medicaid, to
private insurance, or to the individual.
   Our main analysis can be thought of as examining the effect of the change in publicly-
provided health insurance on different types of health services. We ask whether there is a change
in the total inpatient admissions or ER visits as a result of the program change. We then separate
out the outcome variable by whether the subsequent health services were paid by private
insurance or Medicaid. Treatment is identified by ethnic group. The treatment group is the
COFA population which is identified as "Micronesian" in our data. For convenience, we have
chosen Caucasians as the control group and Japanese as placebo group (and the results are the
same regardless of comparison group).
   For a given outcome variable  , the main estimation equation that we employ can then be
expressed as:



          =  +  +    +    + ( ) +                                                                 (1)


where  is a dummy variable that is equal to one when the calendar month is between
March 2015 and December 2015,  is a dummy for an individual of Japanese ethnicity, 
is a dummy that is equal to one if the individual is Micronesian, and  is the individual's age
at time t. The parameter  is an individual fixed effect that adjusts for any unobserved time-
invariant characteristics that might impact medical demand or might be associated with
treatment. The parameter  is the coefficient on the placebo and is expected to be zero. Our
parameter of interest is , the difference-in-difference estimate of the effect of the change in
coverage on medical utilization. We clustered all standard errors by individuals.
       We can modify equation (1) to account for a richer form of heterogeneity. Specifically,
we consider the following variant:


                                                 13
          =  +   +  +    +    +                                                                                 (2)


which includes a heterogeneous time trend given by  . Note that the heterogeneous trend
basically obviates the need for adjusting for age. This specification hedges against some
violations of the parallel trends assumption required in the DD model since the trend is allowed
to vary across individuals. To estimate this model, we first difference the model to obtain


                 =  +  +    +    + 


and, so the coefficient on the trend becomes a fixed effect in the first differenced model. We
then apply the standard within group estimator to the first differenced model given above to
estimate . This specification requires parallel trends in the model in first differences but allows
for violations of the parallel trends assumption in levels and, so it is a very robust estimation.
    Finally, we also estimate two additional variants of equation (1). The first is a standard event
analysis. For these estimations, we include a complete set of time dummies and their interactions
with the COFA dummy. Specifically, we estimated the model


                                    24

                =  +  +   ×  + ( ) +                                                                            (3)
                                   =2



where the  denotes one of 24 months during 2014 and 2015. 7 For each of these estimations, we
plot the  estimates for all . These estimations will also shed light on the parallel trends
assumption as the  for the period before March 2015 should be zero if it holds.
         The second variant of equation (1) allows us to investigate heterogeneity in the treatment
effect by age. For these estimations, we include a complete set of age dummies as well as their
interactions with the COFA dummy. For this, we estimated the model


7
  Note that for this specification, we combined the Japanese and Caucasians into the control group. We did this
because the subsequent analysis did not indicate that there were different effects on the placebo group. Accordingly,
we opted to combine the two groups for the sake of efficiency and parsimony. In addition, the omitted time
interaction in the summation is the first period, January 2014.

                                                         14
                                

     =  +  +  ( +  ×  +  ×  ×  ) +                                                                              (4)
                               =1


where  denotes a five year age bin between ages one and 95. Note that we employed a separate
age bin for infants as this is an important age group. This specification features an age profile
denoted by the  specific to Japanese and Caucasian people, an age profile specific to COFA
migrants denoted by  , and the age specific treatment effects denoted by  . 8


       V.      Results

Core Results
Our core results from the fixed effect DD model are reported in Table 2. The table reports the
results of 12 estimations for people under 65 years of age. For each of the estimations, we report
the treatment effect on the COFA population as well as the placebo estimate corresponding to the
interaction of the post and Japanese dummies. As previously stated, non-Hispanic whites (or
Caucasian) is the omitted group for this analysis.
       Before we proceed, it is important to bear in mind that with the dummy observations, our
sample size is effectively about 900,000 individuals which corresponds to the total population of
Caucasians, Japanese, and Hawaiians in Hawaii during 2014-2015 (see Table 1b). The vast
majority of these individuals are observed for 24 months. Given this large sample size, we would
occasionally expect p-values in the vicinity of ten or even five percent even with a true effect of
zero due to Type I error (see Deaton 1997). This should be borne in mind when interpreting the
estimates on the placebo effects.
       In the panel A of Table 2, we look at the effects of the policy change on inpatient admissions
and ER visits. For each outcome, we consider admissions funded by any payer, by Medicaid, and
by private insurers. In the first column of this panel, we see that the policy had a substantial
negative impact on all inpatient admissions with a coefficient estimate of -0.0027 (p<0.01) for
the COFA migrants and little to no effect for the Japanese population, although this estimate is



8
    As before, we are combining Japanese and Caucasian people into a single control group for the sake of parsimony.

                                                          15
only significant at the 10% level. 9 Note that this effect is inclusive of utilizations that were
funded by Medicaid and those that were funded by private insurance. In the fourth column of the
same panel, we see a larger reduction in ER visits of 0.0047 (p<0.01) per patient-month for the
COFA migrants and no effects for the Japanese population. Finally, because we see declines in
both inpatient admissions and ER visits together, this is suggestive that the two types of
utilizations are complements and are not substitutes, which is consistent with the literature.
    Next, looking at utilization disaggregated by type of insurer (columns 2, 3, 5 and 6), we see
that utilizations charged to Medicaid declined whereas those charged to private insurance
increased for COFA migrants. However, the magnitudes of the former effects are larger than
those for the latter effects which is what accounts for the net negative impacts found in the
"Any" payer columns (columns 1 and 4). In the second and fifth columns, we see that inpatient
admissions and ER visits that were charged to Medicaid declined by 0.0043 (p<0.01) and 0.0100
(p<0.01) per patient-month. The means of inpatient admissions and ER visits among COFA
migrants under 65 that were charged to Medicaid in the pre-policy period were 0.0062 and
0.0240 in Table 1d. Accordingly, these effects amount to 69% and 42% decreases in utilization
for the COFA migrants in this time period. In contrast, inpatient admissions and ER visits
charged to private insurance increased by 0.0015 (p<0.01) and 0.0043 (p<0.01), respectively.
Compared to the means of 0.0007 and 0.0034 of inpatient admissions and hospital admissions
from Table 1d charged to private insurers, these effects represent 214% and 126% increases.
These large numbers are entirely attributable to the fact that the vast majority of COFA migrants
were not enrolled in private insurance prior to March of 2015. On the whole, this indicates that
the policy worked as expected with a shift in financing away from Medicaid and towards private
insurers.
    The second panel of Table 2 reports the effects for total utilization which is the sum of total
inpatient admissions and ER visits in the first three columns as well as total charges (for both ER
and inpatient) in the last three columns. The first three columns of the panel (total utilization),
mechanically, are the sum of the impacts on inpatient admissions and ER visits from the first
panel. Specifically, these are count variables that measure the number of admissions or visits per
person. In the first column, we see that, on net, utilization decreased by 0.0074 (p<0.01)
admissions per patient-month for the COFA migrants. The next two columns indicate that total



                                                  16
utilization charged to Medicaid declined by 0.0143 (p<0.01) and those charged to private
insurers increased by 0.0058 (p<0.01). We find no impact, as expected, for the Japanese
population.
   The final three columns are analogous to the first three columns except that instead of
examining the count measure of visits or admissions, we examine the total dollar charges
incurred as a result of the expiration of benefits. In the fourth column, we see that on net total
(i.e. including both charges to Medicaid and private insurers) charges declined by $48.48
(p<0.01). Breaking these charges down by those charged to Medicaid and to private insurance,
we see that charges to Medicaid declined by $121.21 (p<0.01) per patient-month in the second
column and those charged to private insurers, in the third column, increased by $58.04 (p<0.01).
Using the figures from Table 1d, these correspond a 57% decline and a 239% increase,
respectively.
   The placebo interactions in Table 2 are generally insignificant. Of the 12 separate
estimations, only five of the placebo interactions are significant but mostly at the 10% level. As
argued above, due to our large sample size, this is most likely Type I Error. This strongly
indicates that our findings are identifying the effects of the expiration of Medicaid benefits on
utilization in the COFA population and not an omitted trend.
   In the Appendix, we report results from several robustness exercises. First, we estimate the
same models as in Table 2 except that we employ alternative weights for COFA migrants. Our
preferred weights in this paper are based on a five year count from the ACS from 2011-2015 of
Micronesians in the State of Hawaii. The weights that we employ throughout this paper are based
off of this count. However, given the possibility that Micronesians (like many other migrant
groups) might be undercounted, we also employ the count from the ACS plus the reported
margin of error which is 3763. Accordingly, we also report a set of results using weights based
off of a count of Micronesians that is slightly higher, 31,653. The results of this exercise are
reported in Table A1. Our qualitative findings are unaffected.
   The second robustness exercise is reported in Table A2 and uses the log of total admissions
and charges as the dependent variable. To account for the large number of zeros in the data, we
added one to all observations. Note that because of this, you cannot interpret these estimates as
elasticities. We did this to ensure that our findings are not being driven by outliers; this is
particularly important for the charges. The results indicate that this is not the case.


                                                  17
    The third robustness exercise is reported in Table A3. In this exercise, we compare the
estimates of the parsimonious specification from equation (1) that are reported in Table 2 with
estimates of a specification with time dummies. The estimates are identical.
    In Table 3, we estimate the same models as in the first panel of Table 2 using inpatient
admissions and ER visits as the dependent variables with alternative estimators. The first panel
extends the fixed effects model estimated in Table 2 to allow for a heterogeneous trend as in
equation (2). The second panel employs OLS. Finally, the third panel employs a standard fixed
effects model as in Table 2. These estimations are identical to the first panel of Table 2 and are
reported for the sake of easier comparisons.
    The estimations with the heterogeneous trends in the first panel are broadly consistent with
the standard fixed effects estimations in the bottom panel. The key difference is that the standard
errors are substantially larger and the point estimates are attenuated. As a consequence, some of
the estimates that were significant in the fixed effects model are not significant once we allow for
the heterogeneous trend. We attribute this issue to power as the estimates in the first panel of the
table essentially rely on a double difference of the original data. That said, the main findings
from Table 2 are still present in this more robust model. For example, we see that inpatient
admissions charged to private payers increase by 0.0007 (p<0.10) per patient-month and ER
visits also charged to private payers increase by 0.0028 (p<0.001) per patient-month in Panel A
for the COFA migrants. Similarly, we see that inpatient admissions charged to Medicaid decline
by 0.0013 (p<0.10) and ER visits charged to Medicaid decline by 0.0041 (p<0.05) per patient-
month in Panel A. We view these estimates as a very stringent test of robustness to a particular
violation of the parallel trends assumption; the estimates indicate that our findings are robust to
such a violation.
    In the Panel B of Table 3, we report estimations for the same outcomes using OLS. These
estimations tend to be similar to the fixed effects estimations in the bottom panel of the table
with similar (albeit slightly smaller) standard errors. However, some of the magnitudes do differ.
    Next, in Table 4, we estimate the same models as in Table 2 but now we restrict the
population to people over 65 years of age. We do not see any impacts of the policy change in this
older population. This is the case for both utilizations charged to Medicaid and to private
insurers. These results can also be viewed as a placebo test since the policy change did not affect
the elderly.


                                                 18
Event Analysis
In Figure 2, we report the results of the event analysis. These figures report the  estimates from
equation (3) for all months during the years 2014-2015. The figure contains four graphs
corresponding to type of utilization (inpatient or outpatient) and payer (Medicaid or private
insurance). The first row displays figures for inpatient admissions and ER visits funded by
Medicaid. The second row displays figures for admissions charged to private insurance. All four
figures include a horizontal line at zero and a vertical line corresponding to March 2015. We see
the following results.
   First, the interactions of the month/year dummies with COFA dummy are not significantly
different from zero in three of the four graphs prior to March 2015. On the whole, this provides
evidence that the trends were parallel across our ethnic groups, at least, in the pre-period.
However, the figure in the second column of the first row corresponding to ER visits charged to
Medicaid does show a substantial dip in the pre-treatment period. This result may indicate that
the impending change in state coverage of Medicaid for COFA migrants produced a response in
emergency room visits prior to the actual change in the policy. Note that the dip that we see for
ER visits in the period prior to the expiration of benefits indicates that the estimates for ER visits
and charges in Table 2 are actual lower bounds (in magnitude) of the true impacts.
   Second, the two figures in the first row, which correspond to Medicaid-funded utilizations,
show a greater decline in both inpatient and ER use after benefits officially expired. The first
figure corresponding to inpatient admissions charged to Medicaid shows a significant decline in
the post-period indicating that there was, indeed, a net decline in inpatient utilization as a
consequence of the policy. Note that some of the time dummies in this figure in the pre-period
are significantly different from zero, but most are not. This might indicate some anticipation of
the policy just prior to the official expiration date. However, as with Medicaid-funded ER visits,
this slight dip in the pre-period implies that, again, we are underestimating the treatment effects
in Table 2.
   Finally, the second row shows that privately funded utilizations increased after Medicaid
program benefits expired. For both privately-funded inpatient and ER use, we see no evidence
of pre-trends. This indicates that the estimates for private-funded utilization in Table 2 are not
biased in any way. We suspect that the absence of pre-trends for privately-funded use but their


                                                  19
presence for Medicaid-funded use is due to anticipation of the policy coming from the supply-
side and not the demand-side. In other words, if the COFA migrants themselves anticipated the
policy, they would have enrolled in private insurance prior to the expiration date as a precaution.
However, it looks like what we are seeing is less support from healthcare providers/institutions
or insurers to enroll COFA migrants in the Medicaid program immediately prior to the official
expiration date, perhaps due to institutional and program uncertainty. We especially think this is
plausible since the ER has been a major entry point to Medicaid for many COFA migrants, and
many supports for Medicaid enrollment are typically provided by health care institutions from
the ER.


Results by Age and Gender
In Figure 3, we investigate how the effects of the expiration of benefits varied by age. In these
figures, we report estimates of  from equation (4) where the  subscript denotes an age bin. As
discussed earlier, the age dummies correspond to five-year age bins. Note that we excluded
infants from this analysis since we believe the effects of the expiration to be very different for
newborns; we will address infants separately later in the paper. For these estimations, we
include individuals both under and over age 65. Each figure contains a horizontal line at zero
and two vertical lines at ages 18 and 65. Medicaid benefits did not expire for the elderly or
children under age 18 and, hence, we should see no effects prior to age 18 or after age 65. As
before, the figure contains four figures corresponding to type of utilization (inpatient or ER) and
payer (Medicaid or private insurance).
          In the first row of the figure, we display results for inpatient admissions and ER visits
charged to Medicaid. Both figures show that the bulk of the effects occurred between ages 18
and 65 for both inpatient use and ER visits. In both cases, we also do not see significant impacts
for the elderly. However, and in both cases, we do see a significant decline in Medicaid-funded
utilization for Micronesian children many of whom were likely covered under the State's CHIP
program. The second row of the figure displays the results for utilization charged to private
payers. Once again, we see that the bulk of the effects occur between ages 18 and 65. We see no
significant effects for children or the elderly.
    In Table 5, we examine the impacts across gender. We report DD estimates of the effects of
the policy on inpatient and ER visits charged to any payer, Medicaid, and private insurance. We


                                                   20
further restrict the estimations to people under 65. The top panel displays impacts on females and
the bottom panel displays impacts on males.
   The main result in this table is that COFA females were affected more than COFA males. For
example, female COFA migrants saw a decline in inpatient admissions charged to Medicaid of
0.0047 (p<0.01) per patient-month, whereas males saw a decline of 0.0040 (p<0.01) per patient-
month. The corresponding estimates for ER visits charged to Medicaid are -0.0126 (p<0.01) for
females and -0.0072 (p<0.01) for males which again indicates an impact on females that is about
twice as large as it is for males and these two estimated coefficients are statistically significantly
different from one another.


Effects on the Uninsured
We now look at how the uninsured were impacted by the policy change. Before we proceed, it is
important to note that it was widely suspected that many migrants were not able to enroll in
and/or maintain coverage in private insurance following this policy change despite the subsidized
premiums. To shed light on this, we estimate our fixed effects DD model using inpatient
admissions and ER visits that were not charged to any insurer (either public or private) as the
dependent variable. We report the results in Table 6. The table displays four DD estimates
corresponding to inpatient and ER visits for people who are under 65 years and separately for
those who are 65 years and older.
   We see some impacts for COFA migrants under 65 years, but not older than 65. There were
no effects on uninsured inpatient admissions. However, we do see that uninsured ER visits
increased by 0.0016 (p<0.01) per patient-month. Note that the impact on uninsured ER visits is
one third of the impact on ER visits charged to private insurers of 0.0043 from Table 2. This is
an important result as it indicates that efforts after the expiration of Medicaid program benefits
efforts to enroll people in private insurance were likely not fully effective. For every three ER
visits by COFA migrants that were paid by private insurance (after Medicaid benefits expired),
there was an ER visit by a COFA migrant that was not paid by insurance. In addition, the impact
on ER visits charged to Medicaid in the same table was -0.0043. Accordingly, the reduction in
insured COFA migrants' ER visits was offset by an increase in the number of uninsured visits to
ER by COFA migrants; the corresponding increase in uninsured ER visits is about one-third of



                                                  21
the decline in Medicaid funded ER visits. The last two columns show no impacts on uninsured
admissions among COFA migrants 65 and older.
     In Figures 4a and 4b, we report similar event analyses and age profiles of the DD estimates
for uninsured admissions as we did in Figures 2 and 3. First, in the event analysis in Figure 4a,
we see that we very large impacts of the policy on uninsured ER visits. However, a large portion
of this increase pre-dates March 2015. It is not completely clear what the cause of this ramp-up is
for pre-March 2015. In keeping with this story, it is important to note that the plot of Medicaid-
charged ER visits from Figure 2 also shows a decline prior to the official expiration date. This
suggests that prior to the "official" expiration date of March 2015, there was a substitution away
from Medicaid-charged ER visits towards uninsured ER visits. Typical practice at most hospitals
with emergency rooms is to enroll eligible, uninsured patients in Medicaid; this guarantees that
the hospital will get paid for the visit. That we do not see this in the period just prior to the
expiration date indicates a rigidity preventing this from happening. 10 Second, in Figure 4b, we
see that the bulk of the impacts on uninsured ER visits occurred for adults younger than 65.
Note that we do not see impacts on COFA migrants 65 years and older. Finally, the effects on
uninsured hospital admissions were substantially smaller.


Effects on the Infants
Finally, we explore how the expiration of benefits impacted Micronesian infants. To do this, we
estimate a variant of equation (1) in which we include an infant dummy and its interaction with
the COFA/POST variable. The idea of this is to shed light on how the policy impacted infants in
a transparent way. We report the results in Table 7. We only consider admissions that were
charged to Medicaid. The table consists of eight columns corresponding to four outcomes:
inpatient admissions, ER visits, and inpatient charges and ER charges. For each outcome, we
report the estimation of equation (1) which was also reported in Table 2 in the odd columns and,
in the even columns, we report the results with the infant interaction.
     The results indicate that the effects of the Medicaid expiration on infants were enormous.
Looking at the first two columns where the dependent variable was inpatient admissions paid by


10
  Private communication with physicians working at Queens Medical Center in Honolulu indicated that just prior to
the expiration of COFA Medicaid program benefits, there was a sense that it would be difficult to enroll uninsured
COFA migrants in the State's Medicaid program due to the policy uncertainty so many providers may not have put
forth the typical effort to support enrollment for those otherwise uninsured.

                                                       22
Medicaid, we see that the raw impact of the policy was -0.0043 (p<0.01) in the first column. In
the second column, the direct impact declines to -0.0033 (p<0.01), but the interaction with the
infant dummy is -0.0978 (p<0.01), so that effect of the policy change was substantially larger for
infants. Accordingly, the net effect on infants was -0.0978-0.0033=-0.1011 inpatient admissions
per patient-month. We see a similar phenomenon in the third and fourth columns where ER visits
are the dependent variable in that infants were more heavily impacted than the rest of the
population. However, with ER visits, we see that the expiration of program benefits caused
Medicaid-funded ER visits to increase by a large margin. The fourth column shows a direct
effect of the policy on ER visits of -0.0106 (p<0.01), but the interaction with the infant dummy is
0.0617 (p<0.01). Hence, the net increase on ER visits for infants is 0.0617-0.0106 = 0.0511 ER
visits per patient/month. The final four columns of the table report the effects on charges. These
results indicate that the policy decreased charges for inpatient admissions of Micronesian
children by -1147.46-87.42 = -1234.88 dollars per patient-month. The corresponding number for
ER visits was 86.92 -22.61 = 64.31 dollars per person/month.
   The contrasting effects of the expiration of benefits on the utilization of infants are important.
We showed that inpatient admissions declined precipitously whereas ER visits increased by a
large magnitude. While our hospital data is perhaps not ideal for pinning down the precise
mechanism, we suspect that the expiration of Medicaid program benefits for many COFA
migrants generally led to a decline in the use of ambulatory care by new mothers, even those
who were still covered by the Medicaid program, which probably led to two consequences. The
first is that the use of ER visits for neonatal care increased. The second was a decline in inpatient
admissions, which may have happened since primary care physicians refer patients for surgery
and other inpatient services. Prima facie, these effects on infants are puzzling since pregnant
women and legally residing children were still technically covered by Medicaid after March,
2015 (i.e. the policy change should not have affected this group). What these results suggest then
is that despite their continued eligibility, there were still many children and pregnant mothers
who did not use the available state-provided Medicaid services ­ perhaps because they were
unaware that they continued to be eligible for CHIPRA coverage.
   In some sense, this can be viewed as a reverse woodworking effect. Benefits expired for a
large swath of the Micronesian population in Hawaii. As previously discussed, young COFA
migrants were actually still covered by the State's CHIP program. However, it appears as if the


                                                 23
salience of the expiration of benefits for the majority of migrants led many eligible migrants to
believe that they were not covered. To this end, Hofschneider (2019) says, "parents are
sometimes confused about why they have different insurance from their children, or mistakenly
think that because they aren't covered that their children aren't either." In a similar vein, but in
the opposite direction, Frean, et al. (2017) found that the expansion of Medicaid under the ACA
increased enrollment in Medicaid among people who were previously eligible for Medicaid
benefits.



   VI.      Conclusions

In this paper, we investigated the effects of eliminating Medicaid program coverage for a
vulnerable migrant population in the State of Hawaii. To do this, we employed a large
administrative database that constitutes close to a census of all inpatient and emergency room
utilizations during 2014 and 2015. Difference-in-difference models indicate that the expiration of
benefits decreased Medicaid-funded inpatient and emergency room utilizations by 69% and 42%,
respectively. Privately-funded utilizations increased by 214% for inpatient admissions and 126%
for emergency room visits. On net, the magnitudes of the publicly-funded utilization did not
make up for the decline in Medicaid-funded utilization resulting in a net decline in utilization
after the expiration of Medicaid program benefits.
         Some of the shortfall in Medicaid-funded utilization of the ER was made up for by
utilizations of uninsured patients. We find that there was a marked increase in ER visits that were
charged to the patient (as opposed to Medicaid) that began earlier than the official expiration
date of Medicaid benefits. This is a puzzle. Ostensibly, COFA migrants should have been
eligible for Medicaid benefits up to March of 2015. Our best guess is that COFA migrants who
were enrolled in Medicaid were allowed to obtain Medicaid benefits until March of 2015.
However, we also suspect that the perception that Medicaid benefits were ending resulted in the
dramatic reduction in enrollment prior to March 2015.This may have been driven by the patients
or the providers, although we suspect that this was mostly driven by the supply-side. Effectively,
this meant that Medicaid benefits expired for uninsured COFA migrants prior to their official
expiration date.



                                                  24
       Despite our finding that Medicaid-funded utilization declined, we did see that there was a
dramatic increase in Medicaid-funded ER visits by Micronesian infants after the general
Medicaid benefits expired. Unfortunately, it is hard to pin down the precise mechanism
underlying this finding, but we suspect that Micronesian parents substituted ER visits for
ambulatory care for their newborns once Medicaid benefits expired. However, what is puzzling
about this is that Micronesian newborns were (and are) still eligible for Medicaid via the State's
CHIPRA program. If ER visits were in fact substituting for ambulatory care for Micronesian
infants, this is suggestive of a failure to effectively communicate that the children of COFA
migrants would continue to be eligible for Medicaid even after benefits for most other COFA
migrants ended.
       Many of these undesirable effects were predicted at the time of the expiration of benefits.
For example, Hagiwara, et al. in the May 2015 issue of the Journal of Health Care for the Poor
and Underserved said, "There is concern that this process, which has proven to be confusing
even for native English speakers, will at best be confusing for COFA migrants and at worst cause
individuals to be uninsured and possibly forgo needed health care." These prognostications
turned out to be true.
       An important take-away of this study for policy makers is that moving poorer people
from Medicaid programs to private insurance obtained from exchanges, even when private
premiums are still supported by public funds, may result in lower utilization on net. This could
happen due to four reasons. First, the relative complexity of the exchanges could result in lower
take-up rates of private insurance thereby leaving many without insurance. Second, the vast
majority of private insurance plans entail more out-of-pocket expenses than Medicaid which
typically has little or no out-of-pocket expense. Third, communicating these changes and options
is not a trivial undertaking. For vulnerable populations with limited English ability and
familiarity with government agencies, this may prove to be a larger hurdle than for the native-
born populations. Fourth and perhaps most importantly, private insurers have a six week open
enrollment period, whereas Medicaid has a year-round open enrollment period. In addition,
COFA migrants must first apply for Medicaid and get rejected before they can enroll in private
insurance (Hofschneider 2019). For these reasons, we would expect a transition from Medicaid
to private insurance to reduce medical demand and/or utilization.



                                                25
       While this study focuses on a very unique policy change affecting a relatively small
population, it can provide lessons to other policy makers. In particular, we have shown the
difficulties of using private insurance obtained through exchanges to provide coverage to
vulnerable migrant populations with low levels of education and English proficiency. Note that
these difficulties persisted despite premiums that were subsidized by public funds. Medicaid
appears to provide clarity and certainty that private insurers may not have been able to provide.
On the whole, we suspect that a relatively simpler single payer public insurance scheme would
be better suited for vulnerable populations. However, if policy makers are insistent on using
private insurers to cover vulnerable migrant populations supported by public funds, better
communications and outreach are needed. Hopefully, this study provides some lessons on how to
proceed.




                                                26
References

Akee, R. (2010). Who leaves? Deciphering immigrant self-selection from a developing country.
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 58(2), 323-344.

Aron-Dine, A., Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein. 2013. "The RAND Health Insurance
Experiment, Three Decades Later." Journal of Economic Perspectives Volume 27, Number 1
Winter: 197­222.

Baicker, K., Congdon, W. J., and Mullainathan, S. (2012). Health insurance coverage and take
up: Lessons from behavioral economics. The Milbank Quarterly, 90(1), 107-134.

Card, D., Dobkin, C., and Maestas, N. (2008). The impact of nearly universal insurance coverage
on health care utilization: evidence from Medicare. American Economic Review, 98(5), 2242-58.

Cohen RA, Zammitti EP, Martinez ME. Health insurance coverage: Early release of estimates
from the National Health Interview Survey, 2016. National Center for Health Statistics. May
2017. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/ releases.htm.

Cutler, D. M. and Zeckhauser, R. J. (2000). The anatomy of health insurance. In Handbook of
health economics (Vol. 1, pp. 563-643). Elsevier.

Deaton, A. (1997). The analysis of household surveys: a microeconometric approach to
development policy. The World Bank.

DeLeire, T. (2018). The Effect of Disenrollment from Medicaid on Employment, Insurance
Coverage, Health and Health Care Utilization (No. w24899). National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Einav, L. and Finkelstein, A. (2018). Moral Hazard in Health Insurance: What We Know and
How We Know It. Journal of the European Economic Association, 16(4), 957-982.

Fernandez, L., Shattuck, R., and Noon, J. (2018). The Use of Administrative Records and the
American Community Survey to Study the Characteristics of Undercounted Young Children in
the 2010 Census (No. 2018-05). Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau.

Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. "The
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 127(3): 1057­1106.

Frean, M., Gruber, J., and Sommers, B. D. (2017). Premium subsidies, the mandate, and
Medicaid expansion: Coverage effects of the Affordable Care Act. Journal of Health Economics,
53, 72-86.

Goldman, D. and Philipson, T. J. (2007). Integrated insurance design in the presence of multiple
medical technologies. American Economic Review, 97(2), 427-432.

                                               27
Hagiwara, M. K. I., Yamada, S., Tanaka, W., and Ostrowski, D. M. (2015). Litigation and
community advocacy to ensure health access for Micronesian migrants in Hawaii. Journal of
health care for the poor and underserved, 26(2), 137-145.

Hawaii Department of Human Services (DHS). (2009). DHS Moving Non-Citizen Adults into
new Medical Assistance Program, `Basic Health Hawaii' on September 1. Hawaii Department of
Human Services. News Release. July 28, 2009.

Hawaii Department of Human Services. COFA Residents and Health Care Assistance in Hawaii.
November 2014. Available from: https://humanservices.hawaii.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2014/11/COFA-Background-Memo.pdf

Hofschneider, Anita (2019, April 3). Micronesians in Hawaii Still Struggle to Get Care.
Honolulu Civil Beat.

Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, Arleen Leibowitz,
and M. Susan Marquis. 1987. "Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence
from a Randomized Experiment." American Economic Review 77(3): 251­77.

McElfish, P.A., Hallgren, E. and Yamada, S., 2015. Effect of US health policies on health care
access for Marshallese migrants. American journal of public health, 105(4), pp.637-643.

Joseph P. Newhouse, Rand Corporation. Insurance Experiment Group, & Insurance Experiment
Group Staff. (1993). Free for all? Lessons from the RAND health insurance experiment. Harvard
University Press.

Pauly, M. V. (1968). The economics of moral hazard: comment. The American Economic
Review, 531-537.

Princeton University. Hawaii's COFA Islanders: Improving Health Access and Outcomes. A
report for the Governor of Hawaii, David Ige. January 2017. Available from
wws.princeton.edu/sites/.../WWS%20591e%20ACA%20Final%20Report%202017.pdf

Rilkon S, Alik W, Hixon A, and Palafox N. (2010). The "Compact Impact" in Hawaii: Focus on
health care. Hawaii Medical Journal, 69 (6); 7-12.

Rosewicz, B. Over Long Term, Revenue Lags Behind Expenses in 10 States. Pew Charitable
Trust. November 2018.

Shigeoka, Hitoshi. 2014. The Effect of Patient Cost Sharing on Utilization, Health, and Risk
Protection. American Economic Review 104:7, 2152-2184. 

Tarazi, W. W., Green, T. L., & Sabik, L. M. (2017). Medicaid disenrollment and disparities in
access to care: evidence from Tennessee. Health services research, 52(3), 1156-1167.

Tello-Trillo, D. S. (2016, June). Effects of Losing Public Health Insurance on Healthcare Access,
Utilization and Health Outcomes: Evidence from the TennCare Disenrollment. In 6th Biennial

                                               28
Conference of the American Society of Health Economists, Ashecon.




                                             29
Appendix A: Discussion of Weighting Procedure

We let   {0,1} denote an indicator for being present in the HHIC data where unity indicates
presence. First, note that we can write


                                                   [ × 1( = ,  =  ,  = 1)]
      [ | = ,  = ,  = 1] =
                                                    ( = ,  =  ,  = 1)


for ,   {0,1}. Next, we note that


                  [ × 1( = ,  =  ,  = 1)]                                                         (1a)
                               =  [ × 1( = ,  =  )].


This is true because  = 0 implies that  = 0. Accordingly, we obtain that


      ( = ,  =  ,  = 1)                                                                           (1b)
                         [ | = ,  = ,  = 1]
       ( = ,  = )
                     =  [ | = ,  = ]


This then implies that
                                             [ × 1( = ,  =  ,  = 1)]
          [ | = ,  =  ] =                                            .
                                                 ( = ,  = )
This is interesting because it suggests that the expectation on the left-hand side of the above
equation can be estimated as
                                              

                                               
                                             =1
              
where  =    and  is the frequency weight associated with the  th observation. Note that
              =1 

 corresponds to the sample size in the HHIC data with the added dummy observations
discussed in Section 3. The frequencies are equal to unity if the observation in in the HHIC data.
For the dummy observations, they are equal to the difference between the counts from the ACS
and the HHIC sample for a given ethnicity/age/gender cell. An important feature of the weights


                                                  30
in  is that they exactly correspond to what standard statistical packages such as STATA
compute when you employ frequency weights.
       The frequency weights that we employ are based off of the five-year population counts
from the ACS reported in Table 1b. We used these counts to construct frequencies for
gender/age/period/ethnicity cells. Note that the sample of Micronesians in Hawaii in any given
year of the ACS is quite small, but five year averages of the ACS can be used to arrive at a fairly
reliable aggregate population count. However, as pointed out by Fernandez, et al. (2018), using
the ACS to construct precise counts of specific age groups and, particularly, the very young is
very difficult. This is especially true for relatively small groups such as Micronesians as there is
only about 200-300 Micronesians in Hawaii total in any given ACS year. Accordingly, we used
the ACS to compute the proportions of Japanese, Caucasian, and Micronesian females and males
who were under and over 65 which is a relatively broad category. We then used these
proportions to count the numbers of each ethnicity/gender category under and over 65 and took
the difference between these counts and the counts in the HHIC data. These numbers constitute
the number of omitted zeros in each gender/ethnicity category under and over age 65. The
resulting number of omitted zeros was then evenly allocated to each age between zero and 85.




                                                 31
Table 1a: Descriptive Statistics for the Raw Data

                                                                       Counts
                                                                     [Percentage]
                Race

                Japanese                                               115,456
                                                                       [28.2%]
                Micronesian                                             25,621
                                                                        [6.3%]
                White                                                  268,479
                                                                       [65.6%]

                Gender

                Male                                                   199,758
                                                                       [48.8%]
                Female                                                 209,796
                                                                       [51.2%]
                Unknown                                                    2
                                                                        [0.0%]

                Payer Type

                Department of Defense                                   19,132
                                                                        [4.7%]
                Medicaid/Quest                                         114,711
                                                                       [28.0%]
                Medicare                                               115,907
                                                                       [28.3%]
                Miscellaneous                                            9,886
                                                                        [2.4%]
                Private Insurance                                      132,601
                                                                       [32.4%]
                Self-pay                                                17,319
                                                                        [4.2%]

                Notes: These are tabulations from the raw discharge data that we used to
                construct the final panel. The raw data consisted of 409,556 utilizations.




                                                     32
Table 1b: Population Counts in the HHIC and ACS Data

 Self-reported ethnic               HHIC                        ACS                    HHIC/ACS
 group
 Micronesian*                      11,530                    27,890                        41%
 Japanese                          63,160                   310,595                        20%
 White/Caucasian                  131,327                   604,474                        22%
 Notes: We used the American Community Survey over the years 2011-2015 to compute the population numbers
 for a given year. The counts from the ACS account for people reporting multiple races.
 *
   Excludes Guamanian/Chamorro.




                                                    33
Table 1c: Descriptive Statistics from Panel Data
                            Any Payer            Medicaid                          Private               Uninsured
                                                    All
 Inpt. Admissions             0.0042               0.0009                          0.0013                  0.0001
                             (0.0683)             (0.0309)                        (0.0380)                (0.0081)
 ER Visits                    0.0135               0.0041                          0.0045                  0.0007
                             (0.1384)             (0.0817)                        (0.0733)                (0.0291)
 Total Charges                176.48                33.51                           47.48                    2.89
                            (4032.16)            (1802.81)                       (2006.49)                (309.38)
 Inpt. Charges                144.72                25.23                           37.05                    1.39
                            (3989.21)            (1777.83)                       (1985.40)                (293.75)
 ER Charges                    31.76                 8.27                           10.44                    1.50
                             (411.12)             (212.28)                        (217.65)                 (88.54)
                                             Under 65 years
 Inpt. Admissions             0.0032               0.0011                          0.0016                  0.0001
                             (0.0593)             (0.0347)                        (0.0415)                (0.0090)
 ER Visits                    0.0138               0.0053                          0.0055                  0.0009
                             (0.1405)             (0.0924)                        (0.0813)                (0.0327)
 Total Charges                121.55                41.43                           54.68                    3.47
                            (3313.44)            (1988.17)                       (2124.44)                (325.91)
 Inpt. Charges                 91.53                30.85                           42.02                    1.59
                            (3269.57)            (1959.67)                       (2100.98)                (307.55)
 ER Charges                    30.03                10.58                           12.66                    1.88
                             (394.10)             (239.40)                        (238.56)                 (98.52)
                                            65 years and older
 Inpt. Admissions             0.0076               0.0001                          0.0005                 0.00002
                             (0.0916)             (0.0120)                        (0.0227)                (0.0045)
 ER Visits                   (0.0126)              0.0003                          0.0011                 0.00009
                             (0.1313)             (0.0235)                        (0.0369)                (0.0107)
 Total Charges                354.87                 7.78                           24.10                    1.04
                            (5776.08)             (983.43)                       (1562.97)                (248.22)
 Inpt. Charges                317.47                 6.98                           20.89                    0.76
                            (5730.63)             (976.22)                       (1551.64)                (243.54)
 ER Charges                    37.40                 0.80                            3.22                    0.28
                             (462.08)              (72.20)                        (127.80)                 (42.18)
 Notes: Reports means and standard deviations in parentheses. All statistics are on a per patient/month basis. Dummy
 observations and frequency weights were used to account for missing zeros.




                                                       34
Table 1d: Descriptive Statistics from Panel Data: COFA Migrants in Pre-Treatment Period
                      Any Payer           Medicaid            Private            Uninsured
                                               All ages
 Inpt. Admissions       0.0078              0.0065            0.0007               0.0004
                       (0.0911)            (0.0832)          (0.0263)             (0.0214)
 ER Visits              0.0322              0.0238            0.0032               0.0044
                       (0.1951)            (0.1685)          (0.0611)             (0.0709)
 Total Charges          289.42              234.13             24.32                19.77
                      (5331.29)           (5049.35)         (1217.52)             (747.32)
 Inpt. Charges          226.42              190.12             17.01                10.32
                      (5287.91)           (5016.62)         (1196.79)             (709.79)
 ER Charges              63.00               44.01              7.31                 9.45
                       (513.87)            (412.66)          (184.76)             (214.65)
                                           Under 65 years
 Inpt. Admissions       0.0075              0.0062            0.0007               0.0005
                       (0.0891)            (0.0813)          (0.0266)             (0.0216)
 ER Visits              0.0327              0.0240            0.0034               0.0046
                       (0.1964)            (0.1694)          (0.0621)             (0.0722)
 Total Charges          263.92              210.89             24.31                19.85
                      (5057.99)           (4772.65)         (1222.47)             (735.73)
 Inpt. Charges          201.74              167.84             16.90                10.15
                      (5014.97)           (4740.65)         (1203.42)             (696.47)
 ER Charges              62.19               43.05              7.41                 9.70
                       (502.42)            (400.56)          (179.24)             (217.08)
                                         65 years and older
 Inpt. Admissions       0.0135              0.0114            0.0005               0.0004
                       (0.1221)            (0.1126)          (0.0212)             (0.0188)
 ER Visits              0.0238              0.0189            0.0012               0.0016
                       (0.1683)            (0.1504)          (0.0400)             (0.0407)
 Total Charges          747.14              651.50             24.54                18.29
                      (8898.39)           (8608.45)         (1124.95)             (931.26)
 Inpt. Charges          669.54              590.16             19.04                13.38
                      (8845.47)           (8563.99)         (1071.00)             (916.59)
 ER Charges              77.60               61.34              5.50                 4.90
                       (687.62)            (588.75)          (264.92)             (165.02)
 Notes: Reports means and standard deviations in parentheses. All descriptive statistics correspond to the period prior
 to March 1, 2015. All statistics are on a per patient/month basis. Dummy observations and frequency weights were
 used to account for missing zeros.




                                                         35
Table 2: Fixed Effects DD Estimates: Under 65


                                      Inpatient Admissions                                                          ER Visits
     Panel A
     Payer                 Any               Medicaid               Private                        Any              Medicaid               Private
     Japanese           -0.0002*               0.0001             -0.0003**                      -0.0002            -0.0002*               0.0002
     Population          (0.0001)             (0.0000)             (0.0001)                     (0.0002)             (0.0001)             (0.0001)
     COFA              -0.0027***           -0.0043***            0.0015***                   -0.0047***           -0.0100***            0.0043***
     Population          (0.0003)             (0.0003)             (0.0001)                     (0.0006)             (0.0007)             (0.0003)

                                         Total Utilization                                                        Total Charges
     Panel B
     Payer                 Any               Medicaid               Private                       Any               Medicaid              Private
     Japanese           -0.0004*               -0.0001              -0.0001                     -9.8973*              -1.8706             -4.6185
     Population          (0.0002)             (0.0001)             (0.0001)                     (4.2818)             (2.0704)            (3.2191)
     COFA              -0.0074***           -0.0143***            0.0058***                  -48.4754***          -121.2113***          58.0373***
     Population          (0.0007)             (0.0009)             (0.0004)                    (14.4764)            (13.6581)            (6.9071)
     *significant at the 10% level; **significant at the 5% level; ***significant at the 1% level
     Notes: All estimations use 156,944 individuals (including the dummy observations) observed over a maximum of 24 months and include individual
     fixed effects, a dummy for the post-policy period, and a quadratic function of age as controls. Japanese Population is the interaction of the post
     dummy with the Japanese dummy. COFA Population is the interaction of the post dummy with the COFA dummy. Non-Hispanic White
     (Caucasian) is the omitted reference group in this analysis. Standard errors adjust for clustering on individuals.




                                                                            36
Table 3: Alternative Estimations: Under 65


 Panel A    First Differenced Fixed-Effects
                               Inpatient Admissions                                                             ER Visits
 Payer               Any           Medicaid                             Private                     Any      Medicaid          Private
 Japanese          0.0000           0.0000                              0.0001                    -0.0005      -0.0003         -0.0001
 Population       (0.0002)         (0.0001)                            (0.0002)                  (0.0005)     (0.0002)        (0.0003)
 COFA              -0.0003         -0.0013*                            0.0007*                     0.0002    -0.0041**       0.0028***
 Population       (0.0007)         (0.0006)                            (0.0003)                  (0.0018)     (0.0014)        (0.0007)

 Panel B           OLS
                                         Inpatient Admissions                                                    ER Visits
 Payer                    Any               Medicaid            Private                              Any      Medicaid         Private
 Japanese               -0.0001               -0.0000           0.0000                             -0.0002      -0.0002        0.0002
 Population            (0.0001)              (0.0000)          (0.0001)                           (0.0002)     (0.0001)       (0.0001)
 COFA                 -0.0009**            -0.0024***         0.0015***                         -0.0027***   -0.0080***      0.0042***
 Population            (0.0003)              (0.0002)          (0.0001)                           (0.0006)     (0.0006)       (0.0003)

 Panel C           Fixed-Effects
                                         Inpatient Admissions                                                    ER Visits
 Payer                   Any                Medicaid            Private                              Any      Medicaid         Private
 Japanese             -0.0002*                0.0001          -0.0003**                            -0.0002    -0.0002*         0.0002
 Population            (0.0001)              (0.0000)          (0.0001)                           (0.0002)     (0.0001)       (0.0001)
 COFA                -0.0027***            -0.0043***         0.0015***                         -0.0047***   -0.0100***      0.0043***
 Population            (0.0003)              (0.0003)          (0.0001)                           (0.0006)     (0.0007)       (0.0003)
 *significant at the 10% level; **significant at the 5% level; ***significant at the 1% level
 Notes: Per Table 2.




                                                                                 37
Table 4: Fixed Effects DD Estimates: Over 65


                                      Inpatient Admissions                                                            ER Visits
     Panel A
     Payer                 Any               Medicaid               Private                       Any                 Medicaid     Private
     Japanese            -0.0000              0.0000                0.0001                      0.0001                 0.0000     0.0003**
     Population         (0.0003)             (0.0000)              (0.0000)                    (0.0003)               (0.0000)    (0.0001)
     COFA                -0.0010              -0.0014               0.0003                      -0.0006                0.0002      0.0003
     Population         (0.0015)             (0.0013)              (0.0003)                    (0.0023)               (0.0021)    (0.0004)

                                         Total Utilization                                                       Total Charges
     Panel B
     Payer                 Any               Medicaid              Private                        Any                 Medicaid      Private
     Japanese            0.0001               0.0000              0.0003**                      -1.8561                 -0.0677     0.3412
     Population         (0.0005)             (0.0000)             (0.0001)                     (14.4428)               (1.3169)    (3.0298)
     COFA                -0.0016              -0.0012              0.0005                      -118.3847              -128.4211     -0.4587
     Population         (0.0030)             (0.0027)             (0.0005)                    (101.3261)              (96.3382)   (10.9350)
     *significant at the 10% level; **significant at the 5% level; ***significant at the 1% level
     Notes: All estimations use 54,398 individuals (including the dummy observations). All other notes per Table 2.




                                                                            38
Table 5: Fixed Effects DD Estimates by Gender: Under 65

                                       Inpatient Admissions                                                      ER Visits
     Panel A: Females
     Payer              Any                   Medicaid                Private                            Any      Medicaid      Private
     Japanese         -0.0001                  0.0001*                -0.0001                          -0.0004    -0.0004**    0.0004*
     Population      (0.0002)                  (0.0001)              (0.0001)                         (0.0002)     (0.0002)    (0.0002)
     COFA          -0.0027***                -0.0047***             0.0019***                       -0.0051***   -0.0126***   0.0061***
     Population      (0.0004)                  (0.0005)              (0.0002)                         (0.0008)     (0.0011)    (0.0006)

                                       Inpatient Admissions                                                      ER Visits
     Panel B: Males
     Payer              Any                   Medicaid                Private                            Any      Medicaid      Private
     Japanese        -0.0004*                   0.0000              -0.0004**                          -0.0001      -0.0000     0.0000
     Population       (0.0002)                 (0.0001)              (0.0001)                         (0.0002)     (0.0001)    (0.0001)
     COFA           -0.0028***               -0.0040***             0.0011***                       -0.0043***   -0.0072***   0.0024***
     Population       (0.0004)                 (0.0004)              (0.0002)                         (0.0008)     (0.0008)    (0.0004)
     *significant at the 10% level; **significant at the 5% level; ***significant at the 1% level
     Notes: All estimations use 80,251 females and 76,693 males. All other notes per Table 2.




                                                                               39
Table 6: Fixed Effects DD Estimates: Utilization by the Uninsured



                                    Under 65                                             Over 65
                       Inpatient                  ER                         Inpatient                ER
 Japanese              0.0000*                0.0002***                       -0.0000               0.0000
 Population            (0.0000)                (0.0000)                      (0.0000)              (0.0000)
 COFA                   0.0000                0.0016***                       -0.0001              -0.0008*
 Population            (0.0001)                (0.0002)                      (0.0002)              (0.0004)
 Notes: All outcomes are counts of admissions per patient/month that were charged to the individual. All other
 notes are per Tables 2 and 3.




                                                        40
Table 7: Fixed Effects DD Estimates: Effects on Infants

                         Inpatient                                     ER                           Inpatient Charges                        ER Charges
 COFA             -0.0043***       -0.0033***           -0.0100***          -0.0106***        -99.4322***      -87.4223***           -21.7791***   -22.6053***
 Population         (0.0003)         (0.0003)             (0.0007)            (0.0007)          (13.0656)        (11.9032)             (1.4574)       (1.4949)
 COFA *                            -0.0978***                               0.0617***                         -1147.4594**                          86.9184***
 Infant                              (0.0151)                                 (0.0104)                          (392.1023)                           (15.9462)
 Notes: All outcomes were reimbursed by Medicaid. The estimations were restricted to people under 65 years of age. All specifications correspond to those from Table 2
 except that the odd columns include a dummy for being an infant and its interaction with the COFA/post variable. All other notes are per Table 2.




                                                                             41
Table A1: Fixed Effects DD Estimates: Under 65 (Alternative Weights)

                                      Inpatient Admissions                                                           ER Visits
     Panel A
     Payer                 Any               Medicaid               Private                        Any               Medicaid               Private
     Japanese           -0.0002*               0.0001             -0.0003**                      -0.0002             -0.0002*               0.0002
     Population          (0.0001)             (0.0000)             (0.0001)                     (0.0002)              (0.0001)             (0.0001)
     COFA              -0.0023***           -0.0038***            0.0014***                   -0.0041***            -0.0088***            0.0038***
     Population          (0.0003)             (0.0003)             (0.0001)                     (0.0005)              (0.0006)             (0.0003)

                                         Total Utilization                                                        Total Charges
     Panel B
     Payer                 Any               Medicaid               Private                        Any               Medicaid              Private
     Japanese           -0.0004*               -0.0001              -0.0001                      -9.8978*              -1.8727             -4.6173
     Population          (0.0002)             (0.0001)             (0.0001)                      (4.2813)             (2.0709)            (3.2178)
     COFA              -0.0065***           -0.0126***            0.0052***                   -43.0653***          -106.3458***          50.8276***
     Population          (0.0007)             (0.0008)             (0.0004)                     (12.7479)            (12.2000)            (6.1824)
     *significant at the 10% level; **significant at the 5% level; ***significant at the 1% level
     Notes: Per Table 2. Additionally, the results in this table employ alternative weights based off of the 5-year ACS count of Micronesian in Hawaii
     plus its margin of error, which is 31,653.




                                                                             42
Table A2: Fixed Effects DD Estimates: Under 65, Admissions and Charges in Logs

 Payer                  Any          Medicaid        Private                   Any           Medicaid       Private
                              Total Utilization (Logs)                                 Total Charges (Logs)

 Japanese           -0.0003*             -0.0000           -0.0001         -0.0038**              -0.0002     -0.0015
 Population          (0.0001)           (0.0001)          (0.0001)          (0.0013)             (0.0006)    (0.0011)
 COFA              -0.0048***         -0.0093***         0.0038***        -0.0501***           -0.0999***   0.0418***
 Population          (0.0005)           (0.0006)          (0.0003)          (0.0049)             (0.0062)    (0.0029)
 *
 significant at the 10% level; **significant at the 5% level; ***significant at the 1% level
 Notes: Per Table 2.




                                                                                  43
Table A3: Fixed Effects DD Estimates: Under 65 (with and without time dummies)


 Payer                             Any                                Medicaid                            Private

                                                         Inpatient Admissions

 Japanese           -0.0002*            -0.0002          0.0001       0.0001                      -0.0003**    -0.0002**
 Population          (0.0001)          (0.0001)         (0.0000)     (0.0000)                      (0.0001)     (0.0001)
 COFA              -0.0027***        -0.0028***       -0.0043*** -0.0044***                       0.0015***    0.0015***
 Population          (0.0003)          (0.0003)         (0.0003)     (0.0003)                      (0.0001)     (0.0001)
                                                              ER Visits

 Japanese             -0.0002           -0.0002        -0.0002*                -0.0002*             0.0002       0.0002
 Population          (0.0002)          (0.0002)         (0.0001)                (0.0001)           (0.0001)     (0.0001)
 COFA              -0.0047***        -0.0047***       -0.0100***              -0.0100***          0.0043***    0.0043***
 Population          (0.0006)          (0.0006)         (0.0007)                (0.0007)           (0.0003)     (0.0003)
 Time
 Effects                No               Yes                  No                  Yes                No             Yes
 *                            **                              ***
 significant at the 10% level; significant at the 5% level;         significant at the 1% level
 Notes: Per Table 2.




                                                                                     44
Figure 1: Utilization by Race




                                45
Figure 2: Event Analysis, Under 65




                                     46
Figure 3: Effects by Age




                           47
Figure 4a: Event Analysis, Under 65, Uninsured Utilization




                                              48
Figure 4b: Effects by Age, Uninsured Utilization




                                              49
