                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE FOUNDING OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE, THE GREAT DEPRESSION AND
            THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. INTERBANK NETWORK

                                      Matthew S. Jaremski
                                      David C. Wheelock

                                       Working Paper 26034
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26034


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




The authors thank Dan Bogart, Charles Calomiris, and two anonymous referees for comments on
a previous version of this paper, as well as conference participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland's 2018 Financial and Monetary History Workshop and the 2018 World Economic
History Conference. The paper greatly benefited from a grant from the Yale Economic Growth
Center. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
official positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Matthew S. Jaremski and David C. Wheelock. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Founding of the Federal Reserve, the Great Depression and the Evolution of the U.S.
Interbank Network
Matthew S. Jaremski and David C. Wheelock
NBER Working Paper No. 26034
July 2019
JEL No. G21,L14,N22

                                          ABSTRACT

Financial network structure is an important determinant of systemic risk. This paper examines
how the U.S. interbank network evolved over a long and important period that included two key
events: the founding of the Federal Reserve and the Great Depression. Banks established
connections to correspondents that joined the Federal Reserve in cities with Fed offices, initially
reducing overall network concentration. The network became even more focused on Fed cities
during the Depression, as survival rates were higher for banks with more existing connections to
Fed cities, and as survivors established new connections to those cities over time.


Matthew S. Jaremski
Utah State University
Department of Economics and Finance
3565 Old Main Hill
Logan, UT 84322
and NBER
matthew.jaremski@usu.edu

David C. Wheelock
Research Division
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166-0442
david.c.wheelock@stls.frb.org
 The Founding of the Federal Reserve, the Great Depression and the Evolution of the U.S.
                                  Interbank Network
                                              Abstract

       Financial network structure is an important determinant of systemic risk. This

       paper examines how the U.S. interbank network evolved over a long and

       important period that included two key events: the founding of the Federal

       Reserve and the Great Depression. Banks established connections to

       correspondents that joined the Federal Reserve in cities with Fed offices, initially

       reducing overall network concentration. The network became even more focused

       on Fed cities during the Depression, as survival rates were higher for banks with

       more existing connections to Fed cities, and as survivors established new

       connections to those cities over time.


1. Introduction

       The interconnected nature of financial networks can propagate shocks, increase systemic

risk, and magnify economic downturns. A growing literature finds that contagion in networks of

interlinked financial institutions was important during recent and historical financial crises (e.g.,

Puhr, Seliger, and Sigmund 2012; Cohen-Cole, Patacchini, and Zenou 2016; Calomiris and

Carlson 2017; Mitchener and Richardson 2019). Insights from theoretical studies suggest that the

tendency of interbank networks to amplify shocks reflects the relative size of network members,

the extent of interconnections between them, and the magnitude of shocks hitting the system,

whereas the systemic risk posed by individual institutions depends on heterogeneity in network

structure and the concentration of counterparty exposures (Cont, Moussa, and Santos 2013).

Prominent in this literature is the idea that greater interconnectedness can make networks

"robust-yet-fragile" (e.g., Allen and Gale 2007; Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi 2015).

                                                  1
Specifically, greater interconnectedness makes an interbank network more resilient to relatively

minor shocks, but can be destabilizing if adverse shocks are sufficiently large to eliminate the

excess liquidity of the banking system. This is especially true for core-periphery systems that

have a small number of well-connected banks at the center of the network, including those of

Germany (Craig and von Peter 2014), the United Kingdom (Gai, Haldane, and Kapadia 2011),

and the United States.1

           Although studies suggest that network structure affects systemic risk, there has been

relatively little empirical work on how the structures of interbank networks evolve. Using newly

digitized data on the entire U.S. interbank network in 1900, 1910, 1919, 1929, and 1940, this

paper studies how the network evolved over a relatively long and important period in U.S.

financial history that included two key events: the founding of the Federal Reserve (Fed) and the

Great Depression. Both events seem likely to have produced lasting changes in the structure of

the interbank network. The founding of the Fed established a lender of last resort and new

federal banking regulator, a new structure of reserve requirements, and a new payments provider.

The Great Depression eliminated some one-third of U.S. banks and led to further substantive

changes in bank regulation. By examining quantitatively how the network evolved over the first

forty years of the 20th century, we can confirm a long-established, but largely descriptive

understanding of the interbank network and study how the network evolved following these two

key events.2



1
    Other theoretical studies of the channels through which networks can transmit shocks include Allen and Gale

(2000), Dasgupta (2004), Allen and Babus (2009), and Freixas, Parigi, and Rochet (2000).
2
    Descriptive studies of the interbank network and correspondent system include Watkins (1929) and Myers (1931),

and more recently James (1978) and James and Weiman (2010).


                                                           2
          Historical studies have used detailed micro-level data on interbank connections in

specific locations or short periods in research on banking panics, contagion, and local economic

development.3 However, other than our paper, only Das, Mitchener, and Vossmeyer (2018) use

data on the entire network for even a single year. Data on the connections of all banks is vital to

understanding the structure of the network. By digitizing the connections of all banks, we are

able to identify the largest correspondent banks and most prominent cities, and thereby provide a

complete picture of the network's structure. Thus, whereas descriptive studies have provided a

general picture of the network and those based on small samples have quantified pieces of the

network, we are the first to document the entire structure of the network for any time before the

Great Depression or to provide quantitative evidence on how the structure evolved over time.

          Our paper relates closely to studies focusing on how changes in regulation and financial

crises can affect the formation and structure of interbank networks. Such studies include Paddrik,

Anderson, and Wang (2019), who examine how the interbank network responded to the major

regulatory changes introduced by the National Banking Acts of the 1860s. Based on a sample of

Pennsylvania banks, they find that the Acts led to an increase in network concentration and

potentially systemic risk by encouraging banks to shift their interbank relationships to

correspondent banks in New York City and Chicago. Das, Mitchener, and Vossmeyer (2018)


3
    Examples include Odell and Weiman (1998), who use information about interbank connections among Georgia

and Texas banks in 1880, 1900, and 1910; Redenius (2002), who studies connections among Indiana and Georgia

banks before 1910; Calomiris and Carlson (2016, 2017), who examine connections of national banks in 38 regional

centers during the early 1890s; Paddrik, Anderson, and Wang (2019), who use data for Pennsylvania banks in the

1860s; Carlson, Mitchener, and Richardson (2011), who study the transmission of distress among Florida banks

during Great Depression; and Heitfield, Richardson, and Wang (2017), who use interbank data for Tennessee,

Mississippi and Alabama to study contagion in 1930.


                                                        3
consider the impact of Great Depression-era bank failures on the interbank network. They

present several descriptive measures of the entire U.S. interbank network in 1929 and 1934 and

find that the systemic risk of the system, and particularly the risk posed by the very largest

banks, increased during the early Great Depression. We build on these studies by investigating

how the founding of the Fed and the Great Depression affected the distribution of network

connections among banks and cities with different characteristics. In particular, we examine how

the Fed's founding affected the types of correspondents and cities that banks chose to connect to

as well as whether the changes in the network observed during the Depression continued or

interrupted any trends in network evolution that began with the Fed's founding.

       Our study also provides context and support for the range of papers that study interbank

contagion during the Great Depression and other periods. For instance, Richardson (2007) shows

that the failure of Caldwell and Company in 1930 contributed to the demise of many other banks

through their interbank connections. Carlson, Mitchener, and Richardson (2011) show that

correspondent relationships transmitted distress among Florida banks during a crisis in 1929, and

Richardson and Van Horn (2018) show that international connections were important for

spreading risk to New York during the Depression. Das, Mitchener, and Vossmeyer (2018) show

that network risk measures help predict bank survival to 1934, and Calomiris, Jaremski, and

Wheelock (2019) find that during the Depression, banks were vulnerable to closures of their

correspondents. Whereas these studies all take network structure as given, our focus here is on

how the structure evolved over the three decades before the Great Depression and how it

changed during the Depression, and in this way, we provide a long-run perspective that can help

inform future studies of network contagion.




                                                  4
       The data confirm that the U.S. interbank network at the end of the nineteenth century was

pyramidal in structure with a small number of banks serving as correspondents for a high

percentage of the nation's banks. Nearly every bank deposited funds in at least one other bank,

yet very few banks held funds for other banks. By far, the banks with the most connections were

large national banks located in New York City, and most U.S. banks had at least one New York

City correspondent.

       We find, however, that the network became less concentrated after the establishment of

the Federal Reserve System as banks shifted their correspondent relationships away from New

York City toward banks in other cities ­ especially cities with Federal Reserve offices within

their local Fed district. Federal Reserve member banks located in Fed cities were especially

favored as correspondents because of their unique access to Federal Reserve liquidity and

payments services, which they were able to pass through to other member and non-member

banks (Anderson, Calomiris, Jaremski, and Richardson 2018). The relative decline in focus on

New York City after the Fed's establishment occurred despite other trends in the financial

system that favored New York City banks, including the tremendous growth of U.S. securities

markets and international trade after World War I. Thus, the Fed not only served as a direct

alternative to private correspondent banks, but its founding changed the relative attractiveness of

correspondents in different locations and seems to have overshadowed other forces that would

likely have increased network concentration.

       Reduced network concentration meant that the risk of contagion emanating from a crisis

hitting a core city, as in the Panic of 1907, was somewhat lessened. However, the system

remained vulnerable to local and regional panics, and ultimately depended on the individual

Federal Reserve Banks to respond to those events to prevent them from spreading across the



                                                 5
banking system.4 The Fed's failure to prevent or stem the panics of the Great Depression, which

mainly arose outside the central money markets, enabled full-blown banking crises to spread

through the interbank system. Withdrawals of interbank deposits led correspondent banks to

reduce lending (Mitchener and Richardson 2019), and banks whose correspondents closed were

themselves at higher risk of closing. In the wake of this distress, banks increased their

connections to correspondents in cities with Federal Reserve Banks and branches even though,

on average, those cities did not have lower rates of bank closure than other large cities. Banks

were also more likely to link to Fed member banks, which had lower failure rates during the

Depression and could provide access to Federal Reserve liquidity.

2. Background on the Interbank Network

           The U.S. developed a deep and active interbank network in the nineteenth century. As a

result of legal restrictions on branch banking, the banking system was comprised of thousands of

small, unit banks that depended on relationships with banks in major cities for payments

services, securities transactions, and to manage seasonal imbalances between local deposits and

local loans. Interbank relationships consisted primarily of account agreements between banks.

Each connection involved a bank and a correspondent in which the bank maintained a deposit.

Following convention, we refer to the banks that held deposits with a given correspondent bank

as the correspondent's respondents.

           Banks established connections with correspondents for three main reasons. First, most

banks could use correspondent deposits to satisfy a portion of their legal reserve requirements

4
    Davison and Ramirez (2014) show that local banking panics were common during the 1920s. Carlson, Mitchener

and Richardson (2011) describe how the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta successfully ended a panic in Florida in

1929, and Richardson and Troost (2009) show that the impact of Great Depression panics on local economic

conditions depended on the responsiveness of individual Federal Reserve Banks to them.


                                                        6
and received interest on those deposits until prohibited by the Banking Act of 1933. Second,

banks invested surplus funds with and obtained loans from their correspondents. Third, banks

relied on correspondents for payments services. In particular, correspondent banks typically

cleared any checks, drafts, and notes drawn on banks in its city or any other bank in its network

and deposited the proceeds into the respondent's account.

       The interbank system was large in terms of total deposits and relative to banking system

assets. Shown in Figure 1, deposits "due from banks and Fed" (i.e., funds held by banks on

deposit in correspondent banks or Federal Reserve Banks) totaled roughly $2 billion in 1914 (in

constant 1900 dollars), $2.5 billion in 1929, and topped out at more than $12 billion in 1940. All

of the net increase between 1914 and 1929 reflected balances held with Federal Reserve Banks

rather than with commercial bank correspondents. Deposits "due to banks" represent funds held

by correspondent banks for the accounts of their respondents, and exclude balances that banks

held with the Fed. Total interbank deposits held in correspondent banks changed little (in

inflation-adjusted dollars) between 1914 and 1929, and declined from about 10 percent of total

banking system assets to 5 percent, while deposits held at the Fed rose to about $500 million (in

1900 dollars). However, both deposits with correspondent banks and deposits with the Fed rose

substantially during the 1930s, in dollar terms and as a percentage of total banking system assets.

       The banking system depended on a well-functioning interbank network. However, the

network tended to break down and become a source of instability when hit by run-inducing

shocks. Shocks to banks in core cities, especially New York City, sometimes produced major

panics that reverberated throughout the banking system, as in the Panics of 1873 and 1907, as did

shocks that originated in areas outside of the central money markets, as in the Panic of 1893. In

panics, banks were unable to access their funds when their correspondents suspended



                                                 7
withdrawals, causing the panic to spread across the system via the interbank network (Sprague

1910; Wicker 2000; Gorton and Tallman 2018).

       Inspired by National Monetary Commission's study of U.S. and international banking

systems after the Panic of 1907, the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 sought to reduce, if not

eliminate, the banking system's reliance on the interbank network and concentration of the

nation's bank reserves in New York City. The Fed's decentralized structure consisting of 12

quasi-independent Reserve Banks serving distinct regional districts reflected a desire to

minimize control of the nation's financial system by the major New York City banks. The

Federal Reserve Act required banks with federal charters (i.e., national banks) to become

members of the Federal Reserve System and hold reserves in a regional Federal Reserve Bank

(state-chartered banks could also become members but were not required to do so). The Reserve

Banks, which opened in November 1914, offered payments services and liquidity to their

members through discount window loans.

       Banks responded to the establishment of a lender of last resort by substantially reducing

their own liquidity (Carlson and Wheelock 2018; Calomiris, Jaremski, and Wheelock 2019). By

lending to banks through its discount window, the Fed largely eliminated seasonal tightness in

money markets, which had long been associated with banking panics (Miron 1986; Bernstein,

Hughson, and Weidenmier 2010; Carlson and Wheelock 2016, 2018). The nation's banks

continued to rely on interbank connections for services that the Fed did not provide, however,

such as a conduit for investing in securities markets (Watkins 1929). The Great Depression

resulted in still more changes in the network's structure, both as a consequence of bank failures

and of changes in the correspondent ties of banks that survived the Depression.




                                                8
           The historical record makes clear the reasons why the interbank network arose

organically in the United States and how it transmitted financial disturbances across the banking

system. However, as discussed in the introduction, the existing literature's focus on small

samples of banks and time periods has not provided a full account of the network's structure at a

particular point in time or how the structure evolved over time in response to the establishment

of the Federal Reserve System or the Great Depression. The rest of this paper examines

comprehensive bank- and city-level information on interbank connections for a broader

understanding of how the nation's network changed in response to these two key events.

3. Interbank Network Data and Macro Facts

           To provide a comprehensive view of the U.S. interbank network at different points in

time, we digitized the correspondent relationships published by the Rand McNally Bankers'

Directory in 1900, 1910, 1919, 1929, and 1940. The directories claim to provide "a full and

complete list of banks, bankers and savings banks in the United States" (1899, title page) as well

as each bank's "principal correspondents." While giving no definition of principal

correspondents, the evidence suggests that the Directory attempted to capture the largest and

most important correspondents. From the few surviving archival records that contain full

correspondent information for comparison, we determined that by 1900 the correspondent lists in

Rand McNally covered the vast majority of funds placed in correspondents. In addition to

providing a source for identifying the correspondents of every bank, the information allows us to

identify every bank's respondents.5

5
    The earliest editions of Rand McNally Bankers' Directory only listed correspondents in New York City or in the

largest nearby financial center. Coverage increased over time and it appears that by 1900 most correspondents were

included. Directories include listings of private banks, and bank branches as well as commercial banks, mutual

savings banks and institutions, and trust companies. We focus on chartered depository institutions and as such omit


                                                           9
            We chose to digitize years that enable us to study the evolution of the interbank market

across three distinct regimes. Specifically, 1900 and 1910 provide a view of the network before

the establishment of the Federal Reserve in 1914, while the years 1919 and 1929 cover the early

Federal Reserve period. Finally, by comparing data for 1929 and 1940, we obtain a view of how

the network changed during the Great Depression.6

           When describing the U.S. interbank network, we find it helpful to measure network

concentration and establish other facts about the network in each year before examining patterns

in the underlying interbank connections. Shown in Table 1, most banks had more than one

correspondent. The average number of correspondents per bank rose from 2.3 in 1900 to 3.2 in

1940. However, while most banks had multiple correspondents, relatively few had any

respondents. That is, few banks were correspondents of other banks. In each year, close to 90

percent of banks had no respondents and 5-8 percent had only one or two. Fewer than one-half

percent of banks had more than 150 respondents. Therefore, while nearly every bank participated

in the network, only a handful of banks were network hubs linking together large numbers of

banks.

           Table 2 lists the 10 banks with the largest number of respondents in each year, as well as

the percentage of U.S. banks that were directly connected to at least one of the top 10 banks.

Clearly, the U.S. interbank system was highly concentrated. In 1900, for example, 14.7 percent


(1) private banks (i.e., unincorporated financial institutions with no charters or regulation) because they typically

were small and did not always take deposits, and (2) bank branches because they either mimicked their head office's

correspondents or did not list any. We also omit the less than 1 percent of banks that did not list any correspondents

as we are unsure whether the data are missing or that those banks actually had no correspondents.
6
    We chose 1919, rather than 1920, to avoid the post-World War I recession that began in 1920, and 1929, rather

than 1930, to capture the network on the eve of the Great Depression.


                                                           10
of all U.S. banks (1,465 banks) were respondents of the top correspondent bank (Hanover

National Bank of New York), while 53.8 percent of all banks (6,984 banks) were respondents of

at least one of the top correspondent banks. The banks with hundreds or thousands of

respondents had the greatest potential for contributing to systemic risk in the interbank network.7

           The percentage of banks connecting to the top correspondent banks varied somewhat

over time. The percentage connecting to the top bank declined from 14.8 percent in 1910 to 13

percent in 1919, but then rose over the subsequent two decades, reaching 21.4 percent in 1940.

The percentage of banks connecting to any of the top 10 increased from 53.8 percent in 1900 to

59.9 percent in 1910, then fell to 53.1 percent in 1929 before rising to 56.8 percent in 1940.

Thus, these measures indicate that while concentration remained high throughout the period, it

declined somewhat over the first decade and half after the founding of the Federal Reserve but

increased during the Great Depression.

           The information in Table 2 also shows that New York City and Chicago banks were

always among the most highly connected. For instance, in 1900, seven of the top 10

correspondent banks were located in New York City and two were located in Chicago, whereas

in 1940, six of the top 10 were in New York City and one was in Chicago. Table 3 lists the 10

cities with the largest number of respondent connections in each year. As suggested by the


7
    The literature on networks generally views concentration as one of the most important factors affecting the

potential transmission of risk through a network (e.g., Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi 2015; Das,

Mitchener and Vossmeyer 2018). Of course, the extent to which a given correspondent bank contributed to systemic

risk depended also on the share of its liabilities comprised of interbank deposits, and its capital and liquidity buffers,

all of which play a part in determining the potential loss to the network if the bank were to fail. Unfortunately,

however, data on interbank assets and liabilities are not available in published balance sheets for individual banks

after 1928, which would necessarily make any estimates of systemic risk imprecise.


                                                           11
previous tables, U.S. banks were highly connected to New York City and, to a lesser extent,

Chicago.

           Although New York City and Chicago remained the largest network hubs, the percentage

of banks with a New York City correspondent declined after 1900, when 85.2 percent of all U.S.

banks had at least one New York City correspondent. Substantial numbers of new banks opened

during the first two decades of the twentieth century, especially in the Midwest, South, and West.

Many of them connected to correspondents in regional banking centers, such as Kansas City,

Minneapolis, and Chicago, rather than New York. Between 1900 and 1919, the fraction of banks

located in the Northeast declined from 23.1 percent to 13.8 percent, and the percentage of banks

with a New York City correspondent declined to 63.7 percent.8 Failures and mergers eliminated

hundreds of banks during the 1920s, however, especially in the regions that had seen rapid

growth during the previous two decades. The fraction of banks located in the Northeast rose to

17.4 percent in 1929, but in spite of this, the percentage of banks with a New York City

correspondent continued to fall, down to 63.0 percent in 1929. Thus, something other than a shift

in the geographic mass of the banking system--likely the establishment of the Federal

Reserve--must have influenced where banks chose to establish correspondent ties during the

1920s. During the Depression, both the percentage of banks with a New York City correspondent

and the fraction of banks located in the Northeast rose. By 1940, 21.6 percent of banks were

located in the Northeast and 74.8 percent of all banks had a New York City correspondent.

           Coinciding with the shift in correspondent connections away from New York City

between 1900 and 1929, the percentage of total interbank connections to any of the top 10 cities

also declined, from 95.5 percent in 1900 to just 83.8 percent in 1929. As we show later, the


8
    The regional bank aggregates in this section are from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1959).


                                                          12
decline among the top 10 cities occurred as banks established ties to correspondents in Federal

Reserve Bank and branch cities in their own Fed districts.

           The number of banks that have a correspondent in a given city and the number of links to

correspondents in a city are two measures of the importance of a city to the nation-wide network.

However, those measures do not reflect the overall centrality of a city to the network, which

depends not only on the number respondents a city's banks have, but also the number and

importance of correspondent connections that the city's banks have to other cities. A city whose

banks have correspondents that are themselves well-connected will be more central to the

network, and hence likely to pose more systemic risk, than a city whose banks are connected to

correspondents with few other connections. Therefore, we augment the basic statistics with three

additional measures of network centrality at the city-level: degree, eigenvector, and betweenness

centrality.9

           Degree centrality measures the percentage of other cities to which a given city is directly

connected through either correspondent or respondent connections. Eigenvector centrality

reflects the collective importance of the banks in a particular city to the network based on 1) their

direct interbank connections to banks in other cities and 2) the relative importance of the banks

in the latter cities to the network. A city with a given number of connections to fringe cities (i.e.,

those with few connections) would receive a lower score than a city with a similar number of

connections to important cities (i.e., those with many connections). Betweenness centrality is a

measure based on the paths by which all cities are connected. Specifically, after calculating the

shortest path between every pair of cities, betweenness centrality is the percentage of total

shortest paths that cross through a particular city. A city with a high betweenness centrality score


9
    See Newman (2008) for additional discussion of these network measures.


                                                        13
thus sits in the middle of the network between a large number of city pairs, but does not have to

be directly connected to a large number of cities itself.

           Table 4 reports the mean centrality scores for all cities in 1900 (expressed as a

percentage), and changes in centrality scores across each decade.10 Shown individually are the

scores for the 12 Federal Reserve Bank cities, the average score for cities with branches of a

Federal Reserve Bank, and the average score for the 100 most populated cities with no Federal

Reserve office. As might be expected with a large number of cities and a highly concentrated,

hierarchical system, the mean centrality scores for all three measures are quite low, indicating

that relatively few cities were important network hubs. The scores for the three central reserve

cities--New York City, Chicago, and St. Louis--are higher than those of other Federal Reserve

cities before the Fed was established, and New York City and Chicago have by far the highest

scores throughout the years spanned by our data, reflecting their importance to the network

throughout the period.11

           Because the results are similar across the various measures, we focus on eigenvector

centrality, which is the most commonly used measure in network and contagion studies because

it emphasizes direct connections in measuring the relative importance of highly connected cities.

Bank closures in one city were likely to stress banks in cities with direct interbank connections to

that city, and thereby spread across the system. Eigenvector centrality captures the importance of

first order contagion that could originate from the bank closures in a particular city.

10
     We normalize the eigenvector centrality scores to sum to 100 in each year in order to obtain a unique score for

each city. Because the scores of most cities are quite small, in Table 4, we report the scores as percentages. Thus, for

example, we report New York City's 1900 score (1.2453) as 124.53%. The changes reported in the table are simple

changes in the scores again expressed as percentages (not percentage changes in the scores).
11
     The centrality scores for 1910, 1919, and 1929 and 1940 are reported in Appendix Table A1.


                                                            14
           The eigenvector centrality scores for nearly all cities declined between 1900 and 1910,

likely because of the large increase in the number of banks, especially in small towns and rural

locations. The Gold Standard Act of 1900 halved the minimum capital level for national banks in

smaller cities, from $50,000 to $25,000, which in turn prompted many states to cut the

minimums required for state-chartered banks. The number of banks in the United States as well

as the number of cities with at least one bank approximately doubled between 1900 and 1910

(Table 1). Many of the new banks were quite small and most established their first correspondent

links to banks in nearby cities, rather than to banks in distant financial centers.

           The eigenvector centrality scores for New York City, St. Louis, and Philadelphia also fell

between 1910 and 1919. However, the scores for other cities with Federal Reserve Banks and

branches rose, indicating that they had become more important to the network. Shown in the top

panel of Figure 2, Federal Reserve Bank and branch cities generally had the largest increases in

eigenvector centrality over the 1910s; most other cities experienced either a decline or a small

increase. Indeed, among Fed cities, the increases in eigenvector centrality were negatively

correlated with their scores at the beginning of the decade. Northeastern Fed cities generally had

small increases in centrality, but cities that were somewhat surprising choices for Reserve Banks,

such as Cleveland, Richmond, and Dallas as well as small branch cities such as Seattle, Helena,

and Omaha had large increases.12

           The increased centrality of Fed cities, particularly those that were not previously

important, occurred despite other changes in the banking system that would have tended to

reduce centrality scores for all major cities. In particular, the growth of the banking system over


12
     Jaremski and Wheelock (2017) examine the selection of cities for Reserve Banks and branches and discuss the

more controversial selections.


                                                          15
the 1910s would have tended to dilute connections to established cities and thereby lower their

centrality scores. The scores of most Fed cities increased, however, and by substantially more

than did the scores of most other large cities, suggesting that the presence of the Fed, rather than

an increased preference of banks for correspondents in large cities, drove the reorientation of the

network toward locations with Fed offices. The decline in the centrality of New York City,

which occurred despite tremendous growth of securities markets and international trade during

and after World War I, and New York banks' increased share of national bank assets and

deposits after the Fed's founding, is further evidence that the establishment of the Fed was the

dominant cause of the network reorientation. The active involvement of all 12 Reserve Banks in

the marketing and distribution of Liberty Bonds in their districts may have also contributed to the

shift away from New York City toward other Fed cities.13

           Eigenvector centrality scores for many cities with Federal Reserve Banks and branches

also increased substantially between 1929 and 1940 relative to those of other large cities,

indicating that Fed cities became even more central to the network during the Depression. While

the centrality scores of nearly all large cities increased during the 1930s, it is clear from the

bottom panel of Figure 2 that scores for Fed cities generally increased the most. To some extent,

the overall increase in concentration reflected a decline in the number of cities with a bank in

operation, though as we show below, the main explanation seems to be that banks increased their

connections to Federal Reserve cities at the expense of other cities. The next section examines

patterns in the network connections of banks and correspondents with particular characteristics




13
     Myers (1931) describes the emergence of New York City as the nation's principal money market during the

nineteenth century and the importance of the City's banks in government finance.


                                                         16
for additional insights about how the founding of the Fed and the Great Depression reshaped the

network.

4. Micro-Level Network Statistics

       Next, we examine patterns in the correspondent choices of individual banks. As noted

previously, on average, banks had between two and four correspondents. Shown in Table 5, the

vast majority of correspondent links were to national banks. For example, in 1900, nearly 90

percent of all links were to a national bank, whereas in 1929 and 1940, 72 percent of links were

to national banks. The increased percentage of links to state-chartered institutions after 1910 was

entirely due to growth in the percentage of links to state-chartered trust companies that joined the

Federal Reserve System. The vast majority of trust companies with respondents were Federal

Reserve members, and several trust companies were among the top 10 correspondents in 1940

(Table 2). Correspondent banks and trust companies were also disproportionately located in

financial centers. More than 75 percent of all links were to banks (or trust companies) located in

cities with Federal Reserve Banks or branches. In the following subsections, we examine changes

in bank-level connections over time to provide additional clarity about the patterns we observe in

the broader statistics, focusing in particular focusing on the effects of the establishment of the

Federal Reserve and the Great Depression

4.1 Establishment of the Federal Reserve

       The Federal Reserve Act brought about the most fundamental regulatory changes of the

period between the National Banking Acts of the 1860s and the Great Depression. The centrality

measures reported above indicate that the cities that received Federal Reserve Banks or branches

became more central to the network. Here, we examine how other aspects of the network's




                                                 17
structure changed after the Fed was established and present evidence consistent with the

founding of the Fed being the main driver of changes in the network.

        The Fed's presence seems to have caused a distinct shift in where surviving banks chose

to have correspondents. In Table 5, we report the percentages of all correspondent links that were

to i) any city with a Fed office, ii) each of the three Fed cities that were central reserve cities

from the National Banking era (New York City, Chicago, and St. Louis), and iii) all other Fed

cities. We also report the average percentage of each bank's correspondent links that were to

banks located in cities with Fed offices in the given bank's Federal Reserve district. In 1900 and

1910, more than half of all correspondent connections were to banks in New York, Chicago, and

St Louis. However, that percentage had dropped to 39.2 percent by 1919, and by 1940, only 37.6

percent of all correspondent ties were to banks in the three cities. At the same time, the

percentage of links to banks in other Federal Reserve Bank and branch cities rose, from 31.0

percent in 1900 to 36.1 percent in 1919 and 40.7 percent in 1940. The relative declines of New

York, Chicago, and St. Louis are not surprising because the Federal Reserve Act eliminated the

ability of national banks to use deposits in a reserve or central reserve city bank to satisfy a

portion of their reserve requirements.

        The Fed's establishment enhanced the ability of banks to obtain payments services and

liquidity from correspondents located in their regional Fed offices, thereby reducing the need to

have connections in New York City. The percentage of the average bank's links that were to

cities with Fed offices within the bank's Fed district increased from 38.3 percent in 1910 to 46.0

percent in 1940. This redistribution contributed to a decline in the average distance from banks to

their correspondents from 404 miles in 1910 to 233 miles in 1940. The increase in the percentage

of links to cities with Fed offices within a bank's district suggests that the geographic



                                                  18
redistribution of correspondent relationships reflected the structure of the Federal Reserve

System, rather than simply a desire of banks to diversify their correspondent connections across

large cities.14

           Fewer than 1,750 of the more than 19,000 state bank and trust companies in existence

during our sample period ever joined the Federal Reserve System. However, many of those that

did join experienced large increases in their share of correspondent links. This was especially

true for trust companies. In 1940, for example, 24.5 percent of all correspondent links were to

trust companies, and 95 percent of those links were to members of the Federal Reserve System.

This suggests that the ability to receive liquidity indirectly through member banks likely

encouraged banks to establish links to member banks, especially those located in cities with Fed

offices. Membership conveyed advantages, including access to the Fed's discount window and

payments services, which made member banks attractive as correspondents. Indeed, Anderson,

Calomiris, Jaremski, and Richardson (2018) show that New York state banks that already were

established correspondent banks were more likely to join the Fed, and gained even more business

by doing so. Our data confirm this finding more generally.

           In Table 6, we present additional evidence about changes in correspondent relationship

patterns, focusing on sets of banks that survived from 1910 to 1919 and from 1910 to 1929.

Focusing on banks that were present in both the first and last years of each interval helps indicate

whether the changes in the aggregate statistics reported in Table 5 reflect changes in the

14
     Jaremski and Wheelock (2017) show that a survey of national banks was highly influential in determining the

boundaries of Federal Reserve districts and selection of cities for Federal Reserve office. The results of that survey,

in turn, largely reflected pre-existing correspondent links. Hence, while the cities where Federal Reserve offices

were located were already relatively important nodes of the interbank system, they became even more important

after the Fed was established.


                                                          19
preferences of banks for the types and locations of correspondents, and not merely the entry or

exit of banks and correspondents.15

           The evidence reported in Table 6 supports and extends the evidence reported in Table 5

for all banks. Across both windows (1910-19 and 1910-29) and all bank types, we observe a shift

of correspondent ties toward Fed member banks located in cities with Fed offices in a bank's

district.16 Additionally, the table shows that the average number of respondents per bank

increased substantially for banks that joined the Federal Reserve System. For example, the

average number of respondents among Fed member state banks and trust companies rose from

2.9 in 1910 to 6.3 in 1919, whereas the average number of respondents for other state banks and

trust companies was small throughout the period, though it did rise from 0.09 in 1910 to 0.25 in

1919.

           Comparing changes in correspondent ties of Federal Reserve member and non-member

banks provides more evidence that Fed's founding was likely responsible for the reorientation of

the interbank network. Congress required all national banks to join the Federal Reserve System

but membership was optional for state banks and trust companies. Shown in Table 6, Fed

member banks shifted their correspondent links more towards banks in cities with Federal

Reserve offices in their Fed district than did non-member banks. For example, between 1910 and

1919, the average percentage of a bank's correspondents located in a Fed city in the bank's

district increased by 1.2 percentage points for non-members, 3.5 percentage points for state bank

and trust company members, and 5.0 percentage points for national banks.



15
     We identified the state banks that belonged to the Federal Reserve System in each year and the districts in which

they were located from the Annual Report of the Federal Reserve Board.
16
     Reported in the Appendix, we find similar though weaker patterns when a clearinghouse opened in particular city.


                                                           20
4.2 The Great Depression

           Next, we investigate the structural changes in the network that occurred during the Great

Depression.17 In particular, we ask whether the relative increase in correspondent links to Fed

office cities in the 1930s resulted from a shift in bank preferences toward establishing

connections in nearby Federal Reserve cities, or simply the closures of banks with more

dispersed correspondents. We address this question by examining changes in the correspondents

of banks that did not close during the 1930s, and then by examining differences in correspondent

patterns between surviving and closed banks.

           The top panel of Table 7 displays correspondent information for banks that survived from

1929 to 1940. These data show that surviving banks shifted their correspondent links toward

banks in Federal Reserve cities, particularly Fed cities in their district. For example, among all

banks that survived the decade, the average percentage of correspondents located in a local

Federal Reserve city increased by 3.1 percentage points, from 44.5 percent to 47.6 percent. On

average, in 1940, banks that survived the decade had more correspondents, and more located in

Fed cities, than in 1929. This reorientation occurred despite the fact that Fed cities generally had

as many bank closures as other cities. Fed cities experienced significantly larger increases in

eigenvector centrality than did other large cities with similar percentage changes in number of

banks, and the correlation between the change in eigenvector centrality and the change in the

number of banks between 1929 and 1940 is negative.18 Hence, the increase in network focus on

17
     Because our data are limited to observations on the network in 1929 and 1940, we are unable to identify

separately the effects of the banking panics and other financial distresses on the network from those of the changes

in regulation that occurred later in the decade. We discussing the effects of the Great Depression, therefore, we are

referring to the totality of events that occurred during the period.
18
     The negative correlation is apparent in Appendix Figure A.1.


                                                            21
Fed cities between 1929 and 1940 was driven at least in part by surviving banks choosing to

increase their links to Fed cities.

           The bottom panel of Table 7 reports various correspondent measures for banks according

to whether they closed during the Depression or survived.19 Although survivors and closed banks

were somewhat similar in terms of most values, on the eve of the Depression, higher percentages

of the correspondents of survivors were located in their district's Fed cities. Among all bank

types, on average, 43.9 percent of the correspondents of survivors were located in a local Federal

Reserve city, compared with an average of 41.3 percent for banks that closed. The average

distance in miles to a correspondent was also substantially shorter for survivors, at 253.4 miles

compared with 301.5 miles for banks that closed. These findings are consistent with the idea that

access to a Fed office in a bank's district, perhaps only indirectly through a correspondent in that

city, conveyed an advantage that reduced a bank's likelihood of closing during the Great

Depression. Because data on Federal Reserve lending to specific banks are unavailable, we

cannot determine whether that advantage resulted from direct injections of liquidity or perhaps

simply that having a correspondent in a Fed city enhanced a bank's reputation with its

depositors. Nonetheless, the differences between closed and surviving banks in average numbers

(and percentages) of correspondents located in nearby Fed cities are striking.

           As suggested by previous work on contagion during the Great Depression, we note an

association between a bank's odds of surviving the Depression and the survival rate of its

correspondents. Among banks that survived the Depression, the average correspondent closure

rate was 24.2 percent, whereas among banks that closed, the average correspondent closure rate


19
     We consider a bank closed if it is listed in the Rand McNally Bankers' Directory in 1929 but not in 1940.

Therefore, we treat banks that suspended but later reopened during the decade as survivors.


                                                           22
was 31.9 percent. The positive correlation holds separately for national banks as well as for state

banks and trust companies regardless of whether they were Fed members.20 Lacking the exact

dates when banks close, we cannot definitively determine the direction of causality between the

closures of banks and their correspondents. However, a bank would be more likely to suffer

impaired assets leading to failure when its correspondent closed, than would a correspondent

bank when its respondent closed.21

5. Conclusion

           The interconnected nature of financial networks can propagate shocks, increase systemic

risk, and magnify economic downturns. Theoretical studies suggest that the vulnerability of

interbank networks to systemic risk is related both to the extent of interconnections between

members of the network and their relative sizes, as well as to the magnitude of shocks hitting the

system. The "core-periphery" structure of the U.S. interbank system during the second half of the

nineteenth century and first decades of the twentieth century had a high potential for contagion

via formal correspondent connections between banks. The failure of a major correspondent bank

could have ripple effects across the entire system, but even the failure of a mid-size

correspondent bank in a regional banking center could trigger local contagion.

           The Federal Reserve was intended to reduce the banking system's reliance on the

interbank network, and especially the concentration of the system's reserves in New York City.

Although the share of interbank deposits held by major New York City banks did fall after the

20
     Appendix Figure A.2 shows that the positive correlation holds across all values of correspondent closures.
21
     Respondent closures could impose costs on correspondent banks. For example, Mitchener and Richardson (2019)

show that correspondent banks reduced their lending when they experienced outflows of respondent deposits.

However, while such outflows would force correspondents to either reduce lending or turn to more expensive

sources of funds, outflows of respondent deposits are not likely to put a correspondent bank out of business.


                                                           23
Fed was established, previous studies have not examined how the interbank network changed

with the introduction of the Fed. Using newly digitized data on the interbank relationships of

every U.S. depository institutions in 1900, 1910, 1919, 1929 and 1940, we quantify changes in

network concentration and other aspects of network structure over four decades. We show that

while New York City remained the network's most important node, nearly all of the other cities

that received Federal Reserve Banks or branches gained connections and became more central to

the network after the Fed was established. Ironically, by pushing the network toward the regional

Fed cities, the System's founders may have inadvertently made the banking system more

vulnerable to regional liquidity shocks and to the responsiveness of local Federal Reserve Bank

officials to those events.22

           Comprehensive analysis of network characteristics during the Great Depression reveals

that surviving banks responded to the Depression by linking even more to correspondents in

cities with Federal Reserve offices, especially New York City. We show that the increased

importance of Fed cities to the network during the 1930s was not the result of lower bank closure

rates in those cities, a shift in preferences toward large cities in general, or to changes in the

composition of the banking system resulting from bank closures. Further, we find that banks with

correspondents that failed or otherwise closed were themselves more likely to close during the


22
     Friedman and Schwartz (1963) emphasize parochialism and inattention to national concerns among local Federal

Reserve officials during the Great Depression, which they argue contributed to the Fed's failure to respond

aggressively to banking panics or the sharp decline in economic activity. Richardson and Troost (2009) show that

differences in the degree to which officials of different Reserve Banks responded to liquidity shortfalls resulted in

significant differences in bank and economic distress between Fed districts. Carlson, Mitchener and Richardson

(2011) and Mitchener and Richardson (2019) also show how the responses of the individual Reserve Banks to

panics affected local outcomes.


                                                          24
Depression. While testing the effects of these connections alongside a host of other explanatory

variables is outside the scope of the present paper, the association supports a growing literature

finding evidence that interbank contagion was an important feature of bank distress during the

Great Depression.




                                                25
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. "Systemic risk and stability in
        financial networks." American Economic Review 105 (2), 2015, pp. 564-608.
Allen, Franklin, and Ana Babus. "Networks in finance." In The network challenge: strategy,
        profit, and risk in an interlinked world (2009): 367-382.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. "Financial contagion." Journal of Political Economy 108 (1),
        2000, pp. 1-33.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. "Systemic risk and regulation." The risks of financial
        institutions. University of Chicago Press, 2007. 341-376.
Anderson, Haelim, Charles W. Calomiris, Matthew Jaremski, and Gary Richardson. "Liquidity
        Risk, Bank Networks, and the Value of Joining the Federal Reserve System." Journal of
        Money, Credit and Banking 50, 2018, pp. 173-201.
Bernstein, Asaf, Eric Hughson, and Marc D. Weidenmier. "Identifying the Effects of a Lender of
        Last Resort on Financial Markets: Lessons from the Founding of the Fed." Journal of
        Financial Economics 98, 2010, pp. 40-53.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. All Bank Statistics. Washington, D.C.: Board
        of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1959.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Mark Carlson. "Corporate governance and risk management at
        unprotected banks: National banks in the 1890s." Journal of Financial Economics 119
        (3), 2016, pp. 512-532.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Mark Carlson. "Interbank networks in the national banking era: their
        purpose and their role in the panic of 1893." Journal of Financial Economics 125 (3),
        2017, pp. 434-453.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Gary Gorton. "The origins of banking panics: models, facts, and
        bank regulation." In Financial Markets and Financial Crises, edited by R. Glenn
        Hubbard. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991, pp. 109-174.
Calomiris, Charles W., Matthew Jaremski, and David C. Wheelock. "Interbank Connections,
        Contagion and Bank Distress in the Great Depression." Federal Reserve Bank of St.
        Louis Working Paper no. 2019-001, January 2019.
Carlson, Mark, Kris James Mitchener, and Gary Richardson. "Arresting banking panics: Federal
        Reserve liquidity provision and the forgotten panic of 1929." Journal of Political
        Economy 119, 2011, pp. 889-924.
Carlson, Mark and David C. Wheelock. "Did the Founding of the Federal Reserve Affect the
        Vulnerability of the Interbank System to Contagion Risk?" Journal of Money, Credit and
        Banking 50 (no. 8), December 2018, pp. 1071-1050.
Carlson, Mark, and David C. Wheelock. "Interbank Markets and Banking Crises: New Evidence
        on the Establishment and Impact of the Federal Reserve." American Economic Review
        Papers and Proceedings 106 (no. 5), May 2016, pp. 533-37.
Cohen-Cole, Ethan, Eleonora Patacchini, and Yves Zenou. "Systemic Risk and Network
        Formation in the Interbank Market." CEPR Discussion Paper, July 8, 2016.
Comptroller of the Currency. Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency. Various Years.
        Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Cont, Rama, Amal Moussa, and Edson B. Santos. "Network Structure and Systemic Risk in
        Banking Systems," in J. Fouque and J. Langsam, eds., Handbook on Systemic Risk.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 327-368.



                                              26
Craig, Ben, and Goetz Von Peter. "Interbank tiering and money center banks." Journal of
        Financial Intermediation 23 (no.3), 2014, pp. 322-347.
Das, Sanjiv R., Kris James Mitchener, and Angela Vossmeyer. "Systemic Risk and the Great
        Depression." National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 25405,
        December 2018.
Dasgupta, Amil. "Financial contagion through capital connections: A model of the origin and
        spread of bank panics." Journal of the European Economic Association 2, 2004 pp. 1049-
        1084.
Davison, Lee K. and Carlos D. Ramirez. "Local banking panics of the 1920s: Identification and
        determinants." Journal of Monetary Economics 66, 2014, pp. 164-177.
Freixas, Xavier, Bruno M. Parigi, and Jean-Charles Rochet. "Systemic risk, interbank relations,
        and liquidity provision by the central bank." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
        2000, pp. 611-638.
Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States 1867-1960.
        Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.
Gai, Prasanna, Andrew Haldane, and Sujit Kapadia. "Complexity, concentration and contagion."
        Journal of Monetary Economics 58 (no. 5), 2011, pp. 453-470.
Gorton, Gary. "Clearinghouses and the origin of central banking in the United States." Journal of
        Economic History 45, 1985, pp. 277­283.
Gorton, Gary and D. Mullineaux. "The joint production of confidence: endogeneous regulation
        and 19th century commercial-bank clearinghouses." Journal of Money, Credit, and
        Banking 19, 1987, pp. 457­468.
Gorton, Gary B. and Ellis W. Tallman. Fighting Financial Crises: Learning from the Past.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018.
Heitfield, Erik, Gary Richardson, and Shirley Wang. "Contagion During the Initial Banking
        Panic of the Great Depression." NBER Working Paper w23629, 2017.
James, John A. Money and Capital Markets in Postbellum America. Princeton: Princeton
        University Press, 1978.
James, John A., and David F. Weiman. "From drafts to checks: the evolution of correspondent
        banking networks and the formation of the modern US payments system, 1850­1914."
        Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42 (no. 23), 2010, pp. 237-265.
Jaremski, Matthew. "The (Dis)Advantages of Clearinghouses Before the Fed" Forthcoming
        Journal of Financial Economics, 2019.
Jaremski, Matthew and David C. Wheelock. "Banker preferences, interbank connections, and the
        enduring structure of the Federal Reserve System." Explorations in Economic History 66,
        2017, pp. 21-43.
Miron, Jeffrey A. "Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate, and the
        Founding of the Fed." American Economic Review 76, 1986, pp. 125-40.
Mitchener, Kris J., and Gary Richardson. "Network contagion and interbank amplification
        during the Great Depression." Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming 2019.
Myers, Margaret G. The New York Money Market. Volume 1. New York: Columbia University
        Press, 1931.
Newman, Mark E. J. "The mathematics of networks." In The New Palgrave Dictionary of
        Economics 2, 2008, pp. 4059-4064.




                                               27
Odell, Kerry A., and David F. Weiman. "Metropolitan development, regional financial centers,
       and the founding of the Fed in the Lower South." Journal of Economic History 58, 1998,
       pp. 103-125.
Officer, L. "What was the value of the US consumer bundle then?" MeasuringWorth, 2008
       (http://www.measuringworth.org/consumer/).
Paddrik, Mark E. and Anderson, Haelim and Wang, Jessie Jiaxu. "Bank Networks and Systemic
       Risk: Evidence from the National Banking Acts." Forthcoming, 2019.
Puhr, Claus, Reinhardt Seliger, and Michael Sigmund. "Contagiousness and vulnerability in the
       Austrian interbank market." Oesterreichische Nationalbank Financial Stability Report
       Vol. 24, December 2012.
Redenius, Scott Arnold. "Between reforms: The US banking system in the postbellum period."
       PhD diss., Yale University, 2002.
Richardson, Gary. "The Check is in the Mail: Correspondent Clearing and the Collapse of the
       Banking System, 1930 to 1933. Journal of Economic History 67 (3), 2007, pp. 643-71.
Richardson, Gary and William Troost. "Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics during
       the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from a Federal Reserve District
       Border, 1929-1933." Journal of Political Economy 117, 2009, pp. 1031-1073.
Richardson, Gary and Patrick Van Horn. "In the Eye of a Storm: Manhattan's Money Center
       Banks during the International Financial Crisis of 1931." Explorations in Economic
       History 68, April 2018, pp. 71-94.
Sprague, O.M.W. History of Crises under the National Banking System. Washington, DC:
       National Monetary Commission, Senate Document 538, 61st Congress, 2d Session, 1910.
Timberlake, Richard. "The central banking role of clearinghouse associations." Journal of
       Money, Credit, and Banking 16, 1984, pp. 1­15.
United States National Monetary Commission. Letter from Secretary of the National Monetary
       Commission, Transmitting, Pursuant to Law, the Report of the Commission January 8,
       1912. (https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/title/?id=641)
Watkins, Leonard L. Bankers' Balances: A Study of the Effects of the Federal Reserve System on
       Banking Relationships. Chicago: A. W. Shaw Company, 1929.
Wicker, Elmus. Banking Panics of the Gilded Age. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
       Press, 2000.




                                             28
Appendix: Establishment of Clearinghouses

       Clearinghouses played a substantial role in the nation's payment system and interbank

network before the founding of the Federal Reserve. First established in New York City in 1853,

clearinghouses were private organizations created by banks to reduce clearing and settlement

costs by providing a central location and fixed daily time to clear checks, notes, and drafts within

their city. Clearinghouses quickly evolved to also monitor banks, publish information, and

provide emergency liquidity during financial panics (Timberlake, 1984; Gorton, 1985; Gorton

and Mullineaux, 1987). Much like a central bank, clearinghouses facilitated the clearing of

checks, notes, and drafts for their members and, by extension, the respondents of their members,

and provided a liquidity backstop should a panic emerge. Jaremski (2019) shows that cities saw

large increases in interbank funds after they established a clearinghouse, suggesting that banks

preferred to establish connections to banks in cities with a clearinghouse.

       Table A2 provides further evidence on the importance of clearinghouses to the interbank

network. Here we examine the association between the presence of a clearinghouse and both the

number of correspondent connections per bank and the city-level eigenvector centrality score.

We include only cities that had at least one bank throughout the sample period to avoid

confusing changes due to the establishment of a clearinghouse with changes resulting from

adding cities that gained their first bank. The results indicate that banks in cities with a

clearinghouse had substantially more correspondent and respondent connections, and more

growth over time in the average number of connections, than banks in cities that never

established a clearinghouse. For those locations that established a clearinghouse during the

sample period, the table suggests that the importance of individual cities (measured, for example,

by eigenvector centrality score) increased the most in the decade of the clearinghouse's



                                                  29
establishment. The evidence thus confirms that cities with bank clearinghouses served as

especially important nodes on the interbank network.




                                               30
                 Figure 1: Interbank Holdings of Commercial Banks (1896-1950)
                                  Panel A: Real Values ($1900 Millions)
 14,000

 12,000

 10,000

  8,000

  6,000

  4,000

  2,000

      0
          1896
                 1898
                        1900
                               1902
                                      1904
                                             1906
                                                    1908
                                                           1910
                                                                  1912
                                                                         1914
                                                                                1916
                                                                                       1918
                                                                                              1920
                                                                                                     1922
                                                                                                            1924
                                                                                                                   1926
                                                                                                                          1928
                                                                                                                                 1930
                                                                                                                                        1932
                                                                                                                                               1934
                                                                                                                                                      1936
                                                                                                                                                             1938
                                                                                                                                                                    1940
                                                                                                                                                                           1942
                                                                                                                                                                                  1944
                                                                                                                                                                                         1946
                                                                                                                                                                                                1948
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1950
                                                           Due From Banks and Fed                                                Due to Banks

                                                                         Panel B: Ratio of Assets
 35.0%

 30.0%

 25.0%

 20.0%

 15.0%

 10.0%

  5.0%

  0.0%
          1896




                                             1906
                 1898
                        1900
                               1902
                                      1904


                                                    1908
                                                           1910
                                                                  1912
                                                                         1914
                                                                                1916
                                                                                       1918
                                                                                              1920
                                                                                                     1922
                                                                                                            1924
                                                                                                                   1926
                                                                                                                          1928
                                                                                                                                 1930
                                                                                                                                        1932
                                                                                                                                               1934
                                                                                                                                                      1936
                                                                                                                                                             1938
                                                                                                                                                                    1940
                                                                                                                                                                           1942
                                                                                                                                                                                  1944
                                                                                                                                                                                         1946
                                                                                                                                                                                                1948
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1950
                                             Due From Banks and Fed/Assets                                                        Due to Banks/Assets

Notes: Figures present the aggregate values of due from banks (i.e. interbank assets) and due to banks (i.e., interbank
liabilities). Data come from Federal Reserve Board (1959). Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using Officer (2008).
The vertical lines denote the beginning of Fed operations in 1914 and the beginning of the Great Depression in 1929.
                        Figure 2: Changes in Eigenvector Centrality (1910-1940)
                                     Panel A: Change 1910-1919




                                           Panel B: Change 1929-1940




Notes: These figures map out the change in the level of eigenvector centrality for each city across the provided time-
period. The size of the dot denotes how large the change was, and the color of the dot denotes whether it was a Fed
Reserve Bank city (in Blue), a Fed Branch City (in Red), or another city (in Green). We only include cities that both had
banks between 1900 and 1940 and achieved an eigenvector centrality measure of at least 0.020 sometime between 1900
and 1940.
                Table 1: Macro-Level Network Statistics (1900-1940)
                                                      All Banks
                                   1900      1910        1919       1929                      1940
Number of Banks                   12,975    25,101      29,857    27,279                     15,840

Avg. # of Correspondents                    2.336        2.191       2.840       2.882        3.185
% With 1 Correspondent                      18.4%       15.0%        9.9%        12.2%       10.2%
% With 2 Correspondents                     42.3%       62.6%        33.2%       30.0%       25.9%
% With 3 Correspondents                     29.2%       13.9%        30.2%       31.2%       32.4%
% With 4 Correspondents                      7.8%        6.6%        20.3%       19.2%       19.8%
% With 5 Correspondents                      1.3%        1.2%         4.4%        4.2%        5.5%
% With 6+ Correspondents                     0.8%        0.6%         2.0%        3.0%        5.7%
% With 0 Respondents                        90.4%       90.3%        87.1%       86.9%       87.5%
% With 1 Respondent                          4.1%        4.6%         5.8%        5.5%        5.5%
% With 2 Respondents                         1.3%        1.4%         2.0%        2.1%        1.7%
% With 3-5 Respondents                       1.4%        1.3%         1.9%        2.2%        2.1%
% With 5-15 Respondents                      1.1%        1.0%         1.4%        1.5%        1.3%
% With 16-50 Respondents                     1.0%        0.7%         0.9%        0.9%        0.9%
% With 51-150 Respondents                    0.5%        0.3%         0.5%        0.5%        0.6%
% With 150+ Respondents                      0.3%        0.2%         0.3%        0.3%        0.4%
Notes: Table presents number of banks, average number of correspondents per bank, and the percentages
of banks with various numbers of correspondents and respondents in each year.
                                                                    Table 2: Top 10 Correspondent Banks By Year
                                          1900                                                                                           1910
                       Bank                          Location    # of Resp. % of Banks                               Bank                              Location     # of Resp. % of Banks
             Hanover National Bank                  New York        1,465      14.71%                       Hanover National Bank                     New York        3,374        14.82%
               Chase National Bank                  New York        1,204      12.09%            Continental and Commercial National Bank              Chicago        3,053        13.41%
                First National Bank                   Chicago        994        9.98%                         Chase National Bank                     New York        2,489        10.93%
                National Park Bank                  New York         690        6.93%                         National Park Bank                      New York        2,038         8.95%
              Western National Bank                 New York         595        5.98%                    National Bank of Commerce                    New York        1,424         6.25%
          National Bank of Commerce                 Kansas City      523        5.25%                         First National Bank                      Chicago        1,403         6.16%
      Importers and Traders National Bank           New York         440        4.42%                          National City Bank                     New York        1,338         5.88%
           Continental National Bank                  Chicago        434        4.36%                    National Bank of Commerce                     St Louis       1,192         5.23%
             Chemical National Bank                 New York         393        3.95%                       Seaboard National Bank                    New York         787          3.46%
                National City Bank                  New York         365        3.67%                  Corn Exchange National Bank (2)                 Chicago         674          2.96%
 % of Banks Connected To At Least One Of The Top 10 Correspondents             53.83%          % of Banks Connected To At Least One Of The Top 10 Correspondents                   59.93%
                                             1919                                                                                        1929
                       Bank                          Location    # of Resp. % of Banks                               Bank                              Location     # of Resp. % of Banks
   Continental and Commercial National Bank           Chicago       3,659      13.07%               Continental Illinois Bank and Trust Co             Chicago        4,785        18.34%
             Hanover National Bank                  New York        3,620      12.93%                         Chase National Bank                     New York        3,181        12.19%
               Chase National Bank                  New York        2,530       9.04%                       Hanover National Bank                     New York        2,868        10.99%
                National Park Bank                  New York        1,942       6.94%                          National City Bank                     New York        1,887         7.23%
                National City Bank                  New York        1,941       6.94%                   First National Bank of Chicago                 Chicago        1,675         6.42%
                First National Bank                   Chicago       1,749       6.25%                         National Park Bank                      New York        1,565         6.00%
          National Bank of Commerce                 New York        1,563       5.58%                    National Bank of Commerce                    New York        1,301         4.99%
        First and Security National Bank           Minneapolis      1,469       5.25%                         First National Bank                    Minneapolis      1,206         4.62%
      Mechanics and Metals National Bank            New York        1,172       4.19%                           Irving Trust Co                       New York        1,194         4.58%
          National Bank of Commerce                   St Louis      1,058       3.78%                     Philadelphia National Bank                 Philadelphia     1,193         4.57%
 % of Banks Connected To At Least One Of The Top 10 Correspondents             56.64%          % of Banks Connected To At Least One Of The Top 10 Correspondents                   53.06%
                                             1940
                       Bank                          Location    # of Resp. % of Banks
               Chase National Bank                  New York        3,346      21.36%
 Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Co      Chicago       2,375      15.16%
       Central Hanover Bank and Trust Co            New York        1,634      10.43%
             Manufacturers Trust Co                 New York        1,378       8.80%
                National City Bank                  New York        1,325       8.46%
                Guaranty Trust Co                   New York        1,055       6.73%
               Commerce Trust Co                    Kansas City      916        5.85%
           Philadelphia National Bank              Philadelphia      864        5.51%
          Chemical Bank and Trust Co                New York         790        5.04%
        First National Bank and Trust Co           Minneapolis       740        4.72%
 % of Banks Connected To At Least One Of The Top 10 Correspondents             56.77%
Notes: Table displays the top 10 correspondent banks in each year. The "% of Banks Connected To At Least One Of The Top 10 Correspondents" denotes the precent of banks that were
connected to at least one of the top 10 correspondents. Some banks were connected to more than one of the top 10 correspondent banks and, thus, it is not a simple sum of the individual
percentages.
                                                                    Table 3: Top 10 Correspondent Cities By Year
                                          1900                                                                                                 1910
        State                  Location               # of Resp.            # of Resp.                  State                    Location               # of Resp.             # of Resp.
         NY                    New York                  8,488               85.26%                      NY                     New York                  15,690                68.90%
         IL                     Chicago                  3,449               34.64%                       IL                      Chicago                  7,269                31.92%
        MO                      St Louis                 1,295               13.01%                      MO                       St Louis                 2,996                13.16%
         PA                  Philadelphia                1,181               11.86%                      MO                    Kansas City                 2,298                10.09%
         MA                     Boston                   1,074               10.79%                      MN                    Minneapolis                 2,148                  9.43%
        MO                   Kansas City                 1,045               10.50%                      PA                    Philadelphia                2,061                  9.05%
        MN                   Minneapolis                  667                 6.70%                      MA                       Boston                   1,055                  4.63%
         OH                    Cincinnati                 577                 5.80%                      OH                     Cincinnati                  890                   3.91%
         NE                     Omaha                     488                 4.90%                      NE                       Omaha                     862                   3.79%
         KY                    Louisville                 385                 3.87%                      PA                     Pittsburgh                  860                   3.78%
    % of Banks Connected to At Least One of Top 10 Cities                    95.54%                  % of Banks Connected to At Least One of Top 10 Cities                      91.95%
                                              1919                                                                                             1929
        State                  Location               # of Resp.            # of Resp.                  State                    Location               # of Resp.             # of Resp.
         NY                    New York                 17,829               63.70%                      NY                     New York                  16,437                63.00%
         IL                     Chicago                  9,915               35.43%                       IL                      Chicago                  9,229                35.38%
        MN                   Minneapolis                 5,008               17.89%                      MN                    Minneapolis                 3,504                13.43%
        MO                   Kansas City                 4,493               16.05%                      MO                    Kansas City                 3,149                12.07%
        MO                      St Louis                 3,491               12.47%                      MO                       St Louis                 3,138                12.03%
         PA                  Philadelphia                2,564                9.16%                      PA                    Philadelphia                2,595                  9.95%
         NE                     Omaha                    1,875                6.70%                      PA                     Pittsburgh                 1,611                  6.18%
         MA                     Boston                   1,380                4.93%                      MA                       Boston                   1,608                  6.16%
         CA                 San Francisco                1,342                4.79%                      NE                       Omaha                    1,457                  5.58%
         PA                    Pittsburgh                1,199                4.28%                      WI                     Milwaukee                  1,063                  4.07%
    % of Banks Connected to At Least One of Top 10 Cities                    88.94%                  % of Banks Connected to At Least One of Top 10 Cities                      83.84%
                                              1940
        State                  Location               # of Resp.            # of Resp.
         NY                    New York                 11,719               74.80%
         IL                     Chicago                  3,845               24.54%
        MO                   Kansas City                 2,276               14.53%
        MN                   Minneapolis                 2,129               13.59%
        MO                      St Louis                 1,939               12.38%
         PA                  Philadelphia                1,762               11.25%
         MA                     Boston                   1,588               10.14%
         PA                    Pittsburgh                1,185                7.56%
         NE                     Omaha                     810                 5.17%
         WI                   Milwaukee                   801                 5.11%
    % of Banks Connected to At Least One of Top 10 Cities                    81.75%
Notes: Table displays the top 10 correspondent cities in each year. The "% of Banks Connected To At Least One Of The Top 10 Cities" denotes the precent of banks that were connected to
              at least one of the top 10 cities. Some banks were connected to more than one of the top 10 cities and, thus, it is not a simple sum of the individual percentages.
                      Table 4: Change in City-Level Centrality Statistics (1900-1940)
                                                         Degree Centrality
                                  1900        1900-10         1910-19           1919-29         1929-40
Mean                             0.09%          -0.05%           0.00%            0.00%          0.01%
New York                        75.49%         -12.86%          -7.61%           -7.38%          0.58%
Chicago                         32.44%          -1.82%           0.07%           -0.51%         -4.11%
St Louis                        13.93%          -0.24%          -1.92%           -1.63%         -0.86%
Boston                           7.36%          -4.09%          -0.01%            0.38%          1.15%
Philadelphia                     9.25%          -1.87%          -0.43%            0.24%          0.77%
Cleveland                        2.64%          -0.73%           0.51%            0.50%         -0.35%
Richmond                         1.20%           0.35%           1.47%           -0.18%         -0.31%
Atlanta                          1.36%           0.20%           0.59%            0.16%          0.98%
Minneapolis                     12.28%          -1.39%           2.03%           -2.31%          0.58%
Kansas City                      6.89%           2.42%           3.41%           -2.19%         -1.12%
Dallas                           0.61%           1.21%           1.22%            0.26%          1.21%
San Francisco                    4.09%          -1.55%           1.00%           -0.36%         -0.13%
All Fed Branches                 1.45%          -0.08%           0.28%            0.13%          0.23%
Top 100 Non-Fed Cities           0.35%          -0.05%           0.09%            0.03%          0.04%
                                                       Eigenvector Centrality
                                  1900        1900-10         1910-19           1919-29         1929-40
Mean                             1.79%          -1.01%          -0.15%            0.00%          0.27%
New York                       124.53%         -36.65%         -10.22%            1.38%         17.82%
Chicago                         56.81%         -17.52%           1.75%            5.93%          2.02%
St Louis                        24.79%          -8.56%          -2.05%           -0.22%          3.44%
Boston                          12.99%          -7.44%           0.33%            1.60%          5.09%
Philadelphia                    17.45%          -6.35%          -0.40%            2.08%          6.76%
Cleveland                        7.13%          -3.06%           0.60%            2.53%          0.71%
Richmond                         4.34%          -1.19%           1.36%            0.45%          1.02%
Atlanta                          4.74%          -1.29%           0.58%            1.15%          3.36%
Minneapolis                     20.90%          -8.73%           1.37%           -1.52%          4.85%
Kansas City                     13.42%          -1.84%           1.29%           -1.04%          1.09%
Dallas                           3.90%          -0.13%           1.14%            0.73%          3.23%
San Francisco                    9.55%          -4.34%           1.71%            1.26%          2.28%
All Fed Branches                 5.16%          -2.11%           0.24%            0.73%          2.02%
Top 100 Non-Fed Cities           3.02%          -1.36%          -0.07%            0.35%          0.75%
                                                       Betweenness Centrality
                                  1900        1900-10         1910-19           1919-29         1929-40
Mean                             0.02%          -0.01%           0.00%            0.00%          0.00%
New York                        72.31%          -7.98%          -7.36%           -6.77%          0.15%
Chicago                         19.18%           5.20%           0.76%            2.41%         -4.42%
St Louis                         6.93%           3.58%          -1.16%           -0.34%         -1.12%
Boston                           5.07%          -2.78%          -0.16%            0.74%          0.15%
Philadelphia                     3.72%           0.10%          -0.21%            1.03%         -0.14%
Cleveland                        0.36%          -0.01%           0.15%            0.85%         -0.25%
Richmond                         0.12%           0.47%           0.59%            0.37%         -0.24%
Atlanta                          0.20%           0.12%           0.05%            0.42%          0.85%
Minneapolis                      5.00%           2.37%           2.11%           -0.79%          1.36%
Kansas City                      2.18%           3.11%           3.47%           -0.20%         -0.33%
Dallas                           0.04%           0.52%           0.47%            0.67%          1.00%
San Francisco                    1.53%          -0.67%           0.10%            0.16%          0.52%
All Fed Branches                 0.35%           0.21%           0.04%            0.28%          0.19%
Top 100 Non-Fed Cities           0.07%           0.02%           0.02%            0.03%          0.03%

Notes: Table presents centrality scores for 1900 and changes for the indicated periods. Bank-level data
are aggregated to the city-level before calculating the statistics. Intra-city connections are excluded in
this calculation. Degree centrality is defined as the percentage of other cities that a city is connected to
in a given year. Eigenvector centrality is normalized to total 100 for all cities in a year and is reported
in percentage point terms. Betweenness centrality is defined as the percentage of paths between all city-
pairs that includes the given city. "Top 100 Non-Fed Cities" is based on city population in 1910.
Changes are calculated as the simple change from one year to the next, expressed in percentages.
                    Table 5: Micro-Level Interbank Network Statistics (1900-1940)
                                                                           All Banks
                                                          1900      1910     1919                        1929      1940
Avg. % National Bank Correspondents                      89.8% 90.7% 86.7%                              72.2%     72.0%
Avg. % State Bank Correspondents                          6.9%      4.5%     7.1%                        5.1%      3.5%
 Avg. % Fed Member State Banks Correspondents               -          -     3.2%                        2.0%      2.0%
 Avg. % Non-Fed Member State Banks Correspondents           -          -     3.9%                        3.1%      1.5%
Avg. % Trust Co Correspondents                            3.3%      4.8%     6.3%                       22.7%     24.5%
 Avg. % Fed Member Trust Co Correspondents                  -          -     4.5%                       17.5%     23.2%
 Avg. % Non-Fed Member Trust Co Correspondents              -          -     1.8%                        5.2%      1.4%
Avg. % Any Fed Bank or Branch City Correspondents                       85.9%     83.4%      75.3%      74.8%     78.3%
 Avg. % New York Correspondents                                         33.5%     30.5%      21.8%      21.7%     23.4%
 Avg. % Chicago Correspondents                                          16.3%     15.3%      12.9%      12.4%     10.3%
 Avg. % St Louis Correspondents                                          5.1%      5.9%       4.4%       4.1%      3.9%
 Avg. % Non-CRC Fed Bank or Branch City Correspondents                  31.0%     31.8%      36.1%      36.6%     40.7%
 Avg. % Correspondents in District's Fed Cities                         40.1%     38.3%      40.3%      42.6%     46.0%
Avg. Distance to Correspondents (in Miles)                               379        404        316       277        233

Notes: Tables provides summary statistics for each variable in each year. "Avg. % X" denotes the percentage of the
average bank's correspondents that have the characteristic "X". "State Bank Correspondents" denotes correspondent banks
that have state charters; "Fed Member State Banks Correspondents" are state-chartered Federal Reserve members; "Non-
Fed Member State Banks Correspondents" are state-chartered non-Fed members. "Trust Co Corrrespondents" denotes
correspondent trust companies (all of which are state chartered); "Fed Member Trust Co Correspondents" are Fed
members; "Non-Fed Member Trust Co Correspondents" are non-Fed members. "National Bank Correspondents" denotes
correspondent banks that are national banks. "Any Fed Bank or Branch City Correspondents" denotes correspondents that
were located in any city with a Federal Reserve Bank or branch. "New York Correspondents" denotes correspondents
located in New York City. "Chicago Correspondents" denotes correspondents located in Chicago. "St Louis
Correspondents" denotes correspondents located in St Louis. "Non-CRC Fed Bank or Branch City Correspondents"
denotes correspondents located any city with a Federal Reserve Bank or branch except New York City, Chicago, or St
Louis. "Correspondents in District's Fed Cities" denotes correspondents that were located in a city with a Federal Reserve
Bank or branch in the bank's district. "Avg. Distance to Correspondents (in Miles)" denotes the average distance in miles
between a bank and all of its correspondents.
                                     Table 6: Change in Correspondent Distributions Among Surviving Banks (1910-1919)
                                                                                         Banks that Survived 1910-19
                                                        Non-Fed State Banks Fed Member State Banks
                                                                                                            National Banks                           All Banks
                                                        and Trust Companies      and Trust Companies
                                                           1910     1919     Diff.     1910   1919     Diff.    1910 1919 Diff.                 1910     1919     Diff.
# of Banks                                                12,078   12,078      -        811    811       -      6,360 6,360      -             19,249   19,249      -
Avg. # of Respondents                                       0.09     0.25    0.15      2.90   6.29     3.39      6.25   9.71   3.46              2.25     3.63    1.38
Avg. % Any Fed Bank or Branch City Correspondents         78.4%    71.7%    -6.7%     88.8%  85.6% -3.3%       92.1% 87.9% -4.2%               84.0%    78.1%    -6.0%
 Avg. % New York Correspondents                           26.7%    19.5%    -7.2%     37.4%  30.4% -7.0%       36.8% 29.6% -7.3%               31.0%    23.6%    -7.5%
 Avg. % Chicago Correspondents                            14.1%    11.9%    -2.2%     18.8%  17.3% -1.5%       15.3% 13.7% -1.6%               14.7%    12.8%    -2.0%
 Avg. % St Louis Correspondents                            6.0%     4.9%    -1.1%      4.0%   3.6%    -0.4%     5.6% 4.1% -1.4%                 5.7%     4.6%    -1.2%
 Avg. % Non-CRC Fed City Correspondents                   31.5%    35.5%    3.9%      28.7%  34.3% 5.6%        34.4% 40.5% 6.1%                32.5%    37.2%    4.7%
 Avg. % Correspondents in District's Fed Cities           39.4%    40.6%    1.2%      35.4%  38.8% 3.5%        36.5% 41.5% 5.0%                38.3%    40.8%    2.6%
Avg. Distance to Correspondents (in Miles)                 367.4    294.6   -72.8     475.2  399.6    -75.6     462.1 372.9 -89.2               403.2    324.9   -78.3
                                                                                               Banks that Survived 1910-29
                                                           Non-Fed State Banks       Fed Member State Banks
                                                                                                                   National Banks                    All Banks
                                                           and Trust Companies        and Trust Companies
                                                           1910 1929 Diff.             1910      1929       Diff.   1910 1929 Diff.            1910 1929 Diff.
# of Banks                                                 6,947 6,947         -        646       646         -     4,523 4,523        -      12,116 12,116          -
Avg. # of Respondents                                       0.08     0.31    0.23       1.79      8.65      6.86     5.20    7.84    2.64      2.08      3.57      1.49
Avg. % Any Fed Bank or Branch City Correspondents         77.8% 69.0% -8.8%           89.5% 86.5% -3.0%            92.0% 84.7% -7.4%          84.5% 76.3% -8.2%
  Avg. % New York Correspondents                          26.6% 17.3% -9.4%           39.7% 30.5% -9.2%            37.2% 27.8% -9.4%          31.8% 22.3% -9.6%
  Avg. % Chicago Correspondents                           14.1% 11.1% -2.9%           16.2% 13.7% -2.5%            14.8% 12.0% -2.8%          14.5% 11.7% -2.8%
  Avg. % St Louis Correspondents                           6.5% 5.4% -1.1%             4.0%      3.9%      -0.1%    5.6% 3.5% -2.1%            6.0% 4.5% -1.4%
  Avg. % Non-CRC Fed City Correspondents                  30.6% 35.2% 4.6%            29.7% 38.4% 8.8%             34.4% 41.3% 6.9%           32.2% 37.8% 5.6%
  Avg. % Correspondents in District's Fed Cities          39.8% 42.2% 2.4%            38.1% 43.7% 5.6%             37.1% 43.4% 6.3%           38.7% 42.7% 4.0%
Avg. Distance to Correspondents (in Miles)                 342.7 236.0 -106.7          444.4     335.1 -109.4      445.97 315.83 -130.1 386.67 271.01 -115.7
Notes: Tables provides the summary statistics for each variable for the group of banks identified in the column heading. The top panel provides the statistics for
banks that survived from 1910 through 1919, whereas the bottom panel provides the statistics for banks that survived from 1910 through 1929. Fed membership of
state bank and trust companies is denoted as of 1919. "Avg. # of Respondents" denotes the average number of banks that claim a bank as a correspondent. See notes
to Table 5 for other definitions.
                                       Table 7: Correspondent Distributions of Closed and Surviving Banks (1929-1940)
                                                                                           Banks that Survived 1929-40
                                                        Non-Fed State Banks Fed Member State Banks
                                                                                                               National Banks          All Banks
                                                        and Trust Companies       and Trust Companies
                                                         1929 1940 Diff.          1929    1940     Diff.    1929 1940 Diff.       1929 1940 Diff.
# of Banks                                              7,372 7,372       -        570     570       -      4,396 4,396      -   12,338 12,338   -
Avg. % Any Fed Bank or Branch City Correspondents       69.9% 72.8% 3.0%         86.4% 88.6% 2.2%          85.7% 86.4% 0.7%      76.8% 79.0% 2.1%
  Avg. % New York Correspondents                        18.6% 18.3% -0.3%        32.5% 36.3% 3.8%          29.0% 30.0% 1.1%      23.3% 23.9% 0.5%
  Avg. % Chicago Correspondents                         11.0% 10.5% -0.6%        11.8% 11.1% -0.7%         10.1% 9.0% -1.0% 10.7% 9.9% -0.8%
  Avg. % St Louis Correspondents                         4.2% 4.3% 0.2%           3.0%    3.4%     0.4%     3.7% 3.5% -0.3%       3.9% 3.9% 0.0%
  Avg. % Non-CRC Fed City Correspondents                36.1% 39.7% 3.6%         39.0% 37.8% -1.2%         42.9% 43.9% 0.9%      38.9% 41.2% 2.3%
  Avg. % Correspondents in District's Fed Cities        43.7% 47.5% 3.8%         45.8% 48.7% 2.9%          45.8% 47.7% 2.0%      44.5% 47.6% 3.1%
Avg. Distance to Correspondents (in Miles)              221.1 200.3 -20.7         293.4   277.0    -16.4    302.6 276.4 -26.1     253.4 230.9 -22.5
                                                                 Comparison of 1929 Correspondent Distribution of Closed and Surviving Banks
                                                             Non-Fed State Banks        Fed Member State Banks
                                                                                                                          National Banks                 All Banks
                                                             and Trust Companies         and Trust Companies
                                                            Closed   Surv. Diff         Closed    Surv.      Diff     Closed    Surv. Diff        Closed   Surv.      Diff
# of Banks                                                  9,719    7,372    -           604       570        -      3,381     4,401    -        13,704   12,343       -
Avg. % Any Fed Bank or Branch City Correspondents           68.4%    69.9% 1.5%         87.6%     86.4%     -1.2%     81.8%     85.7% 3.9%        73.0%    76.8%     3.8%
  Avg. % New York Correspondents                            16.9%    18.6% 1.7%         30.3%     32.5%     2.2%      26.7%     29.0% 2.3%        20.2%    23.3%     3.1%
  Avg. % Chicago Correspondents                             13.4%    11.0% -2.3%        14.5%     11.8%     -2.7%     14.2%     10.1% -4.2%       13.7%    10.7%     -3.0%
  Avg. % St Louis Correspondents                             4.7%     4.2% -0.6%         4.8%      3.0%     -1.8%      3.3%      3.7% 0.4%         4.4%     3.9%     -0.4%
  Avg. % Non-CRC Fed City Correspondents                    33.4%    36.1% 2.6%         38.0%     39.0%     1.0%      37.6%     42.9% 5.4%        34.8%    38.9%     4.1%
  Avg. % Correspondents in District's Fed Cities            40.7%    42.9% 2.1%         45.1%     45.7%     0.6%      42.1%     45.6% 3.5%        41.3%    43.9%     2.7%
Avg. Distance to Correspondents (in Miles)                  260.5    221.1 -39.4        353.1     293.4     -59.7     410.9     302.6 -108.4       301.5    253.4    -48.1
Notes: Tables provides the summary statistics for each variable for the group of banks identified in the column heading. The top panel pertains to banks that survived
from 1929 through 1940. The bottom panel pertains to all banks present in 1929. Fed membership of observed state bank and trust companies is as of 1929. Fed
membership of correspondents is as of the specified year (i.e., 1929 or 1940 for the top panel and 1929 in the bottom panel). With the exception of the first and the
last, each of the rows provides the average fraction of total correspondents that take the particular characteristic described. See notes to Table 5 for other definitions.
                            Table A.1: City-Level Centrality Statistics (1900-1940)
                                                          Eigenvector Centrality
                                     1900           1910            1919            1929                   1940
Mean                                1.79%          0.78%           0.63%           0.64%                  0.91%
New York                          124.53%         87.88%          77.66%          79.04%                 96.86%
Chicago                            56.81%         39.30%          41.05%          46.98%                 49.00%
St Louis                           24.79%         16.23%          14.18%          13.95%                 17.40%
Boston                             12.99%          5.55%           5.88%           7.48%                 12.57%
Philadelphia                       17.45%         11.10%          10.70%          12.78%                 19.53%
Cleveland                           7.13%          4.07%           4.66%           7.19%                  7.91%
Richmond                            4.34%          3.15%           4.52%           4.96%                  5.98%
Atlanta                             4.74%          3.45%           4.03%           5.18%                  8.54%
Minneapolis                        20.90%         12.17%          13.55%          12.03%                 16.88%
Kansas City                        13.42%         11.58%          12.87%          11.83%                 12.92%
Dallas                              3.90%          3.76%           4.90%           5.63%                  8.86%
San Francisco                       9.55%          5.21%           6.92%           8.18%                 10.46%
All Fed Branches                    5.16%          3.05%           3.28%           4.02%                  6.04%
Top 100 Non-Fed Cities              3.02%          1.66%           1.59%           1.94%                  2.69%
                                                         Betweenness Centrality
                                     1900           1910            1919            1929                   1940
Mean                                0.02%          0.01%           0.01%           0.01%                  0.02%
New York                           72.31%         64.32%          56.96%          50.19%                 50.34%
Chicago                            19.18%         24.38%          25.15%          27.55%                 23.13%
St Louis                            6.93%         10.51%           9.35%           9.02%                  7.90%
Boston                              5.07%          2.29%           2.13%           2.87%                  3.02%
Philadelphia                        3.72%          3.81%           3.61%           4.64%                  4.49%
Cleveland                           0.36%          0.35%           0.49%           1.34%                  1.09%
Richmond                            0.12%          0.59%           1.18%           1.55%                  1.30%
Atlanta                             0.20%          0.33%           0.38%           0.79%                  1.64%
Minneapolis                         5.00%          7.37%           9.47%           8.68%                 10.04%
Kansas City                         2.18%          5.29%           8.77%           8.57%                  8.24%
Dallas                              0.04%          0.56%           1.03%           1.70%                  2.70%
San Francisco                       1.53%          0.86%           0.96%           1.12%                  1.64%
All Fed Branches                    0.35%          0.56%           0.60%           0.88%                  1.06%
Top 100 Non-Fed Cities              0.07%          0.08%           0.11%           0.14%                  0.17%
                                                            Degree Centrality
                                     1900           1910            1919            1929                   1940
Mean                                0.09%          0.04%           0.04%           0.03%                  0.05%
New York                           75.49%         62.62%          55.01%          47.63%                 48.21%
Chicago                            32.44%         30.62%          30.68%          30.18%                 26.07%
St Louis                           13.93%         13.69%          11.77%          10.14%                  9.29%
Boston                              7.36%          3.26%           3.25%           3.63%                  4.78%
Philadelphia                        9.25%          7.38%           6.95%           7.19%                  7.96%
Cleveland                           2.64%          1.92%           2.42%           2.92%                  2.57%
Richmond                            1.20%          1.55%           3.02%           2.84%                  2.53%
Atlanta                             1.36%          1.56%           2.15%           2.30%                  3.28%
Minneapolis                        12.28%         10.89%          12.92%          10.62%                 11.19%
Kansas City                         6.89%          9.31%          12.72%          10.53%                  9.41%
Dallas                              0.61%          1.81%           3.03%           3.29%                  4.50%
San Francisco                       4.09%          2.54%           3.54%           3.18%                  3.04%
All Fed Branches                    1.45%          1.37%           1.64%           1.78%                  2.00%
Top 100 Non-Fed Cities              0.35%          0.29%           0.38%           0.41%                  0.45%
Notes: Table provides centrality scores for each year. Bank-level data are aggregated to the city-level before
calculating the statistics. Intra-city connections are excluded from the calculation. Degree centrality refers to
the percentage of other cities in a year that a city is connected to. Eigenvector centrality is normalized to total
100 for all cities in a year and is reported in percentage points. Betweenness centrality is defined as the
percentage of paths between all city-pairs that include a given city. "Top 100 Non-Fed Cities" is based on city
population in 1910.
             Table A.2: Interbank Networks Statistics for Clearinghouse Cities (1900-1919)
                                                            Never Had Clearinghouse
                                          1900          1910             1919        1900-10       1910-20
Avg. # of Respondents Per City             0.30          0.90             2.42           0.60           1.52
Avg. # of Correspondents Per City          3.79          5.26             7.59           1.47           2.34
Avg. Eigenvector Centrality Per City 0.0196            0.0196           0.0195         0.0000        -0.0001
                                                       Clearinghouse Existed Before 1890
                                          1900          1910             1919        1900-10       1910-20
Avg. # of Respondents Per City           368.27        714.55          1000.96         346.29         286.41
Avg. # of Correspondents Per City         56.55         70.55            85.76          14.00          15.20
Avg. Eigenvector Centrality Per City 0.0944            0.0941           0.1007        -0.0003         0.0067
                                                        Clearinghouse Existed 1890-1900
                                          1900          1910             1919        1900-10       1910-20
Avg. # of Respondents Per City            10.05         26.14            58.50          16.09          32.36
Avg. # of Correspondents Per City         17.73         21.59            28.41           3.86           6.82
Avg. Eigenvector Centrality Per City 0.0324            0.0322           0.0328        -0.0002         0.0005
                                                     Clearinghouse Established 1900-1910
                                          1900          1910             1919        1900-10       1910-20
Avg. # of Respondents Per City             5.92         23.05            51.98          17.13          28.94
Avg. # of Correspondents Per City         13.67         20.88            26.94           7.20           6.06
Avg. Eigenvector Centrality Per City 0.0300            0.0310           0.0321         0.0010         0.0012
                                                     Clearinghouse Established 1910-1919
                                          1900          1910             1919        1900-10       1910-20
Avg. # of Respondents Per City             4.14         11.75            26.31           7.61          14.56
Avg. # of Correspondents Per City          8.48         13.45            18.86           4.97           5.40
Avg. Eigenvector Centrality Per City 0.0277            0.0278           0.0293         0.0001         0.0016
Notes: Table provides average statistics for groups of cities listed in column headings. Only cities that had
at least one bank present from 1900 through 1940 are included in the calculations.
Figure A.1: Correlation Between Change In Eigenvector Centrality and Percentage Change in Banks (1929-1940)
                                                  Panel A: All Cities




                                            Panel B: Removing New York




Notes: Figures display the change in each city's eigenvector centrality during 1929-1940 against the percentage change
in number of banks. Only Fed Cities and other cities among the largest 100 cities are included. Blue dots denote Fed
Reserve Bank cities, red dots denote Fed branch cities, and green dots denote all other cities.
 Figure A.2: Fraction of Banks Closed During Great Depression As A Fraction of Closed Correspondents
                                           65%
  % of Banks in 1929 that Closed By 1940


                                                    State Bank and
                                                                National
                                                                   Trust Banks
                                                                         Co.All Banks              all
Less Than
      60%
          25%                                             52%         37%         47%        0.2           87      54        141
25-35%                                                    54%         39%         49%        0.3         2861    1093       3954
36-45%                                                    48%         37%         43%        0.4          171     141        312
      55%
46-55%                                                    58%         43%         53%        0.5         3905    1729       5634
56-65%                                                    58%         41%         50%        0.6          291     217        508
      50%
66-75%                                                    57%         47%         54%        0.7         2430    1040       3470
76-85%                                                    55%         46%         52%        0.8         1182     696       1878
More 45%
      than 85%                                            62%         56%         61%        0.9         4233    1820       6053

                                           40%


                                           35%
                                                 Less Than 25-35% 36-45% 46-55% 56-65% 66-75% 76-85% More than
                                                   25%                                                          85%
                                                                % of Correspondents in 1929 that Closed By 1940

                                                       State Bank and Trust Co.         National Banks          All Banks

Notes: Figures provides the percent of banks in 1929 that closed before 1940 as a function of the percent of their
correspondents in 1929 that closed before 1940.
