                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  GLOBAL DIMENSIONS OF U.S. MONETARY POLICY

                                      Maurice Obstfeld

                                     Working Paper 26039
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26039


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve conference on "Monetary Policy Strategy,
Tools, and Communication Practices," held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago on June 4-5,
2019. I thank Jianlin Wang for outstanding research assistance, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti for
helpful conversation, and Edward Nelson for suggestions. Comments by Kristin Forbes and other
conference participants also improved the paper. For generous help with data, I acknowledge Oya
Celasun, Weicheng Lian, Ava Hong, and Mahnaz Hemmati of the IMF and Anna Zabai of the
BIS. All errors are mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Maurice Obstfeld. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy
Maurice Obstfeld
NBER Working Paper No. 26039
July 2019
JEL No. E52,E58,F36,F41,G15

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper is a partial exploration of mechanisms through which global factors influence the
tradeoffs that U.S. monetary policy faces. It considers three main channels. The first is the
determination of domestic inflation in a context where international prices and global competition
play a role, alongside domestic slack and inflation expectations. The second channel is the
determination of asset returns (including the natural real safe rate of interest, r*) and financial
conditions, given integration with global financial markets. The third channel, which is particular
to the United States, is the potential spillback onto the U.S. economy from the disproportionate
impact of U.S. monetary policy on the outside world. In themselves, global factors need not
undermine a central bank's ability to control the price level over the long term -- after all, it is the
monopoly issuer of the numeraire in which domestic prices are measured. Over shorter horizons,
however, global factors do change the tradeoff between price-level control and other goals such
as low unemployment and financial stability, thereby affecting the policy cost of attaining a given
price path.


Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu
    Under the postwar Bretton Woods system of ...xed exchange rates that
prevailed through the early 1970s, the external constraint of preserving o¢ -
cial dollar convertibility into gold ...gured explicitly and importantly in U.S.
monetary policymaking (Eichengreen 2013). The con          ict between this com-
mitment and the domestic macroeconomic policy priorities of successive U.S.
administrations ultimately helped wreck the ...xed exchange rate system. The
move to pure ...at money and       oating exchange rates did not insulate U.S.
monetary policy (or other countries'monetary policies) from global factors,
however. As became immediately clear through the ...rst OPEC oil-price
shock, foreign disturbances can feed through to U.S. prices and output over
the medium term, perhaps posing more di¢ cult tradeo¤s for the Federal Re-
serve. If anything, the importance of global in     uences seems to have grown
over time.
    The Federal Reserve'    s legal policy mandate focuses explicitly on three
domestic variables: U.S. employment, price stability, and long-term interest
rates (although the last of these is hardly independent of the second, and
the ...rst two may be closely linked). That focus does not imply, however,
that foreign events are not signi...cant drivers of Fed actions. As a young
New York Fed sta¤er, Charles P. Kindleberger, put it more than 80 years
ago: "A monetary policy based entirely upon the requirements of the internal
economy will be based at one remove on external factors."1 Moreover, the
Fed' s leaders are hardly reticent about citing global events for their potential
U.S. impacts. At a speech in Berkeley during the global ...nancial turbulence
of 1998, Chairman Greenspan memorably stated: "[I]t is just not credible
that the United States can remain an oasis of prosperity una¤ected by a
world that is experiencing greatly increased stress" (Greenspan 1998). Later
that month, the Fed cut rates.2 Ferrara and Teuf (2018) ...nd a systematic
relationship between references to international factors in FOMC minutes
and accommodative monetary moves.
    This paper is a partial exploration of mechanisms through which global
factors in  uence the tradeo¤s that U.S. monetary policy faces.3 It considers
   1
     Kindleberger (1937, pp. 230-231).
   2
     According to the accompanying FOMC explanation, "The action was taken to cushion
the e¤ects on prospective economic growth in the United States of increasing weakness in
foreign economies, and of less accommodative ...nancial conditions domestically."
   3
     Some areas the paper does not discuss in detail are mentioned in context below. The

                                           1
three main channels. The ...rst is the determination of domestic in         ation
in a context where international prices and global competition play a role,
alongside domestic slack and in     ation expectations. The second channel is
the determination of asset returns (including the natural real safe rate of
interest, r ) and ...nancial conditions, given integration with global ...nancial
markets. The third channel, which is special to the United States, is the
potential spillback onto the U.S. economy from the disproportionate impact
of U.S. monetary policy on the outside world. In themselves, global factors
need not undermine a central bank'      s ability to control the price level over
the long term ­after all, it is the monopoly issuer of the numeraire in which
domestic prices are measured. Over shorter horizons, however, global factors
do change the tradeo¤ between price-level control and other goals such as
low unemployment and ...nancial stability, thereby a¤ecting the policy cost
of attaining a given price path.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents some basic data on
the U.S. economy'    s evolving economic integration with world product and
asset markets. Section 2 explores the changing nature of consumer-price in-
  ation, which is shown to depend importantly on import-price in        ation but
seems ever less dependent on domestic wage in       ation since the early 1990s. I
argue that it is unclear how important globalization is in explaining the ap-
parently declining importance of domestic economic slack in the U.S. Phillips
curve. In section 3, I explore how the global determination of rates of re-
turn matters for monetary policy. One lesson is that the determination of
r is inherently global, and tied up with movements in current account bal-
ances, which therefore can o¤er important clues about the real natural rate.
However, global markets also determine the returns on an array of risky as-
sets. While events that create incipient imbalances in the foreign exchange
market may be o¤set to some degree by exchange-rate adjustments, two-way
gross cross-border    ows can have important asset-market impacts ­carrying
macroeconomic and ...nancial stability implications ­ without much impact
on exchange rates. The last substantive section, section 4, explains how the
dollar's singular international roles as an invoicing and funding currency, as
well as a benchmark for currency stabiization, confer on the Federal Reserve
paper also does not attempt an evaluation of particular monetary policy frameworks,
unlike the studies in Adrian, Laxton, and Obstfeld (2018).


                                        2
a unique global ampli...cation mechanism for its monetary policy actions.
Even a purely self-oriented perspective must take into account the result-
ing potential spillbacks onto the U.S. economy. Section 5 o¤ers concluding
thoughts.


1    The U.S. economy in a global context
During the postwar period, the world economy has evolved in a context of
ever-broader and deeper markets for good, services, and securities. At the end
of World War II, the United States stood uniquely dominant as an economic
and ...nancial power. Over nearly 75 subsequent years, global recovery and
development have left it embedded in a world of much more comparable
economic powers, linked by interdependent and complex networks for trade
and ...nance. That interdependence has far-reaching implications for U.S.
monetary policy: its domestic e¤ects, its impact on the rest of the world,
and the range of shocks that it faces.
    The evolution of U.S. interconnections with foreign economies, along with
U.S. exposure to foreign shocks, could be measured in several ways. In this
section I set out some basic quantity indicators of economic openness.
    A ...rst indicator is the sheer size of U.S. output relative to world GDP.
Other things being equal, the smaller is the U.S. share in world GDP, the
more exposed it is likely to be to macroeconomic shocks originating abroad.
Figure 1a shows the shares of the United States and the emerging and de-
veloping economies (EMDEs) in world GDP measured at market exchange
rates, starting in 1980. Perhaps surprisingly, while the EMDE share rises
markedly over the period shown, from about 24 to 40 percent, the U.S. share
remains roughly constant at around 25 percent (albeit with considerable     uc-
tuations in between). Equally surprising, Maddison (2001, p. 263) reports
a U.S. share for 1950 that is not much higher ­ 27.3 percent, although one
might well question the data he uses for the USSR, Eastern Europe, and
China. In contrast the U.S. share in 1913, on the eve of World War I, was
only 19.1 percent.
    The picture is very di¤erent when measuring national outputs at pur-
chasing power parity (PPP), as Figure 1b does. Doing so, we see a marked
decline since 1980 in the U.S. output share, while the EMDE share rises

                                      3
from under 37 to 63 percent. Although PPP-adjusted numbers are critical
for relative welfare assessments, GDP comparisons at market exchange rates
better account for the exchange rate' s role in intermediating shock transmis-
sion between national economies. Thus, a fair conclusion is that the U.S. has
not become more exposed to foreign disturbances simply through a fall in its
relative economic size.
    Size, however, is not the only thing that matters; so do the breadth and
depth of market linkages with the outside world. Here, the United States
does seem more exposed than in the past.
    Take trade ...rst. As is well known, and as Figure 2 rea¢ rms, the dollar
values of U.S. exports and imports have risen substantially over time relative
to dollar GDP, the most dramatic acceleration starting in the early 1970s as
the industrial economies abandoned ...xed exchange rates. These numbers mix
valuation and volume e¤ects ­ for example, the dollar'    s sharp depreciation
in the 1970s boosted both export and import values relative to GDP ­but
over time there has clearly been an increase in trade volumes. Compared
with other OECD members, and even most high-income countries, the U.S.
remains relatively closed on the trade side. Increasingly around the world, for
example, non-commodity exports depend on imported intermediate inputs,
with resulting increases in trade volumes. But U.S. exports rank low in this
respect (Figure 3). That being said, imported intermediate inputs do play an
increasingly important role in overall U.S. production (not just in exports).
Consider industrial supplies and capital goods. They made up about half of
all U.S. goods imports in 2018, roughly the same share as in 1999; but imports
have expanded by half as a share of GDP over the last 25 years, outpacing the
growth of exports (Figure 2). The rising importance of intermediate imports
implies a growing channel for foreign price developments to in      uence U.S.
product prices.
    If the United States looks closed on the trade side when compared with
other countries, the same is not nearly as true of its international ...nancial
links. Figure 4 shows US gross external assets and liabilities relative to
GDP. These grow sharply (but roughly commensurately) up until the Global
Financial Crisis, reaching ratios to GDP in the neighborhood of 150 percent.
Since then, assets have leveled o¤ but liabilities have continued to grow.4
  4
      Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018) survey international ...nancial integration since the


                                             4
    The balance between assets and liabilities changes not only because of
current account     ows, but also because of asset-price developments that can
sharply alter gross assets and liabilities. Speci...cally, U.S. foreign liabilities
are mostly denominated in U.S. dollars, whereas assets are mostly in non-
dollar currencies. In addition, U.S. foreign assets are more heavily skewed
toward equity (portfolio equity and FDI) than are liabilities. An implication
is that unexpected dollar strength tends to transfer wealth from the U.S. to
foreigners, as do global stock-market declines (Gourinchas and Rey 2007).
And with gross external positions so extensive, the wealth transfers can be
very big.
    Compared with the       ow change in the NIIP due to the current account,
the stock revaluation due to asset-price changes is indeed large and volatile
(Figure 5). Over 2008, the U.S. sacri...ced nearly 13 percent of GDP in wealth
to the rest of the world, only to gain back 12 percent over 2009. These are very
large economic shocks, though their macroeconomic impact may be muted
if they are temporary and hit mostly deep-pocketed and lightly leveraged
investors. On the other hand, changes in the current account re         ect shifts
in aggregate demand, and while these do not reach the upper levels of the
wealth transfers shown in Figure 5, they can be macroeconomically quite
signi...cant, even for the United States (Figure 6). They represent another
channel through which ...nancial openness is both a source and transmitter of
macro disturbances ­though their implications for monetary policy depend
on the nature of the shocks driving them.
    The balance of this paper looks more closely at some macroeconomic
implications of trade and ...nancial openness.


2         Global aspects of the ination process
It is well known that in recent years ­ and certainly predating the Global
Financial Crisis ­in  ation has seemed less responsive to domestic economic
activity gaps, in the United States and other industrial countries alike. For
example, the IMF (2013) chronicled the limited downward response of in-
 ation to the crisis and its aftermath. Conversely, even as activity has re-
crisis.



                                        5
turned to or exceeded pre-crisis levels and monetary policies have remained
accommodative, in     ation has generally been slow to respond in advanced
economies.
    Numerous potential explanations have been o¤ered (see Kiley 2015 for
a survey). Potential explanations include better anchored in         ation expec-
tations (for example, Del Negro, Giannoni, and Schorfheide 2015; Jordà
et al. 2019) or expectational shifts driven by commodity prices (Coibion
and Gorodnichenko 2015); underestimation of economic slack (Yellen 2015);
the domestic in   uence of global activity and labor-market conditions (IMF
2006, 2016; Auer, Borio, and Filardo 2017; Forbes 2018); and           atter price
Phillips curves, albeit perhaps only at relatively low in     ation rates (Blan-
chard, Cerutti, and Summers 2015; Gagnon and Collins 2019). While admit-
tedly these factors are potentially interrelated ­for example, better anchor-
ing can itself potentially  atten the Phillips relationship, as can international
competition, with mutually reinforcing spillovers among countries ­ a nat-
ural starting point for assessing the impact of global factors is to ask how the
basic architecture of the price Phillips curve could change in an international
context.
    In standard closed-economy macroeconomic models, the expectations-
augmented price Phillips curve links consumer-price in        ation to expected
future in  ation and some measure of the output or employment gap. Com-
pared with the hypothetical closed-economy case, an open-economy price
Phillips curve adds two dimensions:

   1. The global competitive environment : Firms'willingness to change prices
      as marginal cost changes can fall when they face more intense compe-
      tition due to potential imports. At the same time, aspects of global
      competition may a¤ect the responsiveness of marginal cost ­especially
      wages ­to economic slack.

   2. Foreign prices : Consumer-level in  ation will re ect not just the nomi-
      nal cost of domestic value-added, but also nominal import prices, which
      a¤ect consumer prices directly as well as domestic production costs. In
      turn, import prices are a mix of those set directly in the terms of lo-
      cal currency and those set in other currencies, translated using the
      domestic-currency prices of those currencies (i.e., exchange rates).

                                        6
2.1    Global competition
Writing in the in ationary mid-1970s, Dornbusch and Krugman (1976) seem-
ingly viewed the Phillips curve facing monetary policy in an open economy
as being steeper under   oating exchange rates. As they put it:
      The link between exchange-rate deterioration and domestic in    a-
      tion takes on importance in the context of our earlier argument
      that an expansionary monetary policy leads to a fall in the ex-
      change rate. The present line of argument establishes a direct,
      short-run link between monetary policy and in      ation. The con-
      ventional case for stabilization policy, including monetary policy
      ­that it acts promptly on quantities and only slowly on prices ­
      is, therefore, lost.
     Their account focuses on the in ation-activity tradeo¤ traced out by mon-
etary shocks, and it depends on both of the open-economy dimensions listed
above: the in    ation responsiveness to costs and the e¤ect of import prices
based on the exchange rate response. It also brngs to mind another possible
gap that I will not discuss ­a credibility gap in monetary policy, such that
wage settlements may respond rapidly and strongly to monetary policies.
Leaving that last important topic aside, it is still helpful to break the ...rst
two mechanisms down, starting with the role of global competition.
     Many international macromodels simplify by assuming that price-setting
...rms face demand curves with constant elasticities. In this case, markups
of price over marginal cost do not vary, including in the face of more in-
tense international competition. Allowing for demand elasticities that vary
along the demand curve is one way to introduce strategic pricing comple-
mentarities for di¤erent ...rms, such that a ...rm's optimal price depends on
what its competitors are charging. Various speci...cations can lead to this
result (see Arkolakis and Morlacco 2017), and ...rm-level empirical evidence
is supportive. When competing ...rms' prices are strategic complements, a
...rm will hesitate to maintain its full markup when its costs rise for fear of
losing customers to competitors. The phenomenon is central to understand-
ing exchange-rate pass-through (e.g., Gust, Leduc, and Vigfusson 2010) and
other macroeconomic implications of globalization (e.g., Erceg, Gust, and
López-Salido 2009).

                                       7
   Such models also imply a muted response of in      ation to departures of real
marginal cost from the "natural" or full-employment level. Sbordone (2009)
o¤ers a very instructive formalization of this e¤ect. In New Keynesian models
with Calvo pricing and constant ...rm markups, the response of domestic
output-price in  ation to a deviation mc c of (log) real marginal cost from its
natural value is given by

                                   t      c t + Et
                                        = mc            t+1 ;                (1)

where < 1 is a real discount factor. This equation leads to a price Phillips
curve if activity gaps are closely associated with deviations of real mar-
ginal costs from full-employment levels. In Sbordone's model with variable
markups, instead of the preceding equation, the approximate in  ation equa-
tion is
                                e c t + Et t+1 ;
                            t = mc

where
                                        e=            < ;
                                             1+ "
with being the natural value of the ...rm'     s demand elasticity and " > 0 the
elasticity of its markup with respect to its market share. The implication is
that pricing complementarity      attens the Phillips curve compared with the
constant-markup case.
     The question of globalization' s e¤ect is a di¤erent one, however, and turns
on whether more intense competition (including, speci...cally, more intense
international competition) actually lowers e further relative to . If so, we
would have one mechanism through which increasing openness             attens the
Phillips curve. However, while more foreign competition (as measured by a
lower global market share, x) clearly raises the demand elasticity (x) (i.e.,
 0
   (x) < 0), it can lower the elasticity "(x).5 The net e¤ect depends on which
e¤ect is proportionally larger.
     Therefore, even when more import competition lowers average markups, it
also can lower the responsiveness of markups to competition ­and the latter
factor is also key for the slope of the Phillips curve. An additional contrary
consideration is that more import competition could drive out smaller and
  5
      Note that "(x) = x 0 (x)= (x)[1     (x)] > 0:


                                               8
less productive domestic ...rms, leaving in business ...rms with more market
power that might be less inclined to shave markups when costs rise.6 All
told, there is little clear evidence yet that international price competition is
behind the    atter U.S. Phillips curve.7
    A related hypothesis about the Phillips curve'   s  attening is an increasing
economic role for those goods, primarily tradable goods, that might be less
cyclically sensitive due to competitive pressures (Stock and Watson 2018).
A recent IMF study (IMF 2018a, Box 1.2) looks at the behavior of broad
aggregates of core goods and services prices across 16 advanced economies,
before and after the crisis. The U.S. data (Figure 7a) are similar to the
16-country average data (Figure 7b), and seem somewhat consistent with
the Stock-Watson decomposition, in that it is the post-crisis average level
of services core in    ation, not goods core in   ation, that is lower since the
crisis (indeed, the latter is slightly higher). But there are also signi...cant
short-run    uctuations in both in   ation series in response to known macro-
economic shocks. The IMF authors conclude that "disaggregated in            ation
trends suggest that enhanced tradability and global competition are unlikely
to have been the main culprits behind the sluggishness in in      ation in recent
years." Furthermore, given the secular upward trend in the weight of ser-
vices in consumption, enhanced output tradability over time (even allowing
for the enhanced tradability of services) seems an implausible explanation
for a   atter Phillips curve.
    Some New Keynesian models imply another potential reason for a            at-
ter Phillips curve. This mechanism centers on the relationship between real
   6
     Feenstra and Weinstein (2017) argue that trade has reduced markups in U.S. trad-
able industries. Their indirect method of measuring demand elasticities via concentation
indexes, however, yields results that are seemingly di¤erent from more direct approaches
such as the one in IMF (2019). In any case, the overall e¤ect of trade competition on
the Phillips curve's slope depends not only on how much it reduces the level of markups.
It also depends on the e¤ect on the responsiveness of markups to costs ­ that is, on the
pass-through of costs into prices ­ and without such responsiveness ("(x) 0), the pro-
competitive e¤ect of imports leaves the slope of the Phillips curve unchanged. For evidence
on trade and markups in the EU, see Chen, Imbs, and Scott (2009).
   7
     This is not, of course, to deny that a one-time surge in import competition could
depress in  ation over a limited horizon. But the latter e¤ect is at most a necessary, not
a su¢ cient condition, to establish global competititon as a potential cause of a      atter
Phillips curve.


                                             9
marginal cost and the output gap. A bigger output gap will depress the
terms of trade if a country's exporters must lower their prices to sell more of
their output on global markets. This development, however, both raises the
product wage (pushing ...rms toward raising prices) and lowers real income
(compared with the situation in a closed economy), encouraging labor sup-
ply and thereby a lower real product wage. If the second e¤ect dominates,
then the New Keynesian Phillips curve will be      atter (Clarida 2009). The
empirical relevance of this e¤ect has not been studied. In the open economy,
the relation between output and in     ation may be decoupled to the extent
that spending can diverge more readily from output (Razin and Yuen 2002).
     An important caveat regarding some of the preceding arguments is that
they hold constant the degree of price stickiness as the economy becomes
more open. It seems plausible, however, that one way global competitive
pressures (and greater exposure to global risks) might work is by leading
...rms to adjust prices more frequently. If this happens, the Phillips curve
will steepen. This possibility deserves more empirical attention. Looking at
one extreme, we certainly believe that price    exibility is relatively high in
smaller, very open economies (which is why economies like Hong Kong can
do well with pegged exchange rates).


2.2    Wage behavior
Wage behavior is a key underlying determinant of in      ation, and provides
another potential reason for a   atter price Phillips curve. A typical wage
Phillips curve might take the form

                            bt = GAPt + A(L) t ;
                            w                                                  (2)

where wb is the change in the (log) nominal wage, the output gap GAP
(however measured) is negatively related to unemployment via Okun'  s Law,
and A(L) is a lag-operator polynomial.8 The positive relation between the
gap and wage growth, coupled with the in   uence of wages on marginal cost,
provides the channel through which the gap also drives price ination, as in
  8
   See Galí (2011) for derivation of a similar expession in a New Keynesian dynamic
model.



                                        10
equation (1). If globalization reduces in equation (2), it will likely also
reduce the slope of the price Phillips curve.
    A common hypothesis is that globalization has eroded the bargaining
power of labor ­ outsourcing is more widespread than was the case several
decades ago, and the intensi...ed engagement with world markets by China,
the ex-Soviet bloc, and India and other reforming EMDEs may have doubled
the world' s e¤ective labor force in the early 1990s. There is not much micro-
level evidence; an exception is the study of French manufacturing ...rms by
Kramarz (2017) concluding that "strong unions caused o¤shoring which in
turn caused employment and wage losses ...." It nonetheless seems plausible
that reduced bargaining power in a more global environment would work to
the disadvantage of workers.
    Once again, however, establishing that an aspect of globalization has
reduced wages does not directly establish that it also reduces the response of
wages to slack. The latter e¤ect must also be present if we are to conclude
that growing globalization has     atened the wage Phillips curve over time.9
    There is some evidence that the U.S. wage Phillips curve has      attened,
but probably not as much as the price Phillips curve. Gali and Gambetti
(2019), for example, report moderate       attening, although they do not link
their results to globalization. Other research suggests that the recent appar-
ent   attening of the wage Phillips curve may be a phenomenon common to
other recession aftermaths (see, e.g., Daly and Hobijn 2014), and therefore
possibly temporary. Hong, Koczan, Lian, and Nabar (2018) attribute the
low nominal wage growth in advanced economies after the Global Financial
Crisis to expectations of continuing low in    ation, low productivity growth,
and mismeasured slack. Stock and Watson (2018, p. 12) conclude: "Unlike
core PCE in     ation, the correlation between wage in    ation and contempo-
raneous slack measures falls only slightly, and for some slack measure does
not fall at all, from the pre-2000 period to the post-2000 period." The same
applies comparing 1960-1983 (when globalization was less advanced) with
subsequent data.10 All in all, the conjecture that globalization has   attened
   9
      A fall in wages could indirectly reduce the impact of wages on overall consumer in a-
tion if it leads to a decline in the share of wages in production costs (for example, owing
to inelastic business demand for labor). The result could manifest as a muted response of
consumer in     ation to labor-market slack.
   10
      Other evidence consistent with this view includes that of Hooper, Mishkin, and Su...

                                           11
the U.S. wage Phillips curve remains just that ­a conjecture. More study is
needed.

2.3     Foreign prices
Import prices directly a¤ect CPI in    ation through two main channels: they
(i) enter into consumer prices and (ii) enter production costs for domestic
producers, and hence into the marginal cost term in equation (1).11 If the
roles of imports in consumption and production rise over time, as they have
for the U.S., the Phillips curve will very likely atten ­in the sense that the
response of consumer in    ation to domestic slack will fall.
    There are several ways to formalize this argument, but to be concrete,
I adopt a less formal but     exible approach.12 Let p bP M denote the change
in (log) producer prices of intermediate imports and p  bCM the same concept
for consumer imports. Let us suppose that domestic output is produced out
of labor (which I assume tentatively to be the source of all domestic value-
added) and intermediate imports. In this case, and assuming a Cobb-Douglas
production function for simplicity, the change in the log nominal marginal
cost of producing home goods is (up to an additive constant)

                                b + (1
                                w               bP M
                                               )p      g;

where g re   ects growth in input productivity (for example, through technical
progress). The change in the nominal price of ...nal home output, now denoted
 H ; will be the change in marginal cost plus the markup change, b, so that


                          H     b + (1
                              = w               bP M
                                               )p       g + b:

This equation is an identity, because the markup term is just a catch-all
residual that will incorporate all the e¤ects implied by the speci...c underlying
dynamic pricing model ­ possibly a New Keynesian model, but possibly
something else. In reality, of course, the term b incorporates a competitive
cost of capital as well as rents to ...rms'owners.
(2019) and of Knotek and Zaman (2014).
  11
     Over time, they can also inuence wage growth through their e¤ect on expected future
in ation and wage demands, but this channel is likely to be weak when expectations are
well anchored.
  12
     See Monacelli (2009) for a more structured approach.

                                          12
    Assume, in addition, that consumer imports are delivered to retail out-
lets from the dock with the help of labor. Assuming perfect competition in
distribution and a Cobb-Douglas weight on the labor input, in     ation in
consumer import prices, M , is equal to

                             M     b + (1
                                 = w              bCM
                                                 )p

(up to an additive constant).
    Overall consumer-price in ation is denoted C     H +(1   ) M , where
is the CPI weight of domestically produced goods and 1   that of consumer
imports. Combining the preceding equations for H and M yields consumer-
price in ation,

  C   =[   + (1        b + (1
                    ) ]w             bP M + (1
                                    )p              )(1    bCM
                                                          )p        g + b: (3)

As it is likely that       (the share of labor in ...nal output) exceeds (the
share of labor in consumer imports), the implication is that the sensitivity
of consumer in      ation to wage pressures ­ and thus to the output gap, via
equation (2) ­will very likely decline as (the consumption share of domestic
goods) and (the weight of domestic factors in ...nal production) decline.
Thus, the more open the economy, the lower the sensitivity of overall in   ation
to domestic slack, other things being equal. Of course, it is also possible that
greater domestic slack discourages markup growth b, and as we have seen,
while it is possible that this e¤ect increases with openness, further   attening
the Phillips curve, it is not inevitable. One additional implication of equation
(3): higher slack abroad may a¤ect domestic in       ation through import prices
or though b, even conditional on domestic slack, as suggested by Auer, Borio,
and Filardo (2017) and Forbes (2018). These mechanisms are in principle
relative price e¤ects, and the strength and time-pattern of any impact on
in  ation depends on the reaction of the exchange rate and the nature of
pass-through to domestic-currency import prices. There is an associated
conceptual problem of interpreting the statistical signi...cance of an external
slack measure in a causal sense. However, an independent external driver of
domestic in     ation, not directly controllable by monetary policy, could make
it less likely that there is a "divine coincidence" in monetary policy, whereby
the best policy for price stability is also the best for stabilizing the output


                                      13
gap. Instead, the central bank would face a harsher policy tradeo¤.13


2.4     Marginal cost correlates of U.S. consumer price
        ination
Discussion of the Phillips curve and its evolution often draw inferences about
the implications for monetary policy tradeo¤s. But conventional Phillips
curve estimates are not structural relationships and can shift over time for
reasons not directly related to exogenous factors such as globalization ­for
example, due to changes in the monetary policy reaction function (McLeay
and Tenreyro 2019). For this reason, an assessment of the impact of global-
ization on the policymaker' s predicament is hard to deduce from the so-called
Phillips curve "tradeo¤." More reliable approaches (albeit more laborious)
would evaluate expected policy loss under di¤erent degrees of openness, or
the impact on tradeo¤s between competing objectives (for an example of the
latter approach, see Erceg, Gust, and López-Salido 2009). These metrics
depend on taking a stand on a particular dynamic model, and I will not
attempt such an exercise here.
    Rather than reporting Phillips curve estimates ­a ground amply covered
in other studies ­ I instead will report the partial correlations suggested
by the pricing relationship (3), with the markup-term being considered as
a regression error. Of course, that error is correlated with the included
regressors, and therefore the resulting estimates do not have a structural
interpretation. They certainly do not describe a policy-invariant constraint in
a central-bank optimization problem. The ...ndings are suggestive, however,
and do furnish a set of empirical regularities that theories of an evolving
in  ation process should explain.
    Table 1 reports ordinary least squares regressions over 1964-2018 of quar-
terly U.S. CPI in   ation on three variables: nominal wage growth (measured
by average hourly earnings of production and nonsupervisory employees in
the nonfarm private sector, as reported by the BLS); growth in overall im-
port prices (as measured by the IMF'  s aggregate import price index); and the
growth in labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector (real output per
  13
    Ihrig et al. (2010) and Mikolajun and Lodge (2016) ...nd no evidence that foreign
activity variables directly enter domestic Phillips curves.


                                         14
hour of all persons, as reported by the BLS). The BLS reports disaggregated
U.S. import price indexes starting in 1992, and Table 2 will use those data to
separate total import price growth into consumer and producer goods. How-
ever, Table 1 gives an indication of very long-term changes in the in       ation
process. All variables are four-quarter trailing moving averages, to eliminate
any seasonality, and the table reports Newey-West standard errors.
    Over the entire 1964-2018 period (Table 1), wages have a substantial
and highly signi...cant positive correlation with in    ation, import prices are
important, and in   ation tends to fall when labor productivity rises. However,
the coe¢ cients appear unstable over time. Most notably, the role of wages
falls dramatically over time, as (to a somewhat lesser degree) does that of
labor productivity. The role of overall import prices         uctuates, possibly
trending downward until the post-crisis period. This pattern seems contrary
to the idea of import prices playing a growing role in U.S. in     ation.
    In qualitative terms, the results are remarkably similar when instead of
average hourly earnings, the labor-cost measure is the growth in compensa-
tion per hour. (That measure allows an extended sample starting in 1957. I
do not report those results here.)
    Table 2 focuses on the post-1992 period and breaks import prices into
consumer and producer goods. I construct import price indexes for those
two categories by de...ning consumer goods (admittedly, approximately) as
those the U.S. Census classi...es in the categories food, feeds, and beverages;
automotive vehicles, parts, and engines; and consumer goods. Imported
producer goods are those falling under the categories industrial supplies and
materials; and capital goods, except automotive. The overall in       ation rates
for consumer and producer imports, p   bCM and pbP M , are then constructed from
disaggregated index changes using import-value shares as weights.
    Table 2, like Table 1, shows a declining importance of wage growth over
time, but within the 1992-2018 sub-sample, a growing importance of produc-
tivity growth (also seen in Table 1). In these estimates, it is the prices of
imported producer goods rather than consumer imports that show the more
consistent correlation with CPI in   ation, with imported consumer goods be-
coming signi...cant only in the post-crisis period. This ...nding echoes that
of Auer, Levchenko, and Sauré (2018) on the role of input-output linkages
in propagating PPI in    ation globally. When compensation per hour is the


                                       15
labor-cost variable, the results (not reported) are generally similar.
    Returning to the U.S. Phillips curve, these ...ndings would be consistent
with a declining role for labor-market slack over time in explaining overall
in  ation. The ...nding that wages and productivity have become less cor-
related with in   ation over time is consistent with the ...nding of King and
Watson (2012) that unit labor costs have become less important in explain-
ing prices, although their study did not explicitly consider import prices; see
also Peneva and Rudd (2015) and Bidder (2015). The role of import-price
in  ation does not seem to have grown over time, in line with the ...ndings of
Ihrig et al. (2010).
    The several-trillion dollar question is to understand what explains the
residual b in equation (3) ­which captures compensation of non-labor pro-
ductive factors as well as non-competitive rents. More research on the ap-
parently reduced role of labor costs is needed, including possible links to
globalization through a secular fall in the U.S. income share of labor (IMF
2017a). Answering this question has important implications for in        ation
forecasting and monetary policy.


2.5     The monetary transmission mechanism
Coming back to Dornbusch and Krugman (1976): if import prices respond
strongly to exchange depreciation and ...rms have little capacity to absorb
higher costs in markups, then the overall in     ation response to monetary
expansion may well be greater than in a hypothetical closed economy. For
this reason, Dornbusch and Fischer (1986, p. 493) stated: "Theory suggests
and empirical evidence supports the notion that under    exible exchange rates
the Phillips curve is much steeper." But to say that the in  ation response to
a positive monetary shock is greater in an open economy is not the same as
saying that the response of in   ation to the output gap is greater -- indeed,
                               14
it very likely will be smaller. Furthermore, the conditions of high pass-
  14
    That is probably why Dornbusch and Krugman (1976, p. 573) distinguish between a
"conventional" short-run Phillips curve and a Phillips curve "in terms of market prices."
Their concept seems related to what Barnichon and Mesters (2019) call the "Phillips
multiplier." Di¤erent understandings of what a "steep" Phillips curve means may explain
some confusion in the literature. Thus, Rogo¤ (2006, p. 269) writes that "globalization
creates [a] favorable milieu for maintaining low ination by steepening the output-ination


                                           16
through that Dornbusch, Fischer, and Krugman assumed do not well describe
the U.S. economy today (Gopinath 2016).
   This is not to deny that the broader issue these authors addressed ­the
monetary transmission mechanism in the open economy ­ is of central im-
portance. In the closed economy, monetary policy directly impacts domestic
aggregate demand. Three main qualitative di¤erences apply to any open
economy, however:

   1. The aggregate-demand e¤ects on market interest rates and asset prices
      will be intermediated by the exchange rate and depend on global ...nan-
      cial market conditions.

   2. Some aggregate demand will spill onto imports while some output is
      sold abroad, with the e¤ects again intermediated by the exchange rate.

   3. The pass-through of exchange rates to import prices will be a critical
      determinant of the ination response.

     There are several illuminating studies of these mechanisms and their
quantitative impact, for example, the one by Erceg, Gust, and López-Salido
(2009). Since that ground has been ably covered by others, I will be selective
and focus next on an aspect of item #1 above, the in       uence of international
...nancial markets.
     Later on, however, I will look at one further global dimension of monetary
that applies primarily to the United States: the outsized global impact of
U.S. monetary policy due to the unique international roles of the dollar and of
U.S. ...nancial markets. This channel is an important additional transmission
mechanism.
(Phillips curve) tradeo¤ faced by central banks." His discussant, Bean (2006, p. 308),
...nds this remark puzzling and observes: "I am less convinced ... that globalization will
result in a steepening of the short-run output-in   ation tadeo¤. Extant analyses of the
tradeo¤ in open economies instead suggest that the increased specialization resulting from
globalization reduces the response of in  ation to the domestic output gap and makes it
more sensitive to the world output gap, leading to a    atter tradeo¤ ...." They are likely
both right ... but they are talking about di¤erent things.




                                            17
2.6    Summary
The U.S. price Phillips curve has    attened over time ­a development not con-
...ned to the United States. The reason for this is unclear ­the Phillips rela-
tionship between in    ation and slack is not structural, but is policy-dependent
through multiple mechanisms The evidence is weak that increasing globaliza-
tion, as opposed, say, to better anchored expectations (something common
to many countries), is responsible. The evidence of a         atter wage Phillips
curve is more tenuous.
      Import prices are a robust correlate of U.S. CPI in   ation and could pro-
vide a mechanism (along with markup changes) for foreign slack measures
to correlate with U.S. in     ation over some time spans. The policy impli-
cation of such a correlation is not obvious (Woodford 2009). Ultimately,
though (once sticky-price and pricing-to-market rigidities have been worked
through), exchange-rate changes induced by monetary shocks will feed pro-
portionately into import prices, ensuring domestic monetary policy long-
run control over domestic prices (except in implausible circumtances). The
process could be relatively lengthy, however, confronting the central bank
with harsher medium-term tradeo¤s.
      One strong pattern in the data is a weaker correlation of U.S. wage
changes with CPI in     ation. The reasons behind this also are unclear. They
could be related to globalization, to the extent that the mechanism lowering
labor'  s GDP share depends on global factors (for example, low-wage imports
or ...rms'capacity to move labor-intensive operations o¤shore).


3     International ...nancial linkages and mone-
      tary policy
Because U.S. ...nancial markets are closely intertwined with markets abroad,
developments in those markets will bu¤et the U.S. economy and could call for
monetary policy responses ­either through interest-rate changes or balance-
sheet adjustments. Sometimes those responses serve to o¤set or temper
shocks, sometimes to accommodate global trends that could destabilize U.S.
in ation if not properly re ected in the monetary-policy reaction function.
The range of potential policy issues is broad, so here I will limit my discus-

                                       18
sion to two main transmission channels for global in    uences: the natural real
rate of interest and ...nancial factors more broadly construed.
    Connections with foreign ...nancial markets complicate the central bank'    s
quest for ...nancial stability, with potential monetary policy implications (see,
for example, Obstfeld 2015). However, I will touch on ...nancial stability
considerations only in passing, as they are the focus of a separate paper at
this conference.


3.1     The natural real interest rate
The "natural" or "neutral" real rate of interest r , a concept that has been
central to monetary theory from Wicksell (1898) to Woodford (2003) and
beyond, provides a key benchmark for monetary policy. It is typically de...ned
as the real rate of interest consistent with full employment in a hypothetical
world with perfectly      exible prices and wages. The general precept most
in   ation-targeting central banks follow approximates the following approach:
set the nominal policy interest rate less forecast in    ation ­the expected real
policy rate ­above r when in      ation is forecast to be above target, and below
r in the opposite case. Because r is not directly observable as the actual
market return on any instrument, central banks face a challenge in estimating
it, and especially so when r is not stable, as changes can be hard to detect
in real time (even when there is in    ation-indexed government debt). In any
...nancially open economy, interest rates are determined in part by global
market forces, and so developments abroad can exert a decisive force on
domestic r . This dependence is a two-edged sword for policymakers: purely
domestic factors that might move r will be muted, but by the same token,
foreign factors that could be much harder to monitor will play signi...cant
roles.
     Figure 8 illustrates the coherence of long-term real rates for a sample of
industrial countries.15 Del Negro et al. (2018) develop a methodology for
estimating trend real interest rates, which likewise show remarkable conver-
gence over recent decades.
  15
    Figure 8 adjusts for the temporary ination e¤ects of Japanese increases in consump-
tion tax in April 1997 and April 2014. In the ...gure, expected in  ation is proxied by
in ation over the preceding 12 months.



                                          19
3.1.1      Global determination of real interest rates
Popular methodologies for estimating r recognize potential global interde-
pendence, but largely proceed on a national basis, as if each economy were a
self-contained unit (e.g., Holston, Laubach, and Williams 2017). Even such
exercises tend to yield r estimates which, like market real interest rates, are
highly correlated across countries ­ unsurprisingly, because the underlying
real data inputs are generated in a market setting that enhances comovement
among national macroeconomic variables, including interest rates.
     A simple textbook diagram based on Metzler (1968) can elucidate the
main forces at play. It uses the same underlying model that informs Bernanke'    s
(2005) account of a global saving glut starting in the late 1990s.
     Figure 9 illustrates the global determination of the full-employment real
interest rate in a hypothetical world with two regions, Home (think of it as
the United States) and Foreign (the rest of the world). In each region, saving
is increasing, and investment decreasing, with the real interest rate. In the
simpli...ed case shown in Figure 9, there is a homogenous world output ­said
di¤erently, PPP holds ­ so that with an integrated world ...nancial market,
the real interest rates prevailing in Home and Foreign will be fully equalized
by net international capital       ows. Importantly, there is also only a single
asset available ­the real bond indexed to the single output ­and no other
asset returns in     uence economic behavior. Moreover, countries'consumption
and investment opportunities are constrained only by their full-commitment
intertemporal budget constraints ­there is no question of asymmetric infor-
mation or default.16
     Global equilibrium means that world saving equals world investment ­
not that saving and investment coincide country by country. Figure 9 show
the equilibrium world natural rate of interest as rH = rF . In this equilibrium,
Home'    s de...ciency of saving compared with investment ­its current account
de...cit ­must be precisely o¤set by Foreign' s excess of saving over investment
­its current account surplus.
     Figure 9 also indicates the hypothetical autarky natural rates of interest,
 aut         aut
rH and rF        , that would prevail in Home and Foreign, respectively, if they
were excluded from international borrowing and lending. These real interest
 16
      For micro-foundations of the Metzler model, see Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (1996).



                                           20
rates force saving to equal investment in each country. Notice how the equi-
librium world interest rate necessarily falls between the two autarky rates:
Home, with the higher autarky rate, has a current account de...cit and thus
capital in  ows, whereas Foreign, with the lower autarky rate, has a current
account surplus and thus capital out   ows.

3.1.2   Role of the current account balance
Figure 9 makes the key point that the natural real rate of interest is in-
timately tied to the current account. Albeit simpli...ed, the model has an
important immediate implication: because the global equilibrium interest
rate is a weighted average of national autarky rates, shocks to autarky rates
anywhere will a¤ect current account balances and the natural real rate every-
where.
     Advanced countries no longer focus directly on the current account bal-
ance (or other balance of payments     ows) when setting monetary policy ­the
Reserve Bank of Australia placed a heavy emphasis on the current account
de...cit at one time, and of course, U.S. o¢ cial liabilities were a major con-
sideration for monetary policy throughout the 1960s and until 1971. There
are thus relatively few formal studies of the interaction between the cur-
rent account and monetary policy, notable exceptions being Ferrero, Gertler,
and Svensson (2009) and Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2018). Those central
banks for which the current account remains an important consideration tend
to be in emerging market economies, which are more vulnerable to capital-
  ow sudden stops. Even in those countries, provided the exchange rate is
  exible, the simultaneous preservation of internal and external balance is in
principle the joint responsibility of monetary and ...scal policy, with mone-
tary policy ideally focusing relatively more on the internal balance, at least
outside of crisis situations.
     There are at least two reasons why monetary policy may be more e¤ec-
tive if central banks monitor current-account developments closely, however.
First, changes in natural real rates therefore are likely to have current-account
implications, so signi...cant sustained current-account shifts will give clues
about changes in the natural rate.
     Second, signi...cant sustained current-account shifts may be driven by de-
velopments with implications for ...nancial stability. These can have dramatic

                                       21
impacts on output and prices down the road, as the events preceding the
Global Financial Crisis illustrate (Obstfeld and Rogo¤ 2009; Obstfeld 2012).
To begin, I take up the ...rst of the preceding motivations for attention to the
current account.
    As an initial illustration, consider Bernanke'  s (2005) account of how a
rise in East Asian saving after the late-1990s regional crises changed the
United States'external equilibrium. If we identify Foreign with Asia, Figure
10 shows the e¤ects of an outward shift in the Asian saving schedule from
         0
SF to SF . That shift lowers the autarky interest rate in Asia, raising its
desired current account surplus. At the same time, the natural real rate
in the United States necessarily falls, swelling its full-employment current
account de...cit. Had the Federal Reserve (in the real world with sticky prices
and wages) not accommodated this fall in the natural rate, the result would
have been currency appreciation, de      ationary pressure, an incipient rise in
the real rate of interest, and a slump.

3.1.3    Role of the real exchange rate
Of course, PPP (as assumed in Figure 10) does not hold in reality: real ex-
change rates, which I will de...ne for my purposes as the ratios of national
consumer price levels when measured in a common currency, are quite vari-
able. Their variability re ects a range of factors including trade impediments
in merchandise and services markets; moreover, changes in relative goods
prices can drive real exchange rate changes when national CPI baskets di¤er
in composition. The framework'     s basic qualitative insights still hold when
PPP fails, however, but with quantitative modi...cations.17
    To extend the model, let q denote the log price of the Foreign consumption
basket in terms of the Home basket ­ the Home-Foreign real exchange rate
­so that a rise in q (the Foreign basket becomes relatively more expensive)
is a real depreciation of the Home currency. The uncovered interest parity
  17
    Clarida's (2009, 2017) New Keynesian framework elucidates the in       uence of global
forces on natural real rates in a setting that allows for PPP deviations. But his closed-
form model solution makes several special assumptions that obscure some of the forces
at work in the interest of algebraic tractability. (For example, his model does not permit
current account imbalances in equilibrium.) His discussion is, however, fully consistent
with mine.


                                           22
condition linking countries' nominal interest rates is equivalent to a real
interest parity condition linking their real interest rates, of the form

                                rH = rF + E q

under conditions of full employment. The validity of this condition relies on
risk neutrality and an absence of di¤erential liquidity bene...ts attached to
safe national debt instruments (Del Negro et al. 2018).
    The expected rate of relative Home currency depreciation, E q , e¤ec-
tively drives a wedge between the Home and Foreign real rates of interest.
Figure 10 shows how this change alters the e¤ect of a rise in Foreign saving,
which Figure 10 illustrated earlier for the PPP case. Figure 11 relies on two
assumptions. First, it assumes that a rise in Foreign saving will lead to a
real appreciation of Home currency, which is necessarily also a depreciation
of Foreign currency. Generally a country'    s consumers have a home bias in
favor of home-produced goods, so a rise in their saving will depress the price
of their preferred consumption basket relative to those of consumers else-
where. Second, the ...gure assumes, consistent with a large body of empirical
research, that real exchange rates are mean reverting (see also Del Negro
et al. 2018). Thus, a rise in Foreign saving is most likely to produce an
immediate fall in q coupled with an expected future increase, that is, with a
rise in E q ­ just as Figure 10 shows. (The assumed behavior of q can be
rationalized even under    exible prices.)
    In the absence of any real exchange rate change, the (unique) global
                                           0         0
real interest rate would settle between rH and rF as in Figure 10, implying
a bigger Home de...cit and counterpart Foreign surplus. A positive value
of E q , however, pushes equilibrium natural rates closer to autarky rates,
reducing the size of the current-account changes. Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2001)
explored how goods-market impediments can mute the response of capital
  ows to shocks.
    In the case that Figure 11 shows, a bigger U.S. de...cit is a signal of a fall
in foreign autarky interest rates, necessarily bringing down the U.S. natural
real rate in response to global de  ationary pressure. The appropriate policy
response is to cut U.S. nominal rates. But the U.S. current account de...cit
may rise for other reasons. Figure 12 shows the e¤ects of an outward shift in
                                               0
the U.S. investment schedule (from IH to IH      ). That change raises the U.S.

                                       23
autarky rate, raises the foreign level of real rates by less, and thereby results
in a larger U.S. de...cit. The implication is that if the initial position is one of
full employment, the central bank may well wish to tighten monetary policy
­if it does not, then despite the currency'   s appreciation, the result will be a
positive output gap followed eventually by in     ation.18

3.1.4    The current account and ...nancial imperfections
I have presented Figures 11 and 12 as re      ecting independent developments,
but in the case of the United States in the 2000s, they were not: the ...rst
promoted the second. Low U.S. interest rates (coupled with forward guid-
ance) early in the 2000s arguably encouraged a house-price and residential
investment boom, coupled with symbiotic ...nancial innovation in mortgage
securitization. The result could well have been an outward shift in the U.S.
investment schedule (as in Figure 12) and a further deterioration in the U.S.
external balance. This is essentially the story that Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2009)
and Obstfeld (2018) tell. Figure 13 shows the time series of U.S. investment
and the current account, highlighting the strong "second leg" of current-
account deterioration from roughly 2003-2006.
     This brings me back to the ...nancial-stability motivation for central banks
to be aware of the current account. In retrospect, the sharp drop in the cur-
rent account starting around 2003 may have been signaling a domestically-
driven rise in the natural real rate, and a need for monetary tightening. The
lesson is that monetary policy, perhaps especially at low nominal interest
rates, cannot be divorced from ...nancial evolutions that not only impinge
on ...nancial stability, but also can generate structural shifts in the saving
and investment schedules that determine the natural rate r . Thus, no-
table current-account developments can furnish clues to perhaps dangerous
...nancial-sector developments.
     Indeed, recent research has shown how ...nancial development can itself be
a further determinant of autarky interest rates, not captured in the preceding
simple model. In the model of Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008), an
  18
    In discussing Figures 11 and 12, I do not sketch out the subsequent dynamics, driven
by the evolution of the NIIP and the need for countries to service their foreign debts in the
long run. Those developments will require long-run shifts in the saving and investment
schedules (for the de...cit country, for example, toward more saving and less investment).


                                             24
enhanced ability of a country'   s ...nancial markets to securitize income   ows
into a tradable form directly raises the autarky interest rate and thus, the
country' s current account de...cit. A challenge for central bank policy is that
such ...nancial innovation may itself be endogenous to the monetary stance,
and may promote instability down the road.19

3.1.5    Low global real rates: Implications for monetary policy
As Del Negro et al. (2018) illustrate, trend real interest rates (and the
trend real "world" rate, which they estimate) have moved sharply downward
since the 1980s, and in concert among advanced economies. Synchronicity is
expected in a world of internationally integrated capital markets, but their
work and that of others points to a range of common factors driving interest
rates lower, including aging work forces, slower productivity growth, and
relative scarcity of safe assets (see, e.g., IMF 2014; CEA 2015; Yi and Zhang
2016; Rachel and Smith 2017; Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver 2018; Rachel
and Summers 2019).20
    The long-term forces that these papers document, complemented by the
recent work of Gourinchas and Rey (2018) documenting the historical ten-
dency for low consumption-wealth ratios to predict future low real interest
rates, suggest that low values of r could remain on the global scene for some
time, especially in the advanced economies. The global determination of real
interest rates implies that, given their in    ation targets, foreign events may
drive central banks to their e¤ective lower bounds (ELBs) on policy inter-
est rates, making it impossible for monetary policy to respond with further
interest cuts to de   ationary shocks from abroad (see Caballero, Farhi, and
Gourinchas 2016). With medium-term in          ation targets at around 2 percent
per year, a central bank that relied only on conventional monetary tools
would be unable to counter a shock that drove r to 2 percent or below,
even in the favorable case that in   ation expectations remained anchored at 2
percent rather than declining. As a result, the possibility of monetary policy
being constrained when faced with either domestic or foreign de          ationary
shocks is higher ­ perhaps even higher than Kiley and Roberts (2017) esti-
  19
      On the long-run relationship between business-cycle develoments and ...nancial evolu-
tion, see Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2017).
   20
      For a longer-term perspective, see Jordà et al. (2017).

                                            25
mate ­and clearly justi...es a re-think of policy frameworks to reduce potential
ELB episodes and, thereby, to expand monetary policy space.


3.2     Broader ...nancial forces
In standard models, the real rate of interest r is a safe rate, set in markets
to equate the ows of saving and investment at the global level. As has been
especially evident in the recent era of large scale asset purchases, monetary
policy also works in part by altering the relative prices of a range of generally
risky assets, where prices are determined to equate global investors'portfolio
demands for particular assets to the stocks that are available worldwide.
The perspective of an integrated stock-      ow equilibrium with multiple assets,
due in its essentials to Tobin (1961), draws attention from the net        ow of
international lending measured by the current account balance, and toward
the gross two-way    ows which, in equilibrium, ...nance that balance and which
in turn derive from desired changes in stock positions given global changes in
asset prices, in wealth, in ...nancial constraints ­and, importantly, in investor
preferences and sentiment.
    Shifts in foreign asset demands are therefore a potential source of distur-
bances with monetary policy implications, as are domestic residents' shifts
between domestic and foreign assets. At the same time-- as the next section
takes up in greater detail-- ...nancial-market structures imply that Federal
Reserve actions are likely to propagate powerfully abroad, much more so
than for other central banks, with important potential spillbacks onto the
U.S. economy itself.

3.2.1   Dollar "liquidity" shocks
As I will discuss further in the next section, the U.S. dollar has a unique
role in the international monetary system as an o¢ cial reserve currency, a
funding currency, an invoicing currency for trade, and a vehicle currency
in the foreign exchange market. As a result, safe dollar assets (including
U.S. Treasury securities, but not necessarily restricted to those) are thought
to o¤er convenience yields over and above their pecuniary returns (see, for
example, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2012; Canzoneri, Cumby,



                                       26
and López-Salido 2013; Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig 2018).21 These
liquidity yields are variable and rise in periods of global stress as the dollar
plays the role of a safe haven. Conversely, a big sell-o¤ of dollar assets
(for example, due to political factors) could pose particular challenges for
monetary policy if the result is a U.S. spending decline coupled with higher
depreciation and in    ation (as modeled by Canzoneri, Cumby, and López-
Salido 2013).
     Figure 14 takes a ...rst look at a rise in the global demand for U.S. dollar
assets within the simpli...ed      exible-price theoretical framework of the last
subsection. The underlying modeling assumption is that in each region, the
rate of return primarily in      uencing saving and investment is the nominal
home-currency bond rate less the expected rate of domestic consumer-price
in  ation, notwithstanding the possibility that some actors transact in foreign
securities.22 If initially current accounts are balanced, the emergence of a
liquidity premium on Home bonds creates a gap between the two countries'
                                                     0
natural real rates with the U.S. rate falling to rH , the Foreign rate rising to
  0
rF , the Home current account moving into de...cit, while Foreign generates the
counterpart surplus. The driving mechanism in this example is not the e¤ect
of asset demand shifts on the exchange rate, but the movement in interest
rates necessary to re   ect the gap , which, in turn, moves the countries along
their saving and investment schedules. Were the real exchange rate variable,
however, as in Figures 11 and 12, the Home currency would appreciate in the
short turn, leading to an expected future depreciation which, in turn, would
                                 0               0
require a somewhat higher rH and lower rF in equilibrium, and, overall, a
smaller short-run home Home de...cit and Foreign surplus.
  21
     Recent applications in asset-pricing models include Del Negro et al. (2018) (interest
rates) and Engel and Wu (2018) (exchange rates).
  22
     Even if dollar interest rates are low due to a liquidity factor, foreign dollar borrowers
will pay the same foreign-currency rate as through home borrowing if they hedge those
dollars in the FX swap market and covered interest parity holds (CIP). Otherwise, they
will bear currency risk. Since the Global Financial Crisis, substantial deviations from CIP
have, however, become commonplace (Cerutti, Obstfeld, and Zhou 2019). Nonetheless,
for most currencies, most issuers are unable to arbitrage that "dollar basis" by borrowing
dollars and swapping into their domestic currencies. For example, the di¤erence between
lower-medium-grade corporate bond yields and Treasury yields, often taken as a measure
of the dollar liquidity yield, wipes out much or all of the dollar basis.



                                             27
    Once source of the Treasury liquidity premium is the U.S. dollar'      s sta-
tus as the world' s premier reserve currency. Warnock and Warnock (2009),
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and others have documented
e¤ects of foreign o¢ cial demand on US Treasury yields. Of USD 10.7 trillion
of 2018:Q4 allocated foreign exchange reserves covered in the IMF'     s COFER
database, USD 6.6 trillion (62 percent of global reserves) were held in dollars.
Foreign o¢ cial reserve behavior thus could be a signi...cant source of shocks
to U.S. bond markets. Another source of the U.S. dollar liquidity premium is
the dollar's unique role as a vehicle currency in FX markets. The last (2016)
Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and OTC Derivatives
Markets showed the U.S. dollar share in daily FX turnover to be 88 percent
(out of 200 percent, given that every deal involves two currencies).
    The structurally low required return on U.S. Treasuries may also be re-
lated to the U.S. global safe haven role ­ which, in turn, may owe to the
greater liquidity of dollar assets and the depth of U.S. ...nancial markets.
Gourinchas, Rey, and Govillot (2017) observe that when the dollar appreci-
ates unexpectedly in an environment of global distress, the resulting decline
in the U.S. NIIP is a transfer of wealth to foreigners that e¤ectively acts as an
insurance pay-out when the world economy is in turmoil (Figure 5). If dollar
securities have higher real payouts when global wealth takes a hit, however,
then average dollar yields should be lower. On this theory, the "exorbitant
privilege" of low dollar borrowing costs is matched by an "exorbitant duty"
to transfer wealth to foreign holders when global ...nancial conditions tighten.
If so, changes in foreign risk aversion or perceptions of risk would impinge
on U.S. interest rates.
    Consistent with this "exorbitant duty" view, the 1980-2018 correlation
coe¢ cient between the Fed'  s broad nominal dollar index and the IMF'    s mea-
sure of real global growth is 0:53, meaning that the dollar does have a
meaningful tendency to appreciate when global growth is low.23
  23
    The IMF weights countries' growth shares in world GDP growth using their PPP-
adjusted income levels. Using market exchange rate GDP weights instead, the preceding
correlation is 0:25: It is lower because when global growth slows and the dollar appreci-
ates, non-U.S. countries'weights in global growth get systematically down-weighted when
evaluated at market exchange rates.




                                           28
3.2.2    Other global inuences over ...nancing conditions
Federal Reserve control of the policy interest rate is meant to in      uence the
entire term structure, as well the prices of other risky assets, in order to
steer in  ation and employment. Financial impulses from abroad can, how-
ever, weaken the links between the policy interest rate, other asset prices,
and activity, and in this case, confront the Fed with harsher policy tradeo¤s
­for example, whether to tighten policy, even though in        ation is quiescent,
in order to deter ...nancial excesses in some markets. This type of dilemma is
present even in a closed economy, of course, but ...nancial openness increases
the United States'exposure to foreign ...nancial in     uences, for example, via
shifts in foreign demand for U.S. assets, driven by changing portfolio prefer-
ences or by ...nancial conditions abroad.24
    Figure 15 illustrates the potential divergence between Fed interest-rate
policy and overall ...nancial conditions. Both of the major hiking cycles
since the early 2000s show overall ...nancial conditions lagging well behind
interest-rate tightening. The cycle beginning in June 2004 featured a much-
noted failure of longer-term interest rates to respond commensurately ­the
"Greenspan conundrum," which many attributed to the in           uence of foreign
demand for safe U.S. longer-term securities. The cycle that began in De-
cember 2015 is followed by a similar failure of U.S. ...nancial conditions to
adjust in the same direction ­ instead, ...nancial conditions loosen through
the end of December 2018. Again, foreign conditions certainly played some
role ­whether through the European Central Bank'       s asset purchase program,
foreign appetite for U.S. corporate debt, or other factors.
    Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017) o¤er an integrated framework for
thinking about the evolution of rates of return in a world of multiple assets,
traded in world markets. They argue that, especially since 2008, a global
shortage of safe assets (driven in part by higher risk aversion) helps to explain
the non-trending rate of return on U.S. capital coupled with a declining risk-
free rate and rise in the equity premium. While this account is stylized, it
  24
    Adrian, Stackman, and Vogt (2019) operationalize this tradeo¤ in a particular way,
as a tradeo¤ between average growth and growth volatility. They argue that empirically,
countries with greater exposure to global ...nancial-market sentiment (as represented by the
VIX) face a steeper tradeo¤ (i.e., more extra output growth volatility for each additional
percentage point of growth).


                                            29
does illustrate the potential role of global ...nancial conditions beyond the
interest-rate channel featured in the Metzler model. Moreover, these factors
will shift saving and investment rates given the risk-free rate of interest, and
thereby move the natural rate r consistent with full employment. There is
no general "divine separability" under which policy interest rates can be set
independently of other ...nancial conditions.
    Financial conditions and, through them, economic activity thus will be
in  uenced by a range of ...nancing terms and conditions beyond any single
measure of the interest rate. This fact has implications for thinking about
about international capital    ows. For a given net capital account balance,
the volume and nature of gross in     ows ­ the gross ...nancing that foreign
markets make available ­is also critical in determining relative asset prices
and the availability of credit. In general equilibrium there can be an e¤ect
on the current account balance, of course, but that net balance does not
by itself reveal the underlying gross   ows, which are all-important for eco-
                                        25
nomic activity and ...nancial stability. Another way to express this is to
think about the role of a   oating exchange rate. In advanced economies, at
least, a   oating exchange rate can help bu¤er economic shocks by automati-
cally maintaining balance-of-payments equilibrium. However, compositional
mismatches between gross capital out      ows and in  ows can have important
impacts on ...nancial markets without the changes in incipient net capital
  ows that are more likely to move exchange rates.
    Bernanke et al. (2011), for example, document how European banks recy-
cled out   ows from U.S. money-market mutual funds (MMFs) back into U.S.
markets in the mid-2000s, pushing down yields on mortgage-backed securities
(and other substitutable assets) and helping to fuel the U.S. housing bubble.
Consistent with my earlier claim that such in   ows may have materially raised
U.S. housing investment, Bernanke et al. (2011) suggest that:

       The strong demand for apparently safe assets by both domestic
       and foreign investors not only served to reduce yields on these
  25
    On this point, see Borio and Disyatat (2015) and Obstfeld (2012). Forbes and Warnock
(2012) document surges and retractions in gross      ows, and their correlation with risk
aversion (as measured by the VIX). For a simple model of how foreign investor preferences
can determine the macroeconomic impact of capital in     ows, see Blanchard et al. (2017);
but the types of e¤ects they highlight can arise even from gross, not just net, inows.


                                           30
        assets but also provided additional incentives for the US ...nancial
        services industry to develop structured investment products that
        "transformed" risky loans into highly-rated securities.

These   ows also helped set up a potentially destabilizing nexus of ...nancial
interconnection among U.S. MMFs, European banks, and the U.S. housing
market.26

3.2.3     Links among long-term nominal yields
Global in   uences over long-term interest rates may re     ect forces beyond
global current account imbalances or reserve accumulation by EMDEs, in-
cluding investor sentiment, central-bank large-scale asset purchases, and gov-
ernment ...nancing needs. Not just long-term real interest rates, but also
long-term nominal interest rates, are surprisingly highly correlated across
countries.
    At one level this may not be so surprising. Even EMDEs have converged
in recent years toward lower in   ation rates (IMF 2018b; Ha, Kose, and Ohn-
sorge 2019), real exchange rate changes are eventually mean reverting, and
there is are strong global common factors driving countries' real interest
rates and likely also, term premia.27 Moreover, other things being equal,
the exchange-rate movements necessary to allow substantial changes in long-
term interest di¤erentials are very big. In a world of uncovered interest-rate
parity, for example, a relatively small expected exchange rate change can al-
low big international di¤erences in one-month interest rates; but by the same
token, a very large cumulative expected change would be needed to support
big di¤erences in ten-year rates.
    One way to illustrate the coherence of long-term rates is through regres-
sions of interest-rate changes on changes in a base-country interest rate ­
either the United States, or an alternative "natural" anchor currency. Table
3, which updates through early 2016 some of the results in Obstfeld (2015),
  26
    See also Acharya and Schnabl (2010).
  27
    Cohen, Hördahl, and Xia (2018) review alternative term premium models and conclude
that U.S. and euro area term premia are more correlated than are the components of
long-term rates explained by expected interest rates. See also Hellerstein (2011) and
Jotikasthira, Le, and Lundblad (2015).


                                         31
reports quarterly pooled nominal interest-rate regressions of the change in
country j '
          s nominal interest rate on the change in its base country'
                                                                   s rate,
                                               0
                        Rjt =    +     Rbt +       Xjt + "jt ;

where the controls Xjt are current and lagged output growth and in in       ation
in country j , variables suggested by the Taylor rule. The table reports regres-
sions with only the United States as a base country­    columns 1 and 5­  as well
as regressions in which countries are allowed to have distinct base partners­
columns 2­   4 and 6­ 8. The latter setup allows panel regressions in which a
time ...xed e¤ect can soak up common global shocks to interest rates, as well
as regressions that control explicitly for likely common shocks­     in Table 3,
the change in the VIX (columns 4 and 8).
    The message in Table 3 is that global long-term interest rates co-move
closely with their base-currency rates (usually the dollar or euro long-term
rates), and much more so than short-term rates. The correlation appears
even higher when controlling for the VIX, rises in which have a signi...cant
positive impact on global long-term nominal rates. This shift could re        ect
the safe haven roles of the main reserve currencies. Other authors ...nd high
correlations for long-term rates with U.S. rates, and higher correlations than
these for short-term rates, even controlling explicitly for U.S. macroeconomic
and the VIX. Those results are consistent with a causal impact of U.S. rates
on foreign rates (Hofmann and Takáts 2015).
    The correlations of long-term interest rates with center-country rates raise
the question of how strongly changes in foreign long-term rates spill over to
U.S. rates, and in particular, how U.S. rates have responded to speci...c foreign
shocks, such as the ECB'   s unconventional policies, including large-scale asset
purchases. There is considerable evidence of signi...cant spillover from U.S.
quantitative easing to foreign asset prices, particularly in EMDEs (Bauer and
Neely 2014; Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza 2015; Rogers, Scotti, and Wright
2014, 2018). In their initial roll-outs (for example, through 2012), ECB un-
conventional policies appear to have had a more limited e¤ect on bond yields
outside of the euro area, certainly when compared with the external e¤ect
of Fed policies (Rogers, Scotti, and Wright 2014; Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and
Straub 2016). The evidence for more recent ECB quantitative easing seems
more mixed (Coeuré 2018), although the ECB Asset Purchase Programme

                                      32
that started in March 2015 has not prevented U.S. 10-year Treasury yields
from rising, nor the gap between those and yields on 10-year Bunds from
growing.
    A growing literature points to the dollar' s unique global role as a likely
factor in the asymmetrically strong global response to U.S. unconventional
measures. The dollar' s role has other far reaching implications for U.S. mon-
etary policy, to which I now turn.


4     Implications of the dollar'
                                s global role
The last section documented the U.S. dollar'      s unique global position as a
reserve currency and a vehicle currency. Those roles are intimately tied to the
two additional roles in which the dollar occupies ...rst rank: invoice currency
and funding currency. Parallel to section 2 of this paper, the dollar'  s invoice-
currency role a¤ects the international price mechanism by in        uencing how
U.S. monetary policy will move real exchange rates, in        ation, and export
competitiveness throughout the world. Parallel to section 3, the dollar'         s
funding currency role mediates the transmission of U.S. monetary policy to
global ...nancing conditions.
    The U.S. dollar also stands out from other currencies as the prime "an-
chor" or "base" currency for exchange rate stabilization. In other words,
the many (mostly emerging and developing) countries that intervene to limit
their currencies'foreign-exchange    exibility often see their bilateral U.S. dol-
lar exchange rate as the most appropriate benchmark for stability. Ilzetzki,
Reinhart, and Rogo¤ (2017) reckon that for about 60 percent of the world'        s
countries (even more on a GDP-weighted basis), the dollar is the anchor cur-
rency. Thus, to the extent that these countries value exchange stability and
intervene in the foreign exchange market to limit       uctuations, Federal Re-
serve policy, more than the monetary policies of other major central banks,
will have an immediate impact on domestic ...nancial conditions.
    Through these mechanisms, U.S. monetary policy has an outsized impact
on global economic activity ­consistent with the evidence on unconventional
policy spillovers that the last section reviewed. The Federal Reserve, even
more than other central banks, has grounds to consider spillbacks from the


                                       33
global economy as a relevant transmission mechanism for its policies.28


4.1       Dollar invoicing
Much international trade is invoiced in U.S. dollars, even when the United
States is not a party to the trade. Only the euro is at all a rival in this
respect, but the share of world trade invoiced in euros is much lower. And
for the United States, of course, the dollar dominates for both imports and
exports, with 93 percent of imports and 97 percent of exports invoiced in
dollars (Gopinath 2017).
    A large literature has focused on how the choice of invoice currency af-
fects the exchange-rate adjustment mechanism, given that import and export
prices tend to be set, and typically are at least somewhat sticky, in invoice
currencies (see the survey by Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc 2011). As pointed
out by Goldberg and Tille (2006, 2008) and Gopinath (2016), invoicing in a
dominant international currency will imply that exchange-rate changes can
have unexpected relative-price e¤ects on trade    ows. For example, if a coun-
try's imports and exports are both largely invoiced in dollars, a depreciation
of its currency against the dollar will sharply raise the price of imports, but
will not in itself make its exports cheaper for foreign buyers, who will face
unchanged dollar prices for those goods. As a result, all near-term trade ad-
justment will take place on the import side. (Exporters'domestic-currency
pro...ts per unit sold will, however, rise, but while that might induce ex-
pansions of export supply and employment over time, the process is likely
to be slower than an export expansion powered by external demand.) The
United States'singular invoicing pattern implies, in contrast, that a dollar
depreciation means lower prices worldwide for U.S. exports, but little near-
term increase in the import prices that U.S. buyers face. Gopinath (2016)
documents the low pass-through of exchange-rate change into U.S. import
prices.
    Invoicing patterns seem broadly not too di¤erent from 25 years ago, with
the main structural change being the advent of euro use for intra-euro area
trade since 1999. But even a look at the euro area' s 2016 trade with partners
outside of the EU gives a sense of the dollar'  s disproportional importance,
 28
      Carney (2019) stresses the spillback channel of advanced-economy policies.


                                            34
with 32.2 of extra-EU exports and 52.9 of extra-EU imports invoiced in
dollars (Figure 16).29 These numbers compare with the EU'       s trade shares
with the United States in 2017, which were 20 percent of exports and only
13.8 percent of imports, according to Eurostat.30
    From the standpoint of U.S. monetary policy, a key need is to understand
how   uctuations in the dollar's exchange rate may a¤ect activity in countries,
many of them emerging markets, that extensively use the dollar to invoice
exports, or that face dollar-denominated import prices in their trade with
non-U.S. partners. A U.S. monetary tightening that generally strengthens
the dollar will raise domestic-currency import prices for countries with im-
ports invoiced in dollars. But if its exports are invoiced in dollars as well,
the prices of those exports will rise against goods priced in other currencies
­ for example, competing exports invoiced in euros, or countries' domestic
products in general.31 For such countries, the net trade e¤ects of a stronger
dollar could therefore be contractionary ­ adding to the contractionary ...-
nancial e¤ects that I will discuss below.32 Related to this possibility, dollar
strengthening also can reduce the volume of world trade by switching demand
toward domestic goods and away from dollar-priced imports, without o¤set-
ting global export promotion for countries that invoice exports in nondollar
  29
      Energy imports, heavily invoiced in U.S. dollars, account for about 16 percent of
total extra-EU imports. Subtracting these from total extra-EU imports invoiced in dollars
leaves a share roughly comparable to extra-EU exports invoiced in dollars, and still far
above the EU import share originating in the United States.
   30
      These aggregate numbers conceal considerable diversity across EU member countries.
To understand the patterns, we need much more analysis of micro-level data, along the lines
of Goldberg and Tille (2016) and Corsetti, Crowley, and Han (2018). For monetary policy
analysis, a major question is to what degree invoice currencies are chosen to minimize ex
post deviations from e¢ cient pricing, given the distribution of possible shocks.
   31
      An open question is the extent to which invoicing choices reect ...rms'desire that their
pre-set prices approximate ex post optimal levels on average, so as to avoid the menu costs
of frequent price change. Particular shocks, however, could leave planned prices far from
the ex post optimum, leading ...rms to deviate from ex ante price intentions. In general,
therefore, the response of nominal prices and markups to exchange rate changes could
re  ect the nature or size of the shocks that drive the exchange rate.
   32
      In a two-country DSGE model, Canzoneri, Cumby, and López-Salido (2013) ...nd a
magni...ed e¤ect of a key currency'  s monetary policy abroad, owing to multiple channels.
Akinci and Queralto (2018) also model an especially strong foreign spillover from U.S.
monetary policy owing to dollar invoicing.


                                             35
currencies. Boz, Gopinath, and Plagborg-Møller (2017) show that empir-
ically, a U.S. dollar appreciation leads rapidly to a decline in the volume
of global trade between other countries (conditioning on the world business
cycle, in case safe-haven appreciations and declining trade are both driven
by global output contraction). However, an alternative interpretation may
be that dollar appreciation tightens global ...nancial conditions, with a di-
rect impact on trade. An emerging literature indeed suggests that dollar
appreciation is associated with tighter global ...nancial conditions.


4.2     Dollar funding
The U.S. dollar' s dominance as a funding currency (and a currency for corpo-
rate borrowing) is another key channel through which Federal reserve mone-
tary actions (and U.S. ...nancial conditions more generally) are communicated
disproportionately to the world outside U.S. borders. As discussed above, the
U.S. economy is subject to ...nancial forces from abroad, with signi...cant im-
plications for monetary policy. On the other hand, U.S. monetary policy has
a distinctively powerful impact on ...nancial conditions in the outside world
­indeed, much of the comovement in global ...nancial indicators is may be a
re  ection of U.S. policy' s foreign impacts. Recent research has documented
the United States'driving role.
    As Gopinath and Stein (2019) emphasize, the U.S. dollar'    s ...nancial dom-
inance, its vehicle currency role, and the safety and liquidity of dollar assets­
far from being independent­     are all inter-related and mutually reinforcing.
For example, dollar invoicing makes dollar assets "safer" in real terms, low-
ering their yields and promoting dollar funding; at the same time, dollar-
denominated export revenues are more easily collateralized to take advantage
of lower dollar interest rates, leading to more dollar invoicing in equilibrium.
Beyond their model, the unique depth and breadth of U.S. ...nancial markets
also play a role. All of these factors also help explain the dollar' s dominance
as an anchor currency (while that role reinforces the tendency to invoice
and fund in dollars, as well as to hold dollar reserves, in a positive feedback
loop).33
  33
    Theoretically speaking, a government need not trade dollar reseves to manage its
currency'
        s exchange rate against the dollar. For example, because the dollar/euro cross


                                         36
     Figures 17 and 18 give some indication of the footprint of dollar-denominated
...nancial transactions in global banking and in global credit markets. Figure
17 shows BIS data on cross-border dollar and euro bank claims and liabil-
ities. Dollar aggregates are much higher and are large even relative to the
size of the U.S. economy. Cross-border dollar banking in both currencies
grew very quickly in the ...nancial cycle leading up to the Global Financial
Crisis, and while dollar balance sheets have continued to grow in nominal
terms since ­albeit much more slowly ­euro balance sheets have retracted.
Figure 18 looks at a di¤erent metric, o¤shore credit to non-banks in dollars,
euros, and yen, comprising bank loans and debt securities, and thus, corpo-
rate borrowing. O¤shore credit to non-banks in dollars as a share of total
credit to resident non-...nancial borrowers (including households and central
government) has continued to rise for the dollar, been roughly stable for the
euro, and fallen for the yen. The dollar ratio is consistently and by far the
highest over the past two decades.
     Recent research papers (for example, Rey 2014; Bruno and Shin 2015;
IMF 2017b; Avdjiev, Koch, and Shin 2017; Jordà et al. 2019; Miranda-
Agrippino and Rey 2019) point to a global ...nancial cycle in asset prices,
bank leverage, and cross-border dollar lending related to the dollar'    s foreign
exchange value and U.S. monetary policy shocks. U.S. monetary policy and
dollar exchange rate changes can work through both the supply and demand
for o¤shore credit. For borrowers with dollar liabilities, a dollar depreciation
can enhance net worth, easing informational frictions that impede the           ow
of credit. Particularly when ...rms'export revenues are in dollars, and dollar
depreciation enhances pro...tability in domestic-currency terms, the demand
for dollar credit will rise. Changes in borrowers'...nancial strength also a¤ects
banks' willingness to lend through a risk-taking channel, for example, by
reducing default risks perceived by banks that operate subject to a value-at-
risk constraint (Adrian and Shin 2013).
     The dollar's unique status makes U.S. monetary shifts uniquely power-
rate is exogenous to a small country, arbitrage could in principle ensure that the authorities
hit a desired dollar exchange rate target by intervening with euros to manage its currency'  s
bilateral euro exchange rate. In view of exchange-market frictions and the variability of
the euro/dollar rate, however, it is more e¢ cient for a country that wishes to manage
 exibility against the dollar to hold dollar reserves and to intervene in dollars.



                                             37
ful to a¤ect global ...nancial conditions. Avdjiev, Koch, and Shin (2017)
document the role of U.S. dollar strength (both on a bilateral and nom-
inal e¤ective basis) in discouraging cross-border dollar lending. In other
work, they suggest knock-on negative e¤ects on investment. Empirical work
claiming a causal role for the dollar' s exchange rate faces the challenge that
negative global shocks can drive the dollar higher through safe-haven e¤ects.
Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2019) show that a high-frequency measure of
U.S. monetary policy surprises has important e¤ects globally, even for coun-
tries with  oating exchange rates. They ...nd that a contractionary U.S. shock
reduces global asset prices, induces global ...nancial intermediaries to delever,
and reduces cross-border credit    ows and domestic credit. This is a powerful
multiplier amplifying U.S. monetary shock e¤ects globally, and additionally
to any e¤ects related to dollar invoicing. Given the size and scope of in-
ternational ...nancial transactions, it is hard to believe that these e¤ects do
not swamp the more conventional net export e¤ects of the associated dollar
movements.34
    The prevalence of cross-border dollar funding has an important implica-
tion for Federal Reserve balance sheet policy: the need possibly to act as a
global lender of last resort in dollars (Obstfeld 2009; Farhi, Gourinchas, and
Rey 2011). The Fed'    s swap lines played a key stabilizing role in the Global
Financial Crisis and could well need to be extended again should global ...-
nancial tensions emerge anew. Unfortunately, the central bank'      s freedom of
action looks likely to be more constrained in the future.


5      Concluding remarks
This paper has explored key avenues through which the global economy im-
pinges on the policy landscape facing the Federal Reserve, possibly altering
the tradeo¤s among di¤erent policy objectives its leaders face. These ob-
  34
     The ...nancial spillovers can be especially destabilizing for emerging markets. There,
higher global liquidity can lead to a buildup of ...nancial fragilities that are revealed when
capital in   ows reverse. See, for example, Aoki, Benigno, and Kiyotaki (2009) and Di-
amond, Hu, and Rajan (2018). Durdu, Martin, and Zer (2018) ...nd that for emerging
market economies with substantial U.S. trade links or a large share of dollar-denominated
liabilities, U.S. monetary tightening raises the likelihood of a banking crisis.


                                             38
jectives include, of course, the "dual mandate" objectives of price stability
and full employment, but also the more subjective goal of ...nancial stability,
which we know to have an immense impact on in          ation and activity in the
longer term. In a complex world made even more complex by global in            u-
ences and linkages, there is unlikely to be a "divine coincidence" according
to which monetary policy can attain all goals at once without tradeo¤s, nor
a "divine separability" such that monetary policy should be set with refer-
ence to a hypothetical natural real interest rate r independently of other
considerations ­even leaving aside ELB constraints.
    More policy tools obviously can help, including e¤ective macro-prudential
tools; and in some cases their e¤ectiveness can be enhanced by multilateral
international cooperation among central banks and other regulators. I have
not explored that important dimension of policy here, except to mention
(brie  y) one aspect that explicitly deploys the Fed' s balance sheet, the use of
central-bank currency swaps to enable lender-of-last resort operations abroad.
    My three areas of focus were the role of global factors in the U.S. in     a-
tion process; the role of international ...nancial integration on U.S. ...nancial
conditions; and the role of the dollar'    s pre-eminence as a global currency
in amplifying the cross-border impact of Fed actions. The discussion has
perhaps made most clear how much we still have to learn about all of these
channels. For example, there remains fundamental uncertainty as to the U.S.
in  ation process and possible longer-term structural drivers; about the global
determinants of ...nancial conditions and their implications for U.S. activity;
and about the strength of the U.S. policy impact on the rest of the world:
how much of the documented common trends in global macroeconomic time
series simply re  ect U.S. policy dominance?
    That is not to deny substantial research progress in understanding key as-
pects of the global policy environment the United States faces. But advances
often occur in distinct sub-literatures that do not always communicate with
each other. An integrated picture of this "elephant" remains elusive and so
scholars rightly continue to toil in search of a synthesis.




                                       39
References
 [1] Acharya, Viral and Philipp Schnabl. "Do Global Banks Spread Global
     Imbalances? The Case of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper During the
     Financial Crisis of 2007-09." IMF Economic Review 58 (1, 2010): 37-
     73.

 [2] Adrian, Tobias, Douglas Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld (eds.). Advanc-
     ing the Frontiers of Monetary Policy. Washington, D.C.: International
     Monetary Fund, 2018.

 [3] Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin. "Procyclical Leverage and Value-
     at-Risk." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18943,
     April 2013.

 [4] Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt. "Global Price of Risk
     and Stabilization Policies." IMF Economic Review 67 (March 2019):
     215-260.

 [5] Akinci, Ozge and Albert Queralto. "Exchange Rate Dynamics and
     Monetary Spillovers with Imperfect Financial Markets." Federal Re-
     serve Bank of New York Sta¤ Report 849, June 2018.

 [6] Aoki, Kosuke, Gianluca Benigno, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. "Capital
     Flows and Asset Prices." In Richard Clarida and Francesco Giavazzi,
     eds., NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2007. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 2009.

 [7] Arkolakis, Costas and Monica Morlacco. "Variable Demand Elasticity,
     Markups, and Pass-Through." Manuscript, Yale University, 2017.

 [8] Auer, Raphael, Claudio Borio, and Andrew Filardo. "The Globalisation
     of In ation: The Growing Importance of Global Value Chains." BIS
     Working Papers 602, January 2017.

 [9] Auer, Raphael A., Andrei A. Levchenko, and Philip Sauré. "Interna-
     tional Ination Spillovers Through Input Linkages." Manuscript, Feb-
     ruary 2018.


                                   40
[10] Avdjiev, Stefan, Catherine Koch, and Hyun Song Shin. "Exchange
     Rates and the Transmission of Global Liquidity." Manuscript, Bank
     for International Settlements, December 2017.

[11] Barnichon, Regis and Geert Mesters. "The Phillips Multiplier."
     Barcelona GSE Working Paper Series 1070, January 2019.

[12] Bauer, Michael and Christopher Neely. "International Channels of
     the Fed'
            s Unconventional Monetary Policy." Journal of International
     Money and Finance 44 (June 2014): 24-46.

[13] Bean, Charles. "Commentary." In The New Economic Geography: Ef-
     fects and Policy Implications. A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal
     Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank
     of Kansas City, 2006.

[14] Bernanke, Ben S. "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Ac-
     count De...cit." Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke at the San-
     dridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Vir-
     ginia, March 10, 2005.

[15] Bernanke, Ben S., Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven
     Kamin. "International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets
     in the United States, 2003-2007." Financial Stability Review (Banque
     de France) 15 (February 2011): 13-26.

[16] Bidder, Rhys. "Are Wages Useful in Forecasting Price Ination?"
     FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-33, November 2, 2015.

[17] Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers. "In   a-
     tion and Activity ­Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Impli-
     cations." In Ination and Unemployment in Europe. European Central
     Bank Forum on Central Banking, Sintra Conference Proceedings, May
     2015.

[18] Blanchard, Olivier, Marcos Chamon, Atish R. Ghosh, and Jonathan D.
     Ostry. "Are Capital In ows Expansionary or Contractionary? Theory,
     Policy Implications, and Some Evidence." IMF Economic Review 65
     (August 2017): 563-585.

                                  41
[19] Borio, Claudio and Piti Disyatat. "Capital Flows and the Current Ac-
     count: Taking Financing (More) Seriously." BIS Working Papers 525,
     October 2015.

[20] Boz, Emine, Gita Gopinath, and Mikkel Plagborg-Møller. "Global
     Trade and the Dollar."National Bureau of Economic Research Work-
     ing Paper 23988, November 2017.

[21] Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (eds.). "The Nat-
     ural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary
     Policy." ECB Occasional Paper Series 217, December 2018.

[22] Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin. "Cross-Border Banking and
     Global Liquidity." Review of Economic Studies 82 (April 2015): 535­
     564.

[23] Bowman, David, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza. "U.S. Un-
     conventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market
     Economies." Journal of International Money and Finance 55 (July
     2015): 27-59.

[24] Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas.
     "An Equilibrium Model of ' Global Imbalances' and Low Interest
     Rates." American Economic Review 98 (March 2008): 358-393.

[25] Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas.
     "Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB." National Bureau
     of Economic Research Working Paper 21670, March 2016 (revised).

[26] Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas.
     "Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Premia: Accounting for Secular
     Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capital, Earning Yields, and Fac-
     tor Shares." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 107
     (May 2017): 614-620.

[27] Canzoneri, Matthew, Robert Cumby, Behzad Diba, and David López-
     Salido. "Key Currency Status: An Exorbitant Privilege and an Extra-
     ordinary Risk." Journal of International Money and Finance 37 (Oc-
     tober 2013): 371-393.

                                   42
[28] Carney, Mark. "Pull, Push, Pipes: Sustainable Capital Flows for a New
     World Order." Speech at the Institute of International Finance Spring
     Membership Meeting, Tokyo, June 6, 2019.

[29] Cerutti, Eugenio, Maurice Obstfeld, and Haonan Zhou. "Covered In-
     terest Parity Deviations: Macro...nancial Determinants." IMF Working
     Paper 19/14, January 2019.

[30] Chen, Natalie, Jean Imbs, and Andrew Scott. "The Dynamics of Trade
     and Competition." Journal of International Economics 77 (February
     2009): 50-62.

[31] Clarida, Richard H. "Reections on Monetary Policy in the Open Econ-
     omy." In Je¤rey Frankel and Christopher Pissarides, eds., NBER In-
     ternational Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008. Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press, 2009.

[32] Clarida, Richard H. "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some
     Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordi-
     nation,"National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23562,
     June 2017.

[33] Coeuré, Benoit. "The International Dimension of the ECB'
                                                            s Asset Pur-
     chase Programme ­An Update." Speech at a Conference on "Exiting
     Unconventional Monetary Policies," Organized by the Euro 50 Group,
     the CF40 forum, and CIGI, Paris, October 26, 2018.

[34] Cohen, Benjamin H., Peter Hördahl, and Dora Xia. "Term Premia:
     Models and Some Stylised Facts." BIS Quarterly Review (September
     2018): 79-91.

[35] Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. "Is the Phillips Curve Alive
     and Well? In  ation Expectations and the Missing Disin   ation." Amer-
     ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (January 2015): 197-232.

[36] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Meredith Crowley, and Lu Han. "Invoicing and
     Pricing-to-Market: A Study of Price and Markup Elasticities of UK
     Exporters." Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper
     13282, October 2018.

                                   43
[37] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. "Optimal Mon-
     etary Policy in Open Economies." In Benjamin M. Friedman and
     Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, volume
     3. Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland, 2011.

[38] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. "Exchange Rate
     Misalignment, Capital Flows, and Optimal Monetary Policy Trade-
     O¤s." Centre for Macroeconomics Discussion Paper CFM-DP2018-06,
     March 2018.

[39] Council    of    Economic     Advisers.     "Long-Term        Interest
     Rates:    A Survey." White House report, July 2015. URL:
     https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/...les/docs/interest
     _rate_report_...nal.pdf

[40] Daly, Mary and Bart Hobijn. "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities
     Bend the Phillips Curve." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 46
     (September 2014) : 51-93.

[41] Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Frank Schorfheide. "Ina-
     tion in the Great Recession and New Keynesian Models." American
     Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (January 2015): 168-196.

[42] Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea
     Tambalotti. "Global Trends in Interest Rates." Federal Reserve Bank of
     New York Sta¤ Report 866, September 2018. Journal of International
     Economics, forthcoming.

[43] Diamond, Douglas W., Yunzhi Hu, and Raghuram G. Rajan. "The
     Spillovers from Easy Liquidity and the Implications for Multilateral-
     ism." Mundell-Fleming Lecture, International Monetary Fund, Novem-
     ber 2018.

[44] Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer. "The Open Economy: Im-
     plications for Monetary and Fiscal Policy." In Robert J. Gordon, ed.,
     The American Economy: Continuity and Change. Chicago: University
     of Chicago Press, 1986.


                                   44
[45] Dornbusch, Rudiger and Paul Krugman. "Flexible Exchange Rates in
     the Short Run." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (3:1976): 537-
     575.

[46] Durdu, C. Bora, Alex Martin, and Ilknur Zer. "The Role of U.S. Mon-
     etary Policy in Global Banking Crises." Manuscript, Federal Reserve
     Board, 2018.

[47] Eichengreen, Barry. "Does the Federal Reserve Care about the Rest of
     the World?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (Fall 2013): 87-104.

[48] Erceg, Christopher, Christopher Gust, and David López-Salido. "The
     Transmission of Domestic Shocks in Open Economies." In Jordi Galí
     and Mark Gertler, eds., International Dimensions of Monetary Policy.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.

[49] Engel, Charles and Steve Pak Yeung Wu. "Liquidity and Exchange
     Rates: An Empirical Investigation." National Bureau of Economic Re-
     search Working Paper 25397, December 2018.

[50] Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Hélène Rey. Reform-
     ing the International Monetary System. London: Centre for Economic
     Policy Research, 2011.

[51] Feenstra, Robert C. and David E. Weinstein. "Globalization, Markups,
     and U.S. Welfare." Journal of Political Economy 125 (August 2017):
     1040-1074.

[52] Ferrara, Laurent and Charles-Emmanuel Teuf. "International En-
     vironment and US Monetary Policy: A Textual Analysis." Eco
     Notepad Blog, Banque de France, posted September 25, 2018. URL:
     https://blocnotesdeleco.banque-france.fr/en/blog-entry/international-
     environment-and-us-monetary-policy-textual-analysis

[53] Ferrero, Andrea, Mark Gertler, and Lars E. O. Svensson. "Current Ac-
     count Dynamics and Monetary Policy." In Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler,
     eds., International Dimensions of Monetary Policy. Chicago: Univer-
     sity of Chicago Press, 2009.


                                   45
[54] Forbes, Kristin J. "Has Globalization Changed the Ination Process?"
     Manuscript, MIT, June 2018.

[55] Forbes, Kristin J. and Francis E. Warnock. "Capital Flow Waves:
     Surges, Stops, Flight, and Retrenchment." Journal of International
     Economics 88 (November 2012): 235-251.

[56] Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub. "ECB
     Unconventional Monetary Policy: Market Impact and International
     Spillovers." IMF Economic Review 64 (May 2016): 36-74.

[57] Gagnon, Joseph E. and Christopher G. Collins. "Low In    ation Bends
     the Phillips Curve." Working Paper 19-6, Peterson Institute for Inter-
     national Economics, April 2019.

[58] Galí, Jordi. "The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve." Journal of the
     European Economic Association 9 (June 2011): 436-461.

[59] Galí, Jordi and Luca Gambetti. "Has the U.S. Wage Phillips Curve
     Flattened? A Semi-Structural Exploration." National Bureau of Eco-
     nomic Research Working Paper 25476, January 2019.

[60] Goldberg, Linda and Cédric Tille. The International Role of the Dol-
     lar and Trade Balance Adjustment. Occasional Paper 71. Washington,
     D.C.: Group of Thirty, 2006.

[61] Goldberg, Linda and Cédric Tille. "Vehicle Currency Use in Inter-
     national Trade." Journal of International Economics 76 (December
     2008): 177-192.

[62] Goldberg, Linda and Cédric Tille. "Micro, Macro, and Strategic Forces
     in International Trade Invoicing: Synthesis and Novel Patterns." Jour-
     nal of International Economics 102 (September 2016): 173-187.

[63] Gopinath, Gita. "The International Price System." In Ination Dy-
     namics and Monetary Policy. A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal
     Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank
     of Kansas City, 2016.


                                   46
[64] Gopinath, Gita. "Dollar Dominance in Trade: Facts and Implications."
     Export-Import Bank of India Lecture, Mumbai, December 21, 2017.

[65] Gopinath, Gita, and Jeremy C. Stein. "Banking, Trade, and the Mak-
     ing of a Dominant Currency." National Bureau Economic Research
     Working Paper 24485, April 2018.

[66] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey. "International Financial
     Adjustment." Journal of Political Economy 115 (August 2007): 665-
     703.

[67] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey. "Global Real Rates: A
     Secular Approach." Manuscript, University of California, Berkeley, and
     London Business School, June 2018.

[68] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Hélène Rey, and Nicolas Govillot. "Exorbi-
     tant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty." Manuscript (October 2017).

[69] Greenspan,   Alan. "Question:        Is There a New Econ-
     omy?" Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan at the
     Haas Annual Business Faculty Research Dialogue,              Uni-
     versity of California, Berkeley, September 4, 1998. URL:
     https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/1998/19980904.htm

[70] Gust, Christopher J., Sylvain Leduc, and Robert J. Vigfusson. "Entry
     Dynamics and the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through." In Robert
     Anderton and Geo¤ Kenny, eds., Macroeconomic Performance in a
     Globalising Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.

[71] Ha, Jongrim, M. Ayhan Kose, and Franziska Ohnsorge (eds.). Ina-
     tion in Emerging and Developing Economies: Evolution, Drivers, and
     Policies. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2019.

[72] Hellerstein, Rebecca. "Global Bond Risk Premiums." Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York Sta¤ Report 499, June 2011.

[73] Hofmann, Boris and El½
                          od Takáts. "International Monetary Spillovers."
     BIS Quarterly Review (September 2015): 105-118 .


                                   47
[74] Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. "Mea-
     suring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Deter-
     minants." Journal of International Economics 108 (S1, May 2017):
     S59-S75.

[75] Hong, Gee Hee, Zsoka Koczan, Weicheng Lian, and Malhar S. Nabar.
     "More Slack than Meets the Eye? Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced
     Economies." IMF Working Paper 18/50, March 2018.

[76] Hooper, Peter, Frederic S. Mishkin, Amir Su.... "Prospects for Ination
     in a High Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just
     Hibernating?" National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
     25792, May 2019.

[77] Ihrig, Jane, Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaime Marquez.
     "Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and In   ation Hypothesis."
     International Finance 13 (Winter 2010): 343-375.

[78] Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogo¤. "Ex-
     change Arrangements Entering the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will
     Hold?" National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23134,
     February 2017.

[79] International Monetary Fund. "Globalization and Ination." Chapter
     3 in World Economic Outlook, April 2006.

[80] International Monetary Fund. "The Dog that Didn' t Bark: Has In-
      ation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?" Chapter 3 in World
     Economic Outlook, April 2013.

[81] International Monetary Fund. "Perspectives on Global Real Interest
     Rates." Chapter 3 in World Economic Outlook, April 2014.

[82] International Monetary Fund. "Global Disin   ation in an Era of Con-
     strained Monetary Policy." Chapter 3 in World Economic Outlook, Oc-
     tober 2016.




                                   48
[83] International Monetary Fund. "Understanding the Downward Trend in
     Labor Income Shares." Chapter 3 in World Economic Outlook, April
     2017a.

[84] International Monetary Fund. "Are Countries Losing Control of Do-
     mestic Financial Conditions?" Chapter 3 in Global Financial Stability
     Report, April 2017b.

[85] International Monetary Fund. "Global Prospects and Policies." Chap-
     ter 1 in World Economic Outlook, April 2018a.

[86] International Monetary Fund. "Challenges for Monetary Policy in
     Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize." Chapter
     3 in World Economic Outlook, October 2018b.

[87] International Monetary Fund. "The Rise of Corporate Market Power
     and Its Macroeconomic E¤ects." Chapter 2 in World Economic Out-
     look, April 2019.

[88] Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig. "For-
     eign Safe Asset Demand for US Treasurys and the Dollar." American
     Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 108 (May 2018): 537-541.

[89] Jordà, Oscár, Chitra Marti, Fernanda Nechio, and Eric Tallman. "In-
      ation: Stress-Testing the Phillips Curve." FRBSF Economic Letter
     2019-05, February 11, 2019.

[90] Jordà, Oscár, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick,
     and Alan M. Taylor. "The Rate of Return on Everything, 1879-2015."
     Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2017-25, De-
     cember 2017.

[91] Jordà, Oscár, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. "Macro...nancial
     History and the New Business Cycle Facts." In Martin Eichenbaum
     and Jonathan Parker, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016. Cam-
     bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017.




                                   49
 [92] Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, Alan M. Taylor, and Felix Ward.
      "Global Financial Cycles and Risk Premiums." IMF Economic Review
      67 (March 2019): 109-150.

 [93] Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Anh Le, and Christian Lundblad. "Why Do
      Term Structures in Di¤erent Currencies Co-move?" Journal of Finan-
      cial Economics 115 (January 2015): 58­ 83.

 [94] Kiley, Michael T. "Low Ination in the United States: A Summary of
      Recent Research." FEDS Notes, November 23, 2015.

 [95] Kiley, Michael T. and John M. Roberts. "Monetary Policy in a Low
      Interest Rate World." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1:2017):
      317-372.

 [96] Kindleberger, Charles P. International Short-Term Capital Movements.
      New York: Columbia University Press, 1937.

 [97] King, Robert G. and Mark W. Watson. "In     ation and Unit Labor
      Cost." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44 (December 2012):
      111-149.

 [98] Knotek, Edward S. and Saeed Zaman. "On the Relationships between
      Wages, Prices, and Economic Activity." Economic Commentary 2014-
      14, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, August 19, 2014.

 [99] Kramarz, Francis. "O¤shoring, Wages, and Employment: Evidence
      from Data Matching Imports, Firms, and Workers." In Lionel Fontagné
      and Ann Harrison, eds., The Factory-Free Economy. Oxford: Oxford
      University Press, 2017.

[100] Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. "The Aggre-
      gate Demand for Treasury Debt." Journal of Political Economy 120
      (April 2012): 233­267.

[101] Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. "The External Wealth
      of Nations Revisited: International Financial Integration in the After-
      math of the Global Financial Crisis." IMF Economic Review 66 (March
      2018): 189­ 222.

                                     50
[102] Maddison, Angus. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective.
      Paris: OECD, 2001.

[103] McLeay, Michael and Silvana Tenreyro. "Optimal In      ation and the
      Identi...cation of the Phillips Curve." Manuscript, Bank of England,
      March 2019.

[104] Metzler, Lloyd A. "The Process of International Adjustment under
      Conditions of Full Employment: A Keynesian View." In Richard E.
      Caves and Harry G. Johnson, eds., Readings in International Eco-
      nomics. Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 1968.

[105] Mikolajun, Irena and David Lodge. "Advanced Economy In  ation: The
      Role of Global Factors." European Central Bank Working Paper Series
      1948, August 2016.

[106] Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Hélène Rey. "US Monetary Policy and
      the Global Financial Cycle." Manuscript, Bank of England and London
      Business School, March 2019.

[107] Monacelli, Tommaso. "Comment [on Sbordone]." In Jordi Galí and
      Mark Gertler, eds., International Dimensions of Monetary Policy.
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.

[108] Obstfeld, Maurice. "Lenders of Last Resort in a Globalized World."
      Monetary and Economic Studies (Bank of Japan) 27 (November 2009):
      35-52.

[109] Obstfeld, Maurice. "Does the Current Account Still Matter?" American
      Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 102 (May 2012): 1-23.

[110] Obstfeld, Maurice. "Trilemmas and Trade-o¤s: Living with Financial
      Globalisation." BIS Working Papers 480, January 2015.

[111] Obstfeld, Maurice. "Twenty-Five Years of Global Imbalances." In
      Jérémie Cohen-Setton, Thomas Helbling, Adam Posen, and Changyong
      Rhee, eds., Sustaining Economic Growth in Asia. Washington, D.C.:
      Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2018.


                                   51
[112] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogo¤. Foundations of International
      Macroeconomics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.

[113] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogo¤. "The Six Major Puzzles in
      International Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?" In Ben S.
      Bernanke and Kenneth Rogo¤, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual
      2000. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.

[114] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogo¤. "Global Imbalances and the
      Financial Crisis: Products of Common Causes." In Reuven Glick and
      Mark Spiegel, eds., Asia and the Global Financial Crisis. Asia Eco-
      nomic Policy Conference. San Francisco, CA: Federal Reserve Bank of
      San Francisco, 2009.

[115] Peneva, Ekaterina V. and Jeremy B. Rudd. "The Passthrough of La-
      bor Costs to Price In   ation." Finance and Economics Discussion Se-
      ries 2015-042, Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary A¤airs,
      Federal Reserve Board, May 2015.

[116] Rachel, Lukasz and Thomas D. Smith. "Are Low Real Interest Rates
      Here to Stay?" International Journal of Central Banking 13 (Septem-
      ber 2017): 1-42.

[117] Rachel, Lukasz and Lawrence H. Summers. "On Falling Neutral Real
      Rates, Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation." Brookings
      Papers on Economic Activity ( 1:2019): forthcoming.

[118] Razin, Assaf and Chi-Wa Yuen. "The '
                                         New Keynesian'Phillips Curve:
      Closed Economy vs. Open Economy." Economics Letters 75 (March
      2002): 1-9.

[119] Rey, Hélène. "Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle
      and Monetary Policy Independence." In Global Dimensions of Uncon-
      ventional Monetary Policy. A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal
      Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank
      of Kansas City, 2014.




                                    52
[120] Rogers, John H., Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright. "Evaluating
      Asset-Market E¤ects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Multi-
      Country Review." Economic Policy 29 (October 2014): 749-799.

[121] Rogers, John H., Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright. "Uncon-
      ventional Monetary Policy and International Risk Premia." Journal of
      Money, Credit, and Banking 50 (December 2018): 1827-1850.

[122] Rogo¤, Kenneth. "Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy." In The
      New Economic Geography: E¤ects and Policy Implications. A Sympo-
      sium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Kansas
      City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2006.

[123] Sbordone, Argia M. "Globalization and In   ation Dynamics: The Im-
      pact of Increased Competition." In Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler, eds.,
      International Dimensions of Monetary Policy. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press, 2009.

[124] Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. "Slack and Cyclically Sen-
      sitive Ination." In Price and Wage-Setting in Advanced Economies.
      European Central Bank Forum on Central Banking, Sintra Conference
      Proceedings, June 2018.

[125] Tobin, James. "Money, Capital, and Other Stores of Value." American
      Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 51 (May 1961): 26-37.

[126] Warnock, Francis E. and Veronica Cacdac Warnock. "International
      Capital Flows and U.S. Interest Rates." Journal of International
      Money and Finance 28 (October 2009): 903-919.

[127] Wicksell, Knut. Geldzins und Güterpreise: Eine Studie über die den
      Tauschwert des Geldes bestimmenden Ursachen. Jena: Gustav Fischer,
      1898.

[128] Woodford, Michael. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of
      Monetary Policy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                    53
[129] Woodford, Michael. "Globalization and Monetary Control." In Jordi
      Galí and Mark Gertler, eds., International Dimensions of Monetary
      Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.

[130] Yellen, Janet L. "Ination Dynamics and Monetary Policy." The Philip
      Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
      Amherst, Massachusetts, September 24, 2015.

[131] Yi, Kei-Mu and Jing Zhang. "Real Interest Rates over the Long Run:
      Decline and Convergence since the 1980s." Economic Policy Paper 16-
      10, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, September 2016.




                                   54
                     Figure 1a: US and EMDE Shares of World GDP
                                (market exchange rates)
45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

 5

 0
     1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018

                                                US        EMDEs




                     Figure 1b: US and EMDE Shares of World GDP
                                 (international dollars)
70

60

50

40

                                                                                                US
30
                                                                                                EMDEs
20

10

 0




                                                     Source: BEA




                                                         55
                                                    10.0
                                                           12.0
                                                                  14.0
                                                                         16.0
                                                                                18.0
                                                                                       20.0




                      0.0
                            2.0
                                  4.0
                                        6.0
                                              8.0
               1929
               1932
               1935
               1938
               1941
               1944
               1947
               1950
               1953
               1956
               1959
               1962
               1965
               1968




     Exports




56
               1971
               1974
               1977
               1980
                                                                                              (GDP shares, percent)




               1983
     Imports   1986
               1989
                                                                                                                      Figure 2: U.S. Exports and Imports




               1992
               1995
               1998
               2001
               2004
               2007
               2010
               2013
               2016
                           Figure 3: Import Content of Exports
                                    (percent of gross value)


45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
     2005   2006    2007     2008    2009     2010        2011   2012   2013   2014      2015   2016

                   US          Mexico            Korea             Germany            EU28

                                            Source: OECD




                                                     57
      Figure 4: U.S. Gross Foreign Assets and Liabilities
                       (percent of GDP)
200

180

160

140

120

100
                                                            Assets
 80
                                                            Liabilities
 60

 40

 20

  0




                             Source: BEA




                                 58
                                  Figure 5: Drivers of the U.S. NIIP
                                         (percent of GDP per year)

15

10

 5

 0
      1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017
 -5

-10

-15

-20

                                Capital gain/loss             Current account balance

                                               Source: BEA




                                                       59
                          Figure 6: Changes in the U.S. Current Account
                                     (percent of GDP per year)
2.5


  2


1.5


  1


0.5


  0
       1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017
-0.5


 -1


-1.5




                                                         60
Figure 7a: U.S. Core Goods and Core Services Consumer Price Inflation
(Year-on-year; percent)
                              US core goods                      US core services

 4.5                          2002­08 average                    2011­17 average
 4.0
 3.5
 3.0
 2.5
 2.0
 1.5
 1.0
 0.5
 0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5                                                                                                Oct.
-3.0                                                                                                17



 Source: IMF staff calculations.




Figure 7b: Advanced Economy Core Goods and Core Services
Consumer Price Inflation
(Year-on-year; percent)
                          AE core goods                                AE core services
 3.5
 3.0                      2002­08 average                              2011­17 average
 2.5
 2.0
 1.5
 1.0
 0.5
 0.0
-0.5
-1.0
                                                                                                   Oct.
                                                                                                   17
 Source: IMF staff calculations, as reported in IMF (2018a).

 Note: The sample includes 16 advanced economies: Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
 France, Germany, Japan, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom and
 United States.



                                                          61
                           0
                               1
                                   2
                                       3
                                           4
                                               5
                                                   6
                                                       7




           -3
                -2
                     -1
                1/1/1989
                1/1/1990
                1/1/1991
                1/1/1992
                1/1/1993
                1/1/1994
                1/1/1995
                1/1/1996
                1/1/1997
                1/1/1998
                1/1/1999




     USA
                1/1/2000
                1/1/2001
                1/1/2002




     DEU
                1/1/2003




62
                1/1/2004
                1/1/2005
                1/1/2006




     JPN
                1/1/2007
                1/1/2008
                1/1/2009
     GBR        1/1/2010
                1/1/2011
                                                           Figure 8: Selected Real Long-Term Interest Rates




                1/1/2012
                1/1/2013
                1/1/2014
                1/1/2015
                1/1/2016
                1/1/2017
                1/1/2018
63
64
65
66
                          Figure 13: U.S. Current Account and Investment
                                          (percent of GDP)
24                                                                                                                0

23                                                                                                                -1

22                                                                                                                -2

21                                                                                                                -3

20                                                                                                                -4

19                                                                                                                -5

18                                                                                                                -6

17                                                                                                                -7




                                                                        2008
     1992


            1994


                   1996


                             1998


                                    2000


                                           2002


                                                     2004


                                                                 2006




                                                                               2010


                                                                                      2012


                                                                                             2014


                                                                                                    2016


                                                                                                           2018
                          Investment              Current account balance (right-hand axis)




                                                            67
68
69
Figure 16: Invoicing Patterns for the Euro Area's Extra-EU Exports and Imports

              Extra-EU Imports by Invoicing Currency
                       Euro Area, 2016, % of Total

                                .6%

                                   4.3%




                                                   42.2%




                      52.9%




                             Euro                     USD
                             Non-Euro EU              Other


              Extra-EU Exports by Invoicing Currency
                       Euro Area, 2016, % of Total


                         .4%
                                 9.8%




                     32.3%
                                                   57.5%




                             Euro                     USD
                             Non-Euro EU              Other


                                Source: Eurostat

                                            70
                                                                                   0
                                                                                       2
                                                                                           4
                                                                                               6
                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                 14
                                                                      31/03/1999
                                                                      31/12/1999
                                                                      30/09/2000
                                                                      30/06/2001
                                                                      31/03/2002
                                                                      31/12/2002




                                                 Dollar claims
                                                                      30/09/2003
                                                                      30/06/2004
                                                                      31/03/2005
                                                                      31/12/2005
                                                                      30/09/2006
                                                                      30/06/2007
                                                                      31/03/2008




                                                 Dollar liabilities
                                                                      31/12/2008




71
                                                                      30/09/2009
                                                                      30/06/2010
                                                                      31/03/2011
                                                                      31/12/2011




                                                 Euro claims
     Source: BIS Locational Banking Statistics
                                                                      30/09/2012
                                                                      30/06/2013
                                                                                                                                  (USD trillions, all BIS reporting banks)




                                                                      31/03/2014
                                                                      31/12/2014
                                                                      30/09/2015
                                                                      30/06/2016
                                                                                                                      Figure 17: Cross-Border Dollar and Euro Bank Positions




                                                                      31/03/2017
                                                 Euro liabilities




                                                                      31/12/2017
                                                                      30/09/2018
                                            0
                                                0.05
                                                       0.1
                                                             0.15
                                                                    0.2
                                                                          0.25
                               31/03/2000
                               31/12/2000
                               30/09/2001
                               30/06/2002
                               31/03/2003
                               31/12/2003
                               30/09/2004
                               30/06/2005
                               31/03/2006
                               31/12/2006




                   US dollar
                               30/09/2007
                               30/06/2008




72
                               31/03/2009
                               31/12/2009




     Source: BIS
                   Euro
                               30/09/2010
                               30/06/2011
                   Yen         31/03/2012
                               31/12/2012
                               30/09/2013
                                                                                 (share of total credit to resident non-financials)




                               30/06/2014
                               31/03/2015
                               31/12/2015
                                                                                                                                      Figure 18: Offshore Credit to Non-banks in Major Currencies




                               30/09/2016
                               30/06/2017
                               31/03/2018
                                                 Table 1: Correlates of CPI Inflation, 1964-2018

                                (1)                (2)           (3)                (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                           64Q1-18Q4          64Q1-92Q1      64Q1-73Q1         73Q1-92Q1    92Q1-18Q4    92Q1-08Q1   08Q1-18Q4
 Wage growth                 0.856***           0.792***        0.444            0.940***     0.399***      0.118       0.245*
                             (0.118)            (0.154)        (0.291)           (0.127)      (0.114)      (0.141)     (0.141)

 Import price growth         0.128***           0.099***        0.111           0.080***     0.140***     0.109***    0.144***
                             (0.021)            (0.030)        (0.139)          (0.028)      (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.007)

 Productivity growth         -0.255***          -0.454***     -0.347***         -0.328**       -0.045     -0.088*     -0.199***
                              (0.088)            (0.133)       (0.112)          (0.132)       (0.066)     (0.051)      (0.033)

 Constant                     0.001              0.004**        0.005           0.003**      0.003***     0.006***    0.003***
                             (0.001)             (0.002)       (0.004)          (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)

  Observations                 216                 108           32               76           108          64          44
  R2                          0.822               0.766         0.536            0.856        0.766        0.610       0.923
Newey-West standard errors (four lags) in parentheses.
* p<0.10 , ** p<0.05 , *** p<0.01.




                                                                          73
                           Table 2: Correlates of CPI Inflation, 1992-2018

                                              (1)                 (2)            (3)
                                         92Q1-18Q4            92Q1-08Q1      08Q1-18Q4
 Wage growth                               0.419***             0.251**         0.231
                                           (0.116)              (0.113)        (0.164)

 Consumer import price growth                0.006              0.004         0.082**
                                            (0.033)            (0.040)        (0.034)

 Producer import price growth              0.051***            0.046***       0.065***
                                           (0.008)             (0.014)        (0.008)

 Productivity growth                       -0.111**            -0.139***      -0.226***
                                            (0.049)             (0.035)        (0.041)

 Constant                                  0.003***            0.005***       0.004***
                                           (0.001)             (0.001)        (0.001)

 Observations                                 104                 60            44
 R2                                          0.805              0.698          0.902
Newey-West standard errors (four lags) in parentheses.
* p<0.10 , ** p<0.05 , *** p<0.01.




                                                         74
Table 3: International Coherence of Nominal Interest-Rate Changes (Quarterly data)
                           (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)         (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
                       US-base SR     Multi-base    Multi-base      Multi-base   US-base LR     Multi-base      Multi-base     Multi-base
                                         SR          SR with       SR with VIX                     LR            LR with      LR with VIX
                                                   Time Effects      Percent                                   Time Effects     Percent
                                                                     Change                                                     Change

US-base SR change        0.0571
                         (0.158)


Multi-base SR                           0.202        0.0457            0.240
change
                                       (0.171)       (0.229)           (0.177)

US-base LR change                                                                  0.354***
                                                                                  (0.0594)


Multi-base LR                                                                                     0.548***       0.430***       0.631***
change
                                                                                                 (0.0668)        (0.136)       (0.0616)


VIX Percent Change                                                  0.00236*                                                   0.00291***
                                                                    (0.00139)                                                 (0.000663)


Constant                -0.00166**    -0.00151**    0.000171       -0.00150**    -0.000791***   -0.000624***    -0.00113**    -0.000635***
                       (0.000746)    (0.000751)    (0.000713)      (0.000745)    (0.000174)     (0.000165)     (0.000438)     (0.000165)
N                         3273          3273          3273             3273         3076           3076           3076           3076
adj. R2                   0.034         0.036         0.061            0.036        0.048          0.084          0.138          0.094
Optimal Lags                5             5             5                5            0              0              0              0
p-value for F Test
that growth and
inflation change       2.81911E-12   5.34395E-12   2.29415E-07    2.31095E-11    0.07240475     0.17723405     0.04280572     0.13447361
variables (and their
lags, where
applicable) = 0




                                                                  75
