                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 ON THE GLOBAL IMPACT OF RISK-OFF SHOCKS AND POLICY-PUT FRAMEWORKS

                                      Ricardo J. Caballero
                                        Gunes Kamber

                                      Working Paper 26031
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26031


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




This article is a contribution to "Asia-Pacific fixed income markets: evolving structure,
participation and pricing," a BIS Asian Office research programme. We thank Eric Swanson for
sharing his data with us. We also thank Chris Ackerman, Efrem Castelnuovo, Stijn Claessens, Piti
Disyatat, Ippei Fujiwara, Peter Hoerdahl and Benjamin Wong for their comments. Jose-Maria
Vidal Pastor and Giulio Cornelli provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Bank for
International Settlements. First draft: February 2018 The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Gunes Kamber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Global Impact of Risk-off Shocks and Policy-put Frameworks
Ricardo J. Caballero and Gunes Kamber
NBER Working Paper No. 26031
July 2019
JEL No. E40,E44,E52,E58,F30,F41,F44,G01

                                         ABSTRACT

Global risk-off shocks can be highly destabilizing for financial markets and, absent an adequate
policy response, may trigger severe recessions. Policy responses were more complex for
developed economies with very low interest rates after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). We
document, however, that the unconventional policies adopted by the main central banks were
effective in containing asset price declines. These policies impacted long rates and inspired
confidence in a policy-put framework that reduced the persistence of risk-off shocks. We also
show that domestic macroeconomic and financial conditions play a key role in benefiting from
the spillovers of these policies during risk-off episodes. Countries like Japan, which already had
very low long rates, benefited less. However, Japan still benefitted from the reduced persistence
of risk-off shocks. In contrast, since one of the main channels through which emerging markets
are historically affected by global risk-off shocks is through a sharp rise in long rates, the
unconventional monetary policy phase has been relatively benign to emerging markets during
these episodes, especially for those economies with solid macroeconomic fundamentals and deep
domestic financial markets. We also show that unconventional monetary policy in the US had
strong effects on long interest rates in most economies in the Asia-Pacific region (which helps
during risk-off events but may be destabilizing otherwise--we do not take a stand on this
tradeoff).


Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics, E52-528
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

Gunes Kamber
Bank for International Settlement
gunes.kamber@gmail.com
 1.    Introduction

Global risk-o¤ shocks can be highly destabilizing for ...nancial markets and, absent an adequate
policy response, may trigger severe recessions. Policy responses were more complex for devel-
oped economies with very low interest rates after the GFC. We document, however, that the
unconventional policies adopted by the main central banks were e¤ective in containing asset
price declines. These policies worked by quickly reducing long rates and by signaling a reliable
policy-put framework that reduced the persistence of risk-o¤ shocks.
   The conceptual framework behind our analysis is motivated by the risk-centric perspective
in Caballero and Simsek (2018). In this framework, we add a market for "risk", similar to the
traditional market for goods or output. Demand recessions work as follows. First, a risk-o¤
shock hits and causes a gap in the demand for "risk". Investors are unwilling to purchase risky
assets at their current prices. When monetary policy is unconstrained, a central bank can lower
the risk-free rate to increase the excess return on these risky assets. The risky assets become
more attractive, investors purchase them, and equilibrium is restored. However, this mechanism
cannot work when interest rate policy is constrained by an e¤ective lower bound (or by some
other consideration, such as a currency peg). When the central bank cannot lower interest rates,
the risky asset's price must fall to restore equilibrium in the risk market. But falling asset prices
have negative impacts on the goods/output market and create a downward spiral. There are two
mechanisms that can counteract this vicious cycle. First, the central bank can directly absorb
some of the risk that private agents are unwilling to bear. Second, the central bank can prop up
the price of risky assets by inducing hope of an economic recovery. If a recovery is more likely,
then the asset'
              s expected value, and hence price, is higher. A credible policy-put framework
operates through these two channels.
   With this perspective in mind, we empirically explore the response of ...nancial markets
around the world to risk-o¤ shocks and the policy responses that followed them. We acknowl-
edge that much of our evidence is circumstantial but, collectively, our ...ndings are consistent
with a view in which risk-o¤ shocks have a signi...cant impact on ...nancial markets, access to
conventional and unconventional monetary policy is an important palliative, and these policies
spill into the rest of the world, especially to countries that are poised to bene...t from developed
market (DM) policies. Note that our goal is to document a set of organized facts, not to assess
the broad welfare implications associated with di¤erent policies. In fact, we are acutely aware
that these policy spillovers are a blessing for recipient countries during risk-o¤ episodes but a


                                                 2
source of concern during reach-for-yield environments. Our main claims are:

  1. Risk-o¤ shocks are highly correlated across major economies. (Figure 1). The correlation
     coe¢ cients are 0.91 between the US and the Euro Area and 0.83 between the US and
     Japan over 1999-2017.

  2. Risk-o¤ shocks trigger stock market declines that are partially insulated by monetary
     policy responses. (Figure 2). A VIX spike of 15 vols, which is the average of the three
     largest weekly increases in VIX in our sample, triggers a stock market decline of around 14
     percent. This is in line with other empirical macro papers, such as Caldara et al. (2016).

  3. Both conventional and unconventional monetary policy e¤ectively limit the sello¤ (Figure
     2). (This is why we (and many others) refer to them as policy-puts).

     Quantitatively, in the conventional policy period, the Fed responded to a risk-o¤ shock that
     raised VIX by 15 volatility points by lowering the federal funds target rate by slightly more
     than 100 basis points (Figure A.2). This magnitude is in line with the policy responses
     to risk-o¤ shocks documented in other empirical macro papers such as Basu and Bundick
     (2017). We show that this policy response generates a persistent decline in the 1-year
     Treasury yield, which drops by slightly less than 100 basis points (Figure 2). It also
     signi...cantly lowers long rates, with a peak impact on the 10-year Treasury yield of around
     40 basis points 16 weeks after the shock.

     In the unconventional monetary policy period, a risk-o¤ shock of the same size leaves the
     1-year rate almost unchanged. Despite unresponsive short rates, the 10-year Treasury
     yield not only declines by a similar amount to the conventional monetary policy period
     but the decline is more frontloaded, with its peak impact at the time of the risk-o¤ shock.

  4. The policy-puts framework during the post-crisis period seems to have operated not only
     by frontloading long rate declines but also by reducing the perceived persistence of risk-o¤
     shocks. The combination of these e¤ects has supported asset values, which was one of the
     key goals of the policy framework designed by the Fed and other major central banks to
     address the aftermath of the ...nancial crisis (Figure 2).

     The reduction in the persistence of risk-o¤ shocks is large. The impulse responses of VIX
     across the two subsamples imply that the half life of the risk-o¤ shock was halved in the
     post-GFC period, dropping from 10 weeks to 5 weeks.


                                                 3
  5. Domestic conditions matter for the impact of both domestic and foreign risk-o¤ shocks
     and policy-puts. Policy-puts helped in Europe, but particularly so after the "whatever it
     takes speech," which allowed periphery economies (Italy in our sample) to bene...t from
     the policy-puts (Figures 5 and 6). For Japan, which already had low long rates, policy-
     puts helped less and imposed indirect costs via the Yen's appreciation. Still, the reduced
     persistence of risk-o¤ episodes also bene...ted Japan. (Figure 7)

  6. Risk-o¤ shocks have similar qualitative implications for equity markets in emerging markets
     (EMs) and DMs, but EMs experience capital outows that push up their long rates and
     depreciate their exchange rates. (Figure 8)

  7. Overall, monetary policy in DMs has a signi...cant impact on how severely EMs are a¤ected
     by global risk-o¤ episodes. (Figure 10)

  8. Somewhat paradoxically, unconventional monetary policies in DMs appear to bene...t EMs
     more than conventional monetary policy during risk-o¤ episodes (Figure 9). We conjecture
     this is because unconventional policies act directly on long rates and reduce the persistence
     of risk-o¤ shocks, which are the main drivers of EMs'sudden stops of (net) capital inows.

  9. There are substantial di¤erences across EMs. In particular, richer and more ...nancially
     integrated economies, economies that have low current account de...cits and high foreign
     reserves, or economies that can produce local safe assets, behave more like DMs and
     experience signi...cantly smaller rises in long rates in response to risk-o¤ shocks. (Figure
     11)

 10. Focusing on the Asia-Paci...c region, we ...nd that conventional and unconventional mone-
     tary policy in the US have a signi...cant impact on local long rates. Moreover, the pass-
     through of the forward guidance component of monetary policy surprises to the region's
     long rates has increased post-GFC. Related, monetary policy surprises associated with
     large scale asset purchase programs signi...cantly lowered the regions' long rates. The
     latter e¤ect was larger for the advanced economies in the region.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 sketches the conceptual frame-
work behind our empirical analysis. Section 3 studies the impact of risk-o¤ shocks for developed
market economies during di¤erent monetary policy regimes. Section 4 extends the analysis to
emerging market economies. Section 5 focuses on the transmission of US policy-puts to the

                                               4
Asia-Paci...c region. Section 6 contains ...nal remarks, and is followed by an appendix with a
detailed description of our data, empirical methods, and robustness analyses.


 2.      Sketching a Conceptual Framework

In this section we sketch the essence of the risk-centric view of macroeconomic uctuations in
Caballero and Simsek (2018) and discuss the mechanisms through which a credible policy-put
framework stabilizes asset markets and the economy.

 2.1.    The Risk-centric Mechanism and Conventional Monetary Policy

Let us capture the essence of the risk-centric macroeconomic perspective with two simple equa-
tions:


                               y = minfAD(q ); y g
                                   Er(q; y (q ); Hope(q + =q ))    rf
                                 =


   The ...rst equation says that, if demand is insu¢ cient (relative to potential output y ), then
output, y , is determined by aggregate demand, AD, which is an increasing function of current
asset prices, q . The second equation says that the perceived supply of volatility (risk) generated
by the productive capacity,       , must be matched by the demand for volatility, which is an
increasing function of the market'
                                 s perceived Sharpe ratio (we interpret the market as a broad
measure of wealth). The numerator of the Sharpe ratio is the market'
                                                                   s expected excess return
and it contains many of the conceptual framework'
                                                s key ingredients. First, it depends on asset
prices through two opposing forces: on one hand, for any given expected earnings, a drop in q
increases the expected return on risky assets. On the other, the drop in q drags down aggregate
demand and earnings. Caballero and Simsek (2018) show that, in their model, the aggregate
demand e¤ect always dominates and the economy implodes unless there is su¢ cient hope about
a prompt recovery, Hope, with signi...cant capital gains q + =q (where q + represents the asset price
upon exit from the risk-o¤ episode). The denominator of the Sharpe ratio is the risk-adjusted
perceived volatility,   , where    can be interpreted as a coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion.
   It is easy to see from the ...rst equation that there is a level of asset prices q , such that for
any q < q there is insu¢ cient aggregate demand (hence there is an output gap). If monetary
policy is unconstrained, rf can adjust to ensure that there is su¢ cient demand for risk at the



                                                 5
asset price level q . That is,


                                  q = q

                                 rf   = Er(q; y (q ); Hope(1))         2
                                                                           >0


    In this context the immediate impact of a spike in perceived volatility (a risk-o¤ episode),
   , is to lower asset prices, but this can be o¤set if the monetary authority drops rf and restores
equilibrium in risk markets at q = q , preventing an output gap.
    If monetary policy is constrained, which we capture with a Zero Lower Bound (ZLB), con-
ventional monetary policy can no longer o¤set a spike in perceived volatility, and the economy
drops into a recession as asset prices must fall to restore equilibrium in risk markets:


                            rf = 0      =)      q<q       =)     y (q ) < AD(q )


    The severity of the recession and the drop in asset prices critically depend on the degree of
agents'optimism. If Hope is low, then asset prices and aggregate demand drag each other down
in the process of restoring equilibrium in asset markets.
    This observation o¤ers a natural interpretation for unconventional (put) policies: they try
to substitute for the private sector'
                                    s missing Hope. Because the central bank cannot increase
asset prices by decreasing the risk free rate, they must increase the perceived value of the risky
assets themselves. It is straightforward to see, from the risk equilibrium condition at the ZLB:


                                      Er(q; y (q ); Hope(q + =q )) =   2



that a policy-induced increase in Hope(q + =q ) raises asset prices and reverses the downward
spiral.

 2.2.     Unconventional Monetary Policy and Policy-puts

Conventional monetary policy acts like a policy-put with respect to risk-o¤ shocks. In the risk
centric perspective, unconventional monetary policy seeks a similar goal once conventional policy
is no longer available.
    There are essentially two channels. In the ...rst channel, a government/central bank with a




                                                      6
credible balance sheet absorbs part of the risk the private sector does not want at rf = 0:

                                      Er(q; y (q ); Hope(q + =q )    0
                                  =                                            < 1:


       For example, Quantitative Easing (QE) policies that swap credit products for US treasury
bonds e¤ectively amount to reducing . By purchasing risky assets from the private sector, the
government has decreased the private sector'
                                           s exposure to risk.
       In the second channel, the central bank increases the expected capital gain in case of a
recovery. One can think of Forward Guidance (FG) as increasing q + by keeping rates below
the natural rate for an extented period during the recovery. Moreover, a policy-put framework
that is explicit and credible is likely to directly help by reducing the perceived volatility and the
perceived persistence of risk-o¤ shocks (captured by an upward shift in the function Hope( )).


 3.       Risk-o¤ Shocks in DMs

In this section we explore how risk-o¤ shocks a¤ect US ...nancial markets and the e¤ectiveness
of the policy-put framework. Then, we explore the impact of these risk-o¤ shocks and policy
puts on major economies.

 3.1.      Risk-o¤ Shocks in the US

We present empirical evidence on the impact of volatility shocks on ...nancial markets under
di¤erent policy regimes (pre- and post-ZLB) in the US. We also highlight the role played by the
policy-put frameworks that have been in place since the global ...nancial crisis in o¤setting the
transmission of volatility shocks to ...nancial markets (and implicitly to the economy).
       Our empirical analysis is based on structural VARs. We identify risk-o¤ shocks in line with
the growing empirical literature on the macroeconomic e¤ects of uncertainty shocks. Several
studies have shown that uncertainty shocks have large and persistent e¤ects on economic activity
and that they have been responsible for a substantial share of historical uctuations in output
and prices.1 Accordingly, our baseline VARs contain data on an index of perceived volatility,
interest rates, equity prices, and exchange rates.
       We identify risk-o¤ shocks using a recursive identi...cation scheme and order our measure of
volatility ...rst in the system. This ordering implies that volatility does not respond to other
   1
     See for instance Bloom (2009), Bekaert et al. (2013), Caggiano et al. (2014), Leduc and Liu (2016), Caldara et
al. (2016) and Basu and Bundick (2017) for the empirical evidence in the US and Carriere-Swallow and Cespedes
(2013), Mumtaz and Theodoridis (2015) for the empirical evidence on the international transmission.


                                                        7
shocks in the impact period but that all the other variables in the system can react contempora-
neously to a volatility shock.2 The evolution of volatility in the following periods, however, can
be shaped by all the other shocks through their impact on the lags of all the other variables. In
appendix A.1, we provide results from an alternative identi...cation scheme in which we identify
risk-o¤ shocks using an external instrument that reects large spikes in volatility. We see this as
a good robustness check since the identi...cation of the risk-o¤ shocks doesn'
                                                                             t require a recursive
ordering of the variables or zero restrictions. We show that, using this alternative approach, we
obtain qualitatively similar results to our baseline ...ndings and only a marginally smaller impact
of risk-o¤ shocks on ...nancial variables.3
       We use weekly data on a number of macro/...nancial indicators. We take VIX, the implied
volatility of the S&P500 index options, as our index of volatility. It is worth noting that even
though VIX is a measure of stock market implied volatility in the US, it is highly correlated with
implied volatility indexes in other major economies. Figure 1 shows the historical evolution of
implied volatilities in the US, the Euro Area and Japan since 1999. Figure 1 suggests a sizable
global component of volatility as there is a high degree of comovement in implied volatility
measures across countries. The correlation coe¢ cient is 0.91 between the implied volatility
indexes in the US and the Euro Area and 0.83 between those in the US and Japan. The
comovement seems to be particularly strong around major global events, such as 9/11, the
collapse of Lehman Brothers and the height of the European sovereign debt crisis. Therefore,
we interpret shocks to the VIX index as risk-o¤ shocks, either from the US or from any region
large enough to generate a movement in global volatility.
       As our sample covers periods during which short rates were constrained by the zero lower
bound, we include both short (1-year) and long (10-year) rates on government bonds. Their
inclusion helps us characterize and compare monetary policy responses and their e¤ectiveness
in constrained and unconstrained periods. Our ...nal variable in the VAR is the log of the S&P
500 stock market index.
       We are interested in documenting the impact of risk-o¤ shocks for two subperiods, one on
each side of the global ...nancial crisis. We take the period from early 1999 to September 2008
as representative of conventional monetary policy for the US. The starting date is constrained
   2
     In the literature on the e¤ects of uncertainty shocks, ordering the measure of volatility ...rst in recursively
identi...ed VARs is common. See for example Leduc and Liu (2016), Basu and Bundick (2017), Carriere-Swallow
and Cespedes (2013), Moore (2017), Rice et al. (2018), Larcher et al. (2018)
   3
     In appendix A.3, we present the impulse responses under alternative orderings of the variables, namely
ordering the VIX after stock prices and ordering it last. Our main conclusions do not change under these
alternative identi...cation assumptions.


                                                         8
by data-availability for emerging markets (see below). In order to limit the e¤ect of rapidly
falling interest rates and high volatility during the height of the crisis, we exclude observations
from the last quarter of 2008. More precisely, we exclude data on the weeks after Lehman'
                                                                                        s
collapse. The second subsample covers the post-GFC period when the Federal Reserve deployed
a number of unconventional policies. Again, in order to limit the e¤ects of the heights of the
...nancial turmoil, we start our second subsample in April 2009. Finally, we estimate the VAR
including six lags as suggested by Akaike information criterion.

   Figure 2 presents the impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock in the US using VIX as the
volatility indicator. In Figure 2, red lines and red shaded areas correspond to the impulse
responses and one standard deviation con...dence bands from the VAR estimated during the pre-
crisis period. Blue lines and blue shaded areas are impulse responses from the VAR estimated
for the second subsample. In order to give our results a quantitative dimension, we calibrate
the initial response of the VIX to be equal to the average of the three largest weekly increases
in VIX in our sample. These three events are associated with major risk-o¤ episodes over the
last decade. The ...rst episode is immediately following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. The
second one is in August 2011, amidst concerns of the European sovereign debt crisis spreading
to Spain and Italy. And the ...nal event is during the sell-o¤ following China'
                                                                              s Black Monday
in August 2015. The average increase in VIX at these three events corresponds to about 15
volatility points. Importantly, since we are concerned with the relative response of ...nancial
variables to similar risk-o¤ shocks in both periods, but the process for risk-o¤ shocks itself is
di¤erent in the two periods, we need to rescale the shocks in the post-ZLB period (see below for
speci...cs): all our statements are based on this rescaled metric.
   The transmission of risk-o¤ shocks echoes some of the ...ndings from the uncertainty litera-
ture. Following an unexpected increase in volatility, equity prices in the US drop sharply and
signi...cantly, and interest rates fall to a lower level, where they remain over the medium term. In
the conventional policy period, the Federal Reserve eases monetary policy in response to height-
ened volatility and falling stock prices consistent with ...ndings in Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2018). This reaction manifests itself in the signi...cant and persistent drop in the 1-year Treasury
yield immediately following the risk-o¤ shock. The e¤ect on the 1-year Treasury yield displays
a hump-shaped response, with a peak decline of around 100 basis points at four to ...ve months,
and the 1-year yield stays below the pre-shock level even after a year. The easier monetary
policy also has an impact on long rates. The 10-year Treasury yield follows a somewhat similar


                                                 9
pattern but the impact is smaller. The peak impact on the 10-year Treasury yield is around 40
basis points. Increased volatility has a signi...cant and persistent impact on stock prices. Despite
looser monetary policy, the equity market experiences a sharp decline, losing around 14 percent
of its value.
       We next present the e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks in the aftermath of the global ...nancial crisis,
a period when short term interest rates were constrained by the ZLB and the Federal Reserve
relied on a number of unconventional policies such as forward guidance on interest rates and large
scale asset purchases. The ...rst observation is that the VIX index's response to an unanticipated
risk-o¤ shock is much less persistent in this period. Following an unanticipated shock in the
conventional policy period, the VIX index stays signi...cantly above the pre-shock level for more
than 9 months, while in the post-GFC period, the e¤ect on the VIX index dies out after about
4 months. This change is also evident when measured in terms of the half-life of a risk-o¤ shock
on the VIX index. The impulse responses of VIX across the two subsamples imply that the half
life of the risk-o¤ shock drops from 10 weeks to 5 weeks.
       The reduction in volatility'
                                  s persistence is most likely related to the policy-put framework
implemented after the GFC. In order to compare the e¤ects across the two subperiods, we scale
the impulse responses in the unconventional policy period to take into account the change in the
persistence of volatility. To this end, we scale the impulse responses so that in both subperiods
the cumulative change in the VIX index is the same during the ...rst 12 weeks. This implies that
the impact response of the VIX index in the second subperiod is about 20 percent.4
       Looking at the response of interest rates, the change in the dynamics of interest rates on
the short end of the yield curve is not surprising. While the Federal Reserve's response to
heightened volatility triggers a persistent decline in the 1-year rate in the conventional policy
period, in the post-GFC period the response of the 1-year rate is small and mostly insigni...cant,
as the federal funds rate was constrained by the ZLB. The interesting observation is that the
10-year Treasury yield in the ZLB period is more responsive to risk-o¤ shocks, in the sense that
its response happens more quickly. Following the risk-o¤ shock, the 10-year yield immediately
drops about 40 basis points and stays signi...cantly below the pre-shock level for more than half
a year. Although its decline is less persistent, this uick recovery is consistent with the risk-o¤
shock itself being less persistent. This ...nding supports the view that, even though the Federal
   4
    If we consider the unscaled impulse responses, the impact response of the VIX index to a risk-o¤ shock is about
24% higher in the post-ZLB sample compared to pre-ZLB sample. The cumulative increase in the VIX index in
the ...rst 12 weeks is, however, about 11% higher in the pre-ZLB period, which is itself an indirect testament to
the e¤ectiveness of policy-puts, as risk-o¤ shocks are more contained in the post-ZLB period.


                                                        10
Reserve was unable to manipulate short term interest rates, it was still able to directly generate
signi...cant movements in longer term interest rates via its unconventional monetary policy tools
and adjust its monetary policy stance in response to shocks. Moreover, it appears that the
policy-put framework was credible enough to trigger an immediate and reinforcing response
from the private sector in anticipation of the risk-o¤ contingent policy.
    The Federal Reserve'
                       s ability to respond to a risk-o¤ shock by loosening monetary policy is
also evident in the response of equity markets in the ZLB period. If the monetary policy reaction
is completely muted in all dimensions, one would expect that an equivalently large increase in
volatility would trigger a bigger fall in asset prices. We ...nd, however, that the equity market
response to a risk-o¤ shock is not di¤erent under ZLB from its response under the conventional
monetary policy period.
    Overall, the results are consistent with the direct evidence reviewed by Swanson (2018), in
which he concludes that there is near consensus that the zero lower bound on nominal interest
rates was not a serious constraint on the Federal Reserve (Fed). The Fed was able to e¤ectively
use forward guidance and large scale asset purchases to inuence medium- and long term interest
rates, stock prices and exchange rates. We return to this literature and extend it in section 5.
    Returning to the risk-centric framework, we have argued that the stabilizing e¤ect of these
policies operated not only by substituting for conventional monetary policy but also by reducing
the persistence of risk-o¤ shocks.   Before concluding this section, we examine the evolution
of two measures of volatility persistence to provide additional evidence supporting this claim.
First, we follow ECB (2016) and measure the half-life of a shock to VIX, calculated from a
GARCH(1,1) model estimated over a rolling window of four years. Figure 3 depicts half-life
estimates alongside major unconventional monetary policy announcements. Although our half-
life measure uctuated considerably over the sample, it has been trending down to below 5
weeks from a peak of around 15 weeks near the end of 2009. Moreover, major unconventional
policy announcements, especially after LSAP II, appear to be followed by persistent declines in
half-lives.
    Second, we investigate the relationship between changes in the VIX spot index and the VIX
futures term structure. We measure the slope of the VIX curve using the di¤erence between the
VIX futures 1 month and 6 months to expiration. We then calculate the correlation between
changes in the VIX spot index and changes in the slope. The idea is that if changes in the VIX
spot index are expected to be short lived, the short end of the VIX curve will jump more than



                                               11
the long end of the curve, implying a negative correlation between the changes in the spot index
and the slope. Figure 4 shows the evolution of this correlation since 2008, a sample dictated by
the availability of VIX futures data. The correlation coe¢ cient is calculated using a six month
rolling window. Figure 4 shows that the correlation between these two variables has also been
trending down since the crisis. Together with the ...ndings from the impulse response analysis,
...gures 3 and 4 reinforce the point that a signi...cant share of the success of the unconventional
policy framework appears to have operated through the increased perception among investors
that containing risk-o¤ shocks had become a central objective of major central banks. That is,
central banks were successful in providing a credible policy-put framework.

 3.2.     Risk-o¤ Shocks in the Global DM Context

As Figure 1 illustrated, signi...cant risk-o¤ events, regardless of their origin, quickly spread to
other regions of the world economy. It stands to reason that policy-puts also spread across
regions. We do not attempt to disentangle the sources but instead focus on understanding the
net (of policy) e¤ect of risk-o¤ shocks in the di¤erent subperiods of U.S. monetary policy, and
how these e¤ects interacted with local conditions.
      In this section we consider the global implications of risk-o¤ shocks by expanding our analysis
to other major economies. We estimate larger VAR models including data on the Euro Area
and Japan. Speci...cally, we estimate two VAR models, one with US and Euro Area data only,
and a second model with US and Japanese data.5 Our expanded VARs include data on Euro
and Yen exchange rates, 1- and 10-year Treasury yields and stock prices. We recursively identify
risk-o¤ shocks by ordering the VIX index ...rst in the VAR. The data is at weekly frequency and
the sub-samples are identical to the ones presented before. Although the Bank of Japan and
the ECB faced di¤erent constraints and the timing of the policy responses di¤ered, comparing
the global e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks in these economies before and after the global ...nancial crisis
provides additional insights on the e¤ectiveness of alternative monetary policy measures.
      Figure 5 displays the impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock obtained from the US-Euro Area
VAR. The quantitative responses of the US variables are slightly di¤erent, possibly because we
now consider cross-border interactions. Qualitatively, however, they convey the same message
as Figure 2, so we do not discuss them again.
      The rest of the panels in Figure 5 show the response of Euro Area variables. For the Euro
  5
    The results are robust to estimating one large VAR that includes data on the US, the Euro Area and Japan
altogether.



                                                    12
Area and for all economies throughout the paper, we de...ne our exchange rate index as the
number of units of foreign currency per US dollar. Therefore an increase in our exchange rate
indices represents the depreciation of the foreign currency against the US dollar. The second
column of Figure 5 shows the impulse responses of 10-year yields and the Euro/Dollar exchange
rate. The essence of our ...ndings for the Euro Area is similar to the ...ndings for the US. The ECB
was able to generate movements in long rates larger than in the pre-crisis era. Moreover, the
euro depreciated against the dollar during the risk-o¤ periods in the post-crisis period (partly
due to concentration of European risk-o¤ shocks during this period). The fall in long rates and
exchange rate depreciation both boost equity markets, and the sell-o¤ in equity markets is no
larger than during the pre-ZLB (third column, top panel). The last panel of Figure 5 shows the
response of 10-year Italian Treasury yields. It is interesting to note that, in the pre-crisis era,
Italian long rates moved in tandem with the average Euro Area long rates. In the post-crisis
period though, Italian rates seem to decouple and increase persistently. Pre-crisis, Eurozone
governments'bonds were treated as homogenous safe assets but that changed post-crisis, with
concerns about the ability of several periphery countries in the Eurozone to service their debts.
This led to investors treating Eurozone government'
                                                  s bonds as heterogenous, with di¤erent risk
pro...les.
    The next ...gure shows, however, that the periphery economies also bene...ted after the ECB's
policy-put framework became credible. For this purpose, we focus on the policy setting in
the Euro Area during the period after the global ...nancial crisis. We partition the post-crisis
period into two subperiods. Our cut-o¤ point is Mario Draghi'
                                                            s "Whatever it takes"speech. In
July 2012, with investors betting on the break-up of the euro zone, Draghi delivered a speech in
London where he said "Within our mandate, the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve
the euro. And believe me, it will be enough". Even though an actual unlimited bond buying
program (Outright Monetary Transactions) was not announced for more than a month and was
never actually used, the speech is widely seen as key in calming ...nancial market turmoil, or
even in saving the European monetary union. European stock markets rallied after the speech,
and perhaps more importantly, spreads on sovereign bonds and credits narrowed, taking the
pressure o¤ countries that investors thought were worse credit risks.
    In Figure 6, we focus on the impulse responses of Italian long rates from a VAR that only
includes Euro Area variables. The VAR is estimated for two subsamples: The ...rst subsample
goes from 2009 to the week before the Draghi speech; the second one covers the post-speech



                                                13
period. Figure 6 depicts the responses of Italian 10-year yields to an unexpected risk-o¤ shock
identi...ed using the implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx 50. The increased e¤ectiveness of policy
puts is evident in the changing dynamics of Italian long rates, as their response to risk-o¤ shocks
essentially switches sign in the period following Draghi'
                                                        s speech. Prior to Draghi's commitment,
a risk-o¤ shock would generate a signi...cant increase in Italian long rates, 40 basis points at
its peak. Once the put-policy in the Euro Area became more credible, the e¤ect is completely
reversed, and long rates in Italy fall together with other European long rates. Overall, our
...ndings provide evidence that the unconventional monetary policies deployed by the ECB in
the post-2012 periods have helped mitigate the adverse e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks for the periphery
economies.
   Finally, we investigate the e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks in Japan. Figure 7 presents the impulse
responses obtained from the US-Japan VAR. An important caveat, which we address indirectly
in our conclusion about Japan'
                             s response to global risk-o¤ shocks, is that the pre-crisis period
does not fully correspond to a conventional policy period in Japan. The BOJ ...rst implemented
its zero interest rate policy in 1999 followed by its ...rst QE programme, which ended in 2006.
BOJ then ran a conventional monetary policy until the start of the Comprehensive Monetary
Easing policy in 2010. However, the targeted overnight call rate remained below 0.5% during
the entire period. In the post crisis era, the quantitative and qualitative easing policies were
introduced in 2013, but our sample ends in 2015 so the e¤ect of these policies is probably not
fully reected in our results.
   With this in mind, our results show that the BOJ had limited inuence on short rates in
response to risk-o¤ shocks even before 2008. The response of the 1-year JGB yield is essentially
zero throughout both samples. On longer dated yields, we ...nd that the 10-year yield tended
to drop in the pre-crisis sample but not in the second subsample. Consistent with these obser-
vations, the impulse responses for the exchange rate reect the relative inability of the BOJ to
e¤ectively respond to risk-o¤ shocks. First, whereas a global risk-o¤ shock left the Yen/Dollar
exchange rate essentially unchanged in the pre-crisis period, the Yen appreciated signi...cantly
against the US dollar after the GFC. Second, and possibly as a result of the currency appreci-
ation and unresponsive long rates, the stock market experienced a larger initial decline. Note,
however, that in line with the positive e¤ect of global policy-puts on the persistence of risk-o¤
episodes, the fall in Japan's equity market is much less persistent in the second period. In sum,
these results suggest that the BOJ, which already had low long rates, was more constrained



                                                14
than the Federal Reserve in its ability to o¤set the e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks on ...nancial markets
in the aftermath of the global ...nancial crisis. In this context, global policy-puts had a mixed
e¤ect on Japan, as it bene...tted from the decline in the persistence of risk-o¤ episodes but it
was hurt by the sharper appreciation of the Yen.


 4.     The e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks on EMs

In Section 3, we showed that both conventional and unconventional monetary policies can limit
the e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks in major economies. In this section, we extend our analysis to
emerging markets and test three predictions of the conceptual framework outlined in Section
2. First, even though emerging markets might not be directly constrained by the ZLB, global
risk-o¤ shocks signi...cantly a¤ect EMs since their ability to respond is limited due to exchange
rate and capital ow concerns. Second, policy-puts in major economies can provide support to
global ...nancial markets and alleviate the e¤ects of global risk-o¤ shocks on EMs. Third, the
ability of EMs to bene...t from these policy-puts, and the direct impact of global risk-o¤ shocks
on them, depends on their economic fundamentals.
    To test these predictions, we estimate the e¤ects of global risk-o¤ shocks on ...nancial markets
and capital ows for 19 emerging market economies.6 We distinguish the e¤ects of global risk-o¤
shocks between the conventional and unconventional policy periods. Further, we estimate the
e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks conditional on the monetary policy stance in major economies. Finally,
we interact risk-o¤ shocks with measures of economic fundamentals in EMs.
    We conduct our analysis using weekly data, in line with the analysis on DMs. As in the
previous section, we study the dynamics of the following variables: yields on government bonds
issued in local currency, bilateral US dollar exchange rates and equity market indices. In order
to better understand the transmission of risk-o¤ shocks, we also include data on weekly capital
ows. Our capital ows data report net portfolio ows in equities and bonds for each country.
Our sample starts in 2004.
    Our ...rst objective is to document the transmission of risk-o¤ shocks to these EMs. Our
empirical strategy is di¤erent from Section 3, which relied on Structural VARs to identify the
transmission channels of risk-o¤ shocks. However, extending the analysis using a VAR frame-
work to analyze 19 additional countries and ...ve variables per country would be impractical.
   6
     The countries we include are: Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Hong Kong, Hungary, In-
dia, Indonesia, Israel, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Poland, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, and
Thailand.



                                                     15
Instead, our empirical strategy here is based on the local projection methodology proposed in
Jorda (2005). Within that approach, we specify the global risk-o¤ shocks building on section 3.
Speci...cally, we use the risk-o¤ shock identi...ed in the structural VAR for the US economy as the
global shock for these emerging markets. Therefore, we implicitly assume that each emerging
market economy is too small to a¤ect the dynamics of shocks hitting the US economy and that
the shocks we identi...ed are exogenous to these economies.
   Our baseline speci...cation for estimating the e¤ects of global risk-o¤ shocks on emerging
markets is:


                                     h       h       h v       K     h
                          yi;t+h =   i   +   t   +    "t   +   k=0 ! k xi;t k   + "i;t+h                      (1)

where    yi;t+h is the h period ahead change in country i'
                                                         s long rates, exchange rate or equity
market index. The variable "v
                            t denotes the risk-o¤ shocks identi...ed from the structural VAR

presented in section 3. Control variables include 8 lags of the dependent variable y and 8 lags
of the following variables: US shadow short rate, S&P 500 index, the DXY US dollar index and
                                                                                      h
oil prices. We include time and country ...xed e¤ects. The coe¢ cients                     measure the e¤ect of a
global risk-o¤ shock on our response variable of interest at horizon h. We estimate this equation
for horizons going up to 20 weeks.
   Figure 8 presents the estimated e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks on emerging market economies for
equity markets, 10-year local government bond yields issued in local currency, exchange rates
and capital ows. As in section 3, the exchange rates are de...ned as the number of units of the
local currency per US dollar and an increase represents a depreciation of the EMs'currencies. In
order to ease the comparison, we calibrate the responses in EMs to represent responses of these
variables to a shock that corresponds to a 15 vol increase in the VIX. The dynamic responses in
Figure 8 are in line with the conventional wisdom that ...nancial markets in emerging markets
are adversely a¤ected during high risk-o¤ environments. The ...rst panel depicts the response of
equity markets. A global risk-o¤ shock triggers a large fall in equity markets, comparable in size
to what we found in developed markets. The trough in stock prices (more than a 7% decline)
occurs after about one month. The negative e¤ect on stock prices is persistent, as after about
...ve months stock prices are still signi...cantly below their pre-shock level.
   The second panel in Figure 8 shows the response of 10-year government bond yields. Con-
trary to what we found in major economies, where long rates tend to fall following a risk-o¤
shock thanks to an easier monetary policy stance, increased global risk puts upward pressure


                                                      16
on emerging market interest rates. 10-year sovereign bond yields in emerging markets increase
persistently, with a peak increase of around 15 basis points. Global risk-o¤ shocks also trigger
persistent depreciations of emerging market currencies against the US dollar of around 2 percent.
      Finally, we ...nd that, in line with the response of equity markets, interest rates and exchange
rates, global risk-o¤ shocks induce sharp net capital outows. EMs experience both net equity
and bond outows. The drop in net equity ows appears, however, to be larger than the drop
in bond ows (a result that is mostly driven by Asia-Paci...c). At its trough, weekly net equity
outows drop by close to 150 million USD, while net bond ows fall by around 40 million USD.
Overall, our baseline impulse response analysis suggests there is a strong portfolio rebalancing
e¤ect following a global risk-o¤ shock. Emerging markets experience sharp capital outows,
putting pressure on the long end of their yield curve, and risk-o¤ shocks are associated with
persistent falls in stock prices and exchange rate depreciations.
      To investigate the empirical relevance of the second prediction of our conceptual framework,
we run two additional regressions. First, in parallel with section 3, we estimate equation (1)
for two subperiods: pre-ZLB and post-ZLB. Second, we estimate a variant of equation (1) by
adding an interaction term between risk-o¤ shocks and the shadow short rate. Our objective
with this speci...cation is to determine whether the monetary policy stance in the US has an
e¤ect on the strength of the impact of volatility shocks on emerging markets. Using shadow
short rates provides a continuous measure of short rates across the whole sample.7 We estimate:


                                h       h       h v       h;ssr v            K     h
                    yi;t+h =    i   +   t   +    "t   +        "t SSRt   +   k=0 ! k xi;t k   + "i;t+h      (2)

                                                          h;ssr
where SSRt is the shadow short rate and                           gives the additional impact of the volatility
shock conditional on the level of the shadow short rate. We estimate equation (2) for the whole
sample.
      Figure 9 compares the impulse responses of equity markets, long rates and exchange rates
between the conventional and unconventional monetary policy periods. Starting with the re-
sponse of equity markets, our results show that the fall in stock prices was larger during the
conventional policy period. Somewhat paradoxically, unconventional monetary policies in major
economies appear to bene...t EMs'equity markets more than conventional policies during risk-o¤
episodes. This larger bene...t appears to result from the larger e¤ect of unconventional policies
on emerging markets' long rates. For instance, as in our baseline impulse responses, the long
  7
      We use the Krippner (2013) measure of shadow short rate.



                                                            17
rates rise by more than 10 basis points in response to the risk-o¤ shock in the conventional pol-
icy period, despite falling long rates in major economies. In the unconventional policy period,
however, after an initial jump EMs'long rates fall as much as 20 basis points. This suggests that
major economies'unconventional policies have acted directly on EMs'long rates. The change
in the response of EMs to risk-o¤ shocks is also evident in the dynamics of exchange rates, even
though the di¤erences are somewhat less pronounced. Nonetheless, our point estimate of the
peak impact of the risk-o¤ shock on the exchange rate is reduced from 4.2% under conventional
policies to 3.5% under unconventional policies.
   Figure 10 presents the e¤ect of risk-o¤ shocks and the role of the interaction term with the
shadow short rate. The ...rst row in Figure 10 reports the direct impact of the risk-o¤ shock
obtained from the speci...cation in equation (2). The direct impact of the risk-o¤ shock is very
similar to the impacts obtained from the baseline speci...cation. The second row reports estimates
of the interaction term for each variable. The interaction terms are statistically signi...cant for
all variables for multiple horizons, suggesting that the stance of monetary policy in the US has
a direct impact on how risk-o¤ shocks transmit to EMs. For all three variables, the interaction
term has the same sign as the baseline e¤ect. This suggests that the e¤ect of risk-o¤ shocks
on these three variables increases with the level of shadow short rates. Put di¤erently, when
short rates are low or monetary policy is loose, a risk-o¤ shock triggers a smaller decline in
EMs'equity markets, their 10-year yields increase less and their exchange rate depreciation is
less pronounced.
   Taken together, our results from interacting the e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks with the monetary
policy stance in core economies agree with the second prediction from our conceptual framework.
That is, policy-puts in major economies support global ...nancial markets and alleviate the e¤ects
of global risk-o¤ shocks on EMs.
   Next, we present empirical evidence on the third and last prediction of our conceptual frame-
work. So far, we have assumed that the e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks are homogeneous across
economies. The economies in our sample, however, are heterogeneous with respect to their
economic fundamentals, and it is likely that these economy-speci...c characteristics shape the
sensitivities of their ...nancial markets to global risk-o¤ shocks. In what follows, we investi-
gate which characteristics of these emerging market economies are important in helping insulate
against the e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks. We consider a wide range of indicators that could con-
tribute to cross-country di¤erences in response to global risk-o¤ shocks. First, we consider a set



                                                18
of variables that are commonly used indicators of external vulnerabilities in emerging markets:
current account de...cit, foreign reserves to GDP and short term debt to foreign reserves. Second,
we include indicators relating to government debt: Moody'
                                                        s local currency sovereign rating and
total government debt to GDP. Third, we examine whether an economy'
                                                                  s ...nancial integration
with the rest of the world (measured as ...nancial openness to GDP) and GDP per capita can
explain cross-country di¤erences. Fourth and ...nal, we construct an index that proxies for an
individual economy'
                  s ability to produce safe government debt denominated in local currency.
We construct this indicator by dividing the ratio of government debt issued in local currency to
GDP by each economy'
                   s sovereign Credit Default Swaps (CDS).
   We augment equation (1) to take into account the interaction between the indicator variables
and risk-o¤ shocks. We estimate:

                                h       h       h v       h;I v            K     h
                   yi;t+h =     i   +   t   +    "t   +      "t Ii;t   +   k=0 ! k xi;t k   + "i;t+h   (3)

                         h;I
where the coe¢ cient           measures the additional e¤ect of the risk-o¤ shock interacted with
the indicator variable. Figures 11-16 present point estimates and the corresponding con...dence
intervals of the interaction coe¢ cients for each variable we consider.

   Focusing on the e¤ects of fundamentals on the transmission of risk-o¤ shocks on bond yields,
we ...nd that most of the interaction terms are signi...cant and have the expected sign. For in-
stance, in terms of indicators related to external vulnerabilities, countries with low current
account de...cits (or surpluses), countries with low short-term debt to foreign reserves and coun-
tries with high foreign reserves to GDP ratios appear to experience less upward pressure on their
bond yields. The same seems to be true for countries with higher levels of GDP per capita and
countries that are more integrated to the international ...nancial markets, as both interaction
terms are estimated to be negative. Regarding indicators related to public debt, our results
suggest that, while a country'
                             s sovereign debt rating appears to be important in attenuating
the e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks, the level of total public debt doesn'
                                                                  t seem to have a statistically
signi...cant e¤ect. Finally, the interaction term with the index of ability to create safe assets
also has a negative coe¢ cient. This suggests that, in countries that can produce local currency-
denominated sovereign debt at low spreads, the long end of their yield curve is less sensitive to
global risk-o¤ shocks.
   Most of our ...ndings on the sensitivity of bond yields to fundamentals apply to the dynamics
of exchange rates during risk-o¤ episodes. That is, there is less pressure on the currencies of

                                                          19
economies with strong fundamentals during these periods. Further, unlike our results on bond
yields, we ...nd that the ratio of short-term debt to foreign reserves can signi...cantly contribute
to and exacerbate the response of the exchange rate. On equity market responses and equity
ows dynamics, we ...nd a rather limited role for fundamentals in di¤erentiating across emerging
markets. None of the interaction variables we consider are estimated to be signi...cantly di¤erent
from zero for equity market response. The level of GDP per capita and the rating on sovereign
debt limit equity outows but we ...nd that, somewhat counter-intuitively, high levels of short
term foreign debt are associated with lower equity outows. Figure 17 depicts the share of
foreign investors' holdings in debt and equity markets as a percentage of GDP in the ...rst
quarter of 2018. Indeed, foreign investors'equity holdings are larger than their debt holdings in
Asian economies. In Latin America and other central and eastern European economies, however,
foreign investors constitute an important part of the investor base in debt markets.




 5.    The e¤ects of US Policy-puts on Asia-Paci...c Economies

In this section, we directly test our (empirically motivated) conjecture from section 4 that
policy-puts in core economies impacted EMs' long rates. We focus on Asia-Paci...c economies
and estimate the impact of US monetary policy shocks on each economy'
                                                                    s long rates (and
...nancial markets). In particular, we de...ne US monetary policy shocks using high frequency
movements in a number of asset prices around FOMC announcements. The advantage of using
high-frequency monetary policy shocks is that we can establish a causal relationship (or identify
spillovers) from US monetary policy to AP economies. We also distinguish between conventional
policy announcements and unconventional policy announcements such as forward guidance and
LSAPs. This enables us to isolate US monetary policies that targeted US long rates and test
whether these policies had a signi...cant and sizeable impact on AP economies'long rates. We do
not take a stand on whether this large impact has been good on net for the region: it is a positive
shield during severe global risk-o¤ episodes but it is a source of concern during reach-for-yield
environments.
   There is an emerging consensus that the Federal Reserve was not very constrained by the
zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, as it was able to e¤ectively use forward guidance
and large scale asset purchases to inuence medium- and long term interest rates, stock prices
and exchange rates. Our ...ndings in Section 3 are consistent with this conclusion (see Swanson

                                                20
(2018) for a review). Several papers also ...nd that US unconventional policies have had large
international e¤ects (e.g., Wright, 2012; Neely, 2015; Bowman et al., 2015; Fratzscher et al.,
2017; Rogers et al., 2018). Our contribution to the existing literature is twofold. First, we
systematically document the e¤ects of US monetary policy using high frequency data on 11
Asia-Paci...c economies. The economies included in our sample are Australia, China, Hong
Kong, Indonesia, India, Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.
Second, instead of characterizing US monetary policy surprises by the response of yields at a
particular maturity, we follow Gurkaynak et al (2005) and Swanson (2017) to take into account
additional dimensions of US monetary policy: forward guidance and LSAPs.
   Our measure of monetary policy shock is taken from Swanson (2017) who uses asset price
changes in a tight window (30 minutes) around FOMC announcements. Using high-frequency
movements in asset prices ensures that the surprise component of monetary policy announce-
ments is well captured. Swanson (2017) decomposes the monetary policy surprise associated
with each FOMC announcement into three components based on the movements in several as-
set prices: federal funds futures, Eurodollar futures, a number of Treasury bond yields up to
30-year maturity, the stock market and the dollar exchange rate against the euro and the yen.
The three components of monetary policy announcements correspond to a target factor (related
to the changes in the federal funds rate), a forward guidance (or path) factor and an LSAP
factor. In order to separately identify the three components Swanson ...rst assumes that the
LSAP factor is as small as possible during the pre-ZLB period. Then, each factor is identi...ed
by imposing that the forward guidance and LSAP components are orthogonal to changes in the
federal funds rate.
   We estimate the e¤ects of each component on Asia-Paci...c ...nancial markets using regres-
sions at daily frequency. We regress daily changes in asset markets on intraday monetary policy
surprises because Asian-Paci...c markets are closed at the time of most FOMC announcements.
Therefore, for each country in our sample, we construct a dataset that collects the changes in
interest rates, exchange rates and stock prices between the day before and the day after each
FOMC announcement. To be consistent with the de...nition of subsamples in the previous sec-
tions, we use data on FOMC announcements in the pre-ZLB period up to the collapse of Lehman
Brothers. That is, the last monetary policy announcement in our pre-ZLB subsample is on 5
August 2008. Similarly, the ZLB subsample starts in April 2009 and the FOMC announcement
on 29 April 2009 is the ...rst observation in this subsample. By construction we exclude the QE1



                                              21
announcement on 18 March 2009.8 We estimate the following equation separately for the two
subsamples de...ned above:


                                          yi;t =   i   +   i Ft   + "t                                (4)

where     yi;t is the daily change in the 10-year yield, the US dollar exchange rate or stock prices in
country i. Ft corresponds to target and forward guidance factors in the conventional monetary
policy period or forward guidance and LSAP factors in the ZLB period. For each economy in
our sample, the starting date for the estimation varies according to data availability. In most
cases, data on equity markets and exchange rates are available for a longer period than other
variables. The data on interest rates are more limited. For each economy, we estimate equation
(4) using the same sample period when all three variables are available. As a result, the sample
periods are not identical in the pre-ZLB period, and one must be cautious comparing coe¢ cients
across economies. We have data on all three variables for all economies in the post-ZLB period,.
      Table 1 presents the responses of bond yields in economies in the Asia-Paci...c region and
in the US. We ...rst discuss the e¤ects of these shocks on the 10-year Treasury yield in the
US. Swanson (2017) already reports estimates of the e¤ect of each component on the 10-year
Treasury yield at intraday frequency. In Table 1, we report the e¤ect of these shocks at a daily
frequency for the US to make our analysis self-contained.9 Moreover, the estimates for the US
long rates are useful for getting a sense of the relative magnitude of the spillovers on other
countries.
      Each component of monetary policy surprises is normalized to unit standard deviation over
the sample. For example, a one standard deviation surprise in the target or the federal funds
rate (FFR) component corresponds to an 8.8 basis point change in the FFR. For the forward
guidance (FG) component, a one standard deviation surprise corresponds to a 6 basis point
increase in 1-year ahead Eurodollar futures. In order to ease interpretation, for both FFR and
FG surprises, we calibrate the responses of bond yields to correspond to an unexpected 100 basis
point fall in each component.
      Starting with the pre-ZLB period, our coe¢ cient estimates suggests that a surprise 100 basis
point cut in the FFR would push the 10-year yield down signi...cantly, by 18 basis points. We also
...nd that the impact of a forward guidance shock on the US 10-year Treasury yield is signi...cant
  8
     In appendix A.4, we provide coe¢ cient estimates obtained including these dates. Our main results are
unchanged under this alternative split of pre-ZLB and post-ZLB samples.
   9
     Our coe¢ cient estimates on daily changes are broadly similar to his results.



                                                   22
in both pre- and post-ZLB periods. The coe¢ cient estimates suggest that the e¤ect is slightly
smaller in the post-ZLB period, 49 vs 37 basis points. Finally, a one standard deviation LSAP
surprise is equivalent to a 225 billion dollar LSAP surprise, and it triggers a 6.7 basis point
decline in the 10-year US Treasury yield. Our estimates of the e¤ects of di¤erent components
of monetary policy shocks are broadly in line with the existing empirical work.


            Table 1. The e¤ects of US monetary surprises in Asia-Paci...c
                                                       Pre-ZLB                           Post-ZLB
                                                Change in                        Change in
                                                FFR            FG                FG            LSAP
            Response of 10-year yields
            Australia                           -8.1           -31.9***          -31.9**       -7.4***
            China                               12.8           32.1***           -6.6          -0.1
            Hong Kong                           -30.4***       -39.0***          -43.0***      -6.5***
            Indonesia                           -4.1           -15.1             -97.1***      -0.4
            India                               -17.5***       -16.9*            -19.3*        -3.4***
            Korea                               -26.3***       -4.2              -31.8**       -3.1***
            Malaysia                            5.4            -7.2              -21.6**       -0.8
            New Zealand                         1.9            -12.1             -21.0         -5.4***
            Philippines                         2.1            -21.5             -32.4         -4.8**
            Singapore                           -3.6           -27.9***          -45.0***      -6.1***
            Thailand                            -17.6***       0.5               -40.0*        -3.6**
            US                                  -18.2**        -49.3***          -37.1**       -6.7***

Notes: The Table reports the e¤ects of each component of FOMC announcements on Asia-Paci...c economies'
10-year yields; coe¢ cient   i   in equation 4. In the pre-ZLB estimates, the two components of monetary policy
announcements are changes in the federal funds rate (FFR) and forward guidance (FG). In the post-ZLB es-
timates, the two components of monetary policy announcements are changes in forward guidance and LSAPs.
* ,** and *** denote statistical signi...cance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively


    We now turn to the e¤ects of US monetary policy shocks on long rates in Asia-Paci...c.
We start with spillovers in the pre-ZLB period. The ...rst two columns of Table 1 present the
responses of foreign bond yields under the conventional policy regime. We ...nd statistically
signi...cant spillovers to long rates in 7 out of 11 economies in our sample, for at least one of
the two components of US monetary policy surprises. Individually, the FFR component has
a signi...cant e¤ect on long rates in 4 economies, and the forward guidance component has a
signi...cant e¤ect in 5 economies. Hong Kong is the only economy where both FFR and forward

                                                          23
guidance have a statistically signi...cant impact on long rates. Further, the magnitude of the
spillovers from US monetary policies is also largest in Hong Kong. This is not surprising as
Hong Kong interest rates tend to follow movements in US interest rates given Hong Kong'
                                                                                      s
linked exchange rate system.
   For other economies, the strength of spillovers from shocks to the FFR and forward guidance
components are somewhat di¤erent. In addition to Hong Kong, the e¤ect of FFR surprises on
10-year government bond yields is statistically signi...cant in three economies (India, Korea and
Thailand). In these economies, the e¤ect of the FFR surprise on long rates is about as strong
as the e¤ect in US 10-year Treasury yield and ranges from 17 to 26 basis points.
   The e¤ect of forward guidance is also statistically signi...cant in a subset of economies in
the pre-ZLB period. We should note, however, that we estimate a positive e¤ect of a surprise
drop in the FG component for China. For other economies, long rates fall less than in the US
following a forward guidance surprise. A 100 basis points forward guidance surprise that lowers
US long rates by 49 basis points reduces these economies'long rates by 17 to 39 basis points.
   We next present the spillovers of US monetary policy shocks under unconventional policies.
The last two columns of Table 1 presents the estimated e¤ects of the forward guidance and
LSAP components. A ...rst observation is that, with the exception of China, the long rates
of all countries in the Asia-Paci...c region are statistically signi...cantly a¤ected by either the
forward guidance or LSAP components. This is remarkably di¤erent from pre-ZLB spillovers
and probably reects the increasing inuence of US unconventional monetary policies on the
region'
      s long rates. Turning to the e¤ects of shocks to individual components, forward guidance
shocks have signi...cant e¤ects on the long rates of 8 economies. The magnitude of spillovers
from forward guidance shocks, however, varies substantially across countries. In economies
where forward guidance shocks have a signi...cant e¤ect, long rates increase more than in the US
in half of the economies (Hong Kong, Indonesia, Singapore and Thailand), while in the other
half (Australia, India, Korea and Malaysia) the e¤ect is less than for the US.
   Relative to their e¤ect on US long rates, the e¤ect of forward guidance surprises on long
rates in the Asia-Paci...c region has strengthened between pre-ZLB and post-ZLB periods. As an
additional way to evaluate the spillovers of US monetary policy, we compare the implied level
of pass-through of forward guidance to long rates, both domestically and internationally. As in
Gilchrist et al. (2016), we de...ne the implied pass-through of forward guidance as the ratio of the
response of the Asia-Paci...c economies'long rates to the response of US long rates to a forward



                                                24
guidance shock. Using this metric in the conventional policy period, we ...nd that the implied
pass-through of forward guidance to the Asia-Paci...c region's 10-year yields ranges between 35
and 80 percent. For the unconventional policy period, the implied pass-through is higher on
average and ranges from 60 to 260 percent.10 Moreover the implied pass-through increases for
every economy. This suggests that forward guidance in the US has larger international spillovers
in the unconventional policy period.
      The last column of Table 1, where we present the sensitivity of long rates to LSAP shocks,
provides estimates of the impact of monetary policies in the US that directly targeted domestic
long rates. We ...nd that these shocks have had signi...cant international spillovers in all countries
except China, Indonesia and Malaysia. There is, nonetheless, a certain degree of heterogeneity
across economies. For example, long rates in the more advanced group of countries seem to be
more sensitive to LSAP shocks. The largest e¤ect of the LSAP shock is on Australian long rates,
which increased more than US long rates (7.4 basis point). The coe¢ cient estimates for other
rather advanced economies (Hong Kong, New Zealand and Singapore) range from 5.4 to 6.5
basis points and these coe¢ cients are distinctly larger than those for less advanced economies.
For the remaining economies in our sample, the coe¢ cient estimates range from 3.48 (India) to
4.99 (the Philippines) basis points. The positive relationship between economic fundamentals
and the reaction to US LSAP shocks supports our claim that fundamentally strong economies
experienced larger spillovers from policy-put frameworks in major economies.


 6.       Final Remarks

We have shown that the policy-put framework implemented by the core economies following the
global ...nancial crisis was highly e¤ective in substituting for the exhausted conventional monetary
policy instruments. Absent these policies, ...nancial markets would have been substantially more
vulnerable to the periodic risk-o¤ episodes experienced by the world economy.
      These policies had substantial spillovers to the rest of the world. While most of the pol-
icy discussion has focused on the problems caused by the reach-for-yield capital ows towards
emerging market economies, we document that there is a positive side of these policy-put frame-
works since they increase the resilience of the rest of the world with respect to global risk-o¤
shocks. For EMs in particular, this increased resilience took the form of more stable long rates
and smaller credit spreads in the face of risk-o¤ shocks. Core policy-put frameworks seem to
 10
      Excluding Indonesia, the highest passtrough is 120 percent (Singapore).



                                                        25
have prevented the traditional unhinging of the long end of EMs' yield curves during risk-o¤
episodes.
   By the same token, this policy-framework spillover observation raises the issue that as (and
if) the core policy-put framework is gradually removed, individual economies may need to boost
their self-hedging mechanisms. Self-hedging often means an increased demand for safe assets,
which may reignite the downward pressure on long interest rates and global imbalances, unless
regional supplies of safe assets expand as well, an issue on which the Asia-Paci...c region has
much to contribute. This expansion in the supply of safe assets can take place at the individual
country or regional level, perhaps by creating tranches from pooled regional debts. Similarly,
the region could consider creating a regional policy-put framework.




References

Ananchotikul, N. and L. Zhang (2014). Portfolio Flows, Global Risk Aversion and Asset Prices
  in Emerging Markets. IMF Working Papers 14/156, International Monetary Fund.

Basu, S. and B. Bundick (2017). Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of E¤ective Demand. Econo-
  metrica 85, 937­958.

Bloom, N. (2009). The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks. Econometrica 77 (3), 623­685.

Bowman, D., J. M. Londono, and H. Sapriza (2015). U.S. unconventional monetary policy
  and transmission to emerging market economies. Journal of International Money and Fi-
  nance 55 (C), 27­59.

Caballero, R. and A. Simsek (2018). A risk-centric model of demand recessions and macropru-
  dential policy. BIS Working Papers 733, Bank for International Settlements.

Caballero, R. J. and E. Farhi (2018). The Safety Trap. Review of Economic Studies 85 (1),
  223­274.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2016). Safe Asset Scarcity and Aggregate
  Demand. American Economic Review 106 (5), 513­518.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2017a). Rents, Technical Change, and Risk
  Premia Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capital, Earning Yields,
  and Factor Shares. American Economic Review 107 (5), 614­620.

                                              26
Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2017b). The Safe Assets Shortage Conundrum.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (3), 29­46.

Caggiano, G., E. Castelnuovo, and N. Groshenny (2014). Uncertainty shocks and unemployment
  dynamics in U.S. recessions. Journal of Monetary Economics 67 (C), 78­92.

Caggiano, G., E. Castelnuovo, and G. Pellegrino (2017). Estimating the real e¤ects of uncertainty
  shocks at the Zero Lower Bound. European Economic Review 100 (C), 257­272.

Caldara, D., C. Fuentes-Albero, S. Gilchrist, and E. Zakrajsek (2016). The macroeconomic
  impact of ...nancial and uncertainty shocks. European Economic Review 88 (C), 185­207.

Carriere-Swallow, Y. and L. F. Cespedes (2013). The impact of uncertainty shocks in emerging
  economies. Journal of International Economics 90 (2), 316­325.

Carriero, A., H. Mumtaz, K. Theodoridis, and A. Theophilopoulou (2015). The Impact of
  Uncertainty Shocks under Measurement Error: A Proxy SVAR Approach. Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking 47 (6), 1223­1238.

Cieslak, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2018). The economics of the fed put. mimeo .

ECB (2016). Financial Stability Review. November, European Central Bank .

Fratzscher, M., M. Lo Duca, and R. Straub (2017). On the international spillovers of us quan-
  titative easing. The Economic Journal 128 (608), 330­377.

Gilchrist, S., E. Zakrajsek, and V. Z. Yue (2016). The response of sovereign bond yields to U.S.
  monetary policy. Journal Economia Chilena (The Chilean Economy) 19 (2), 102­106.

Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. Swanson (2005). Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? The
  Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements. International Journal
  of Central Banking 1 (1).

Jorda, O. (2005). Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections. American
  Economic Review 95 (1), 161­182.

Krippner, L. (2013). Measuring the stance of monetary policy in zero lower bound environments.
  Economics Letters 118 (1), 135­138.




                                               27
Kuttner, K. N. (2018). Outside the box: Unconventional monetary policy in the great recession
  and beyond. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (4), 121­46.

Larcher, K., J. Kim, and Y. Kim (2018). Uncertainty Shocks and Asymmetric Dynamics in
  Korea: A Nonlinear Approach. Working Papers 2018-12, Economic Research Institute, Bank
  of Korea.

Leduc, S. and Z. Liu (2016). Uncertainty shocks are aggregate demand shocks. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 82 (C), 20­35.

Moore, A. (2017).     Measuring Economic Uncertainty and Its E¤ects.           The Economic
  Record 93 (303), 550­575.

Mumtaz, H. and K. Theodoridis (2017). Common and country speci...c economic uncertainty.
  Journal of International Economics 105 (C), 205­216.

Neely, C. J. (2015). Unconventional monetary policy had large international e¤ects. Journal of
  Banking & Finance 52 (C), 101­111.

Rice, A., T. Vehbi, and B. Wong (2018). Measuring uncertainty and its impact on the New
  Zealand economy. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Notes series AN2018/01, Reserve
  Bank of New Zealand.

Rogers, J. H., C. Scotti, and J. H. Wright (2018). Unconventional Monetary Policy and Inter-
  national Risk Premia. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 50 (8).

Swanson, E. T. (2017). Measuring the E¤ects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset
  Purchases on Financial Markets. NBER Working Papers 23311, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Swanson, E. T. (2018). The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound
  on Nominal Interest Rates. NBER Working Papers 25123, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Wright, J. H. (2012). What does monetary policy do to long-term interest rates at the zero
  lower bound? The Economic Journal 122 (564), F447­F466.




                                             28
7.   Figures




               29
                                     Figure 1: Implied Volatilities




                                                                                                 80


                                                                                                 60


                                                                                                 40


                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                  0
        2000        2002     2004     2006       2008        2010   2012    2014   2016   2018
         United States     Japan     Euro area

Notes: For US, CBOE VIX Index. For Japan, Nikkei Stock average Volatility Index. For Euro Area VSTOXX
Volatility Index. Data up to 25 Jun 2018. Sources: Bloomberg, Datastream.




                                                        30
                            Figure 2: The e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks in the US




Notes: The ...gure shows impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock obtained from weekly VARs estimated for two
subsamples. The variables included in the VAR are the VIX index, 1- and 10-year US Treasury yield and the log
of the S & P 500 index. The ...rst subsample, labelled pre-ZLB, covers January 1999 to September 2008. The
second subsample, labelled post-ZLB, covers April 2009 to December 2015. Red (blue) solid lines and shaded areas
correspond to point estimates and one standard deviation con...dence intervals. The volatility shock is calibrated
to generate a 15 vols increase in VIX in the ...rst subsample. The impulse responses in the post-ZLB sample are
scaled so that the 12 week cumulative increase in the response of VIX is the same in both subsamples. The units
of the vertical axes are vols for VIX, basis points for interest rates and percentage points for stock prices.




                                                         31
                               Figure 3: Half-life of Shocks to Volatility



                                          LSAP I    LSAP II   MEP

                                                                                                                 15
                                                                    LSAP III


                                                                                                                 10


                                                                                                                  5


                                                                                                                  0
      2002         2004        2006        2008        2010            2012    2014        2016        2018
      Half life
Notes: The graph shows the half-life of a shock to VIX in weeks estimated from GARCH(1,1) over four year
rolling windows. The vertical lines indicate 25 Nov 2008 (Announcement of LSAP I), 16 Dec 2008 (Target federal
funds is lowered to its e¤ective lower bound), 18 Mar 2009 (Announcement to purchase Treasuries and increase
the size of purchases of agency debt and agency MBS), 10 Aug 2010 (Announcement of LSAP II), 3 Nov 2010
(Announcement of additional purchase of Treasury securities), 21 Sep 2011 (Maturity Extension Program-MEP),
20 Jun 2012 (Announcement of continuation of the MEP through end of 2012), 13 Sep 2012 (Announcement of
LSAP III) and 12 Dec 2012 (Announcement of an increase in LSAP-III).




                                                     32
           Figure 4: Correlation between changes in VIX and slope of the VIX futures




Notes: The blue line represents 6-month rolling correlation coe¢ cient between changes in VIX and changes in the
slope of the VIX curve de...ned as UX6-UX1. Dashed line is the ...tted linear trend.




                                                       33
                           Figure 5: The e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks in the Euro Area




Notes: The ...gure shows impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock obtained from weekly VARs estimated for two
subsamples using US and Euro Area variables. The ...rst subsample, labelled pre-ZLB, covers January 1999 to
September 2008. The second subsample, labelled post-ZLB, covers April 2009 to December 2015. Red (blue)
solid lines and shaded areas correspond to point estimates and one standard deviation con...dence intervals. The
volatility shock is calibrated to generate a 15 vols increase in VIX in the ...rst subsample. The impulse responses
in the post-ZLB sample are scaled so that the 12 week cumulative increase in the response of VIX is the same in
both subsamples. The units of the vertical axes are vols for VIX, basis points for interest rates and percentage
points for stock prices.




                                                        34
 Figure 6: The e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks on Italian long rates (Before and after Draghi speech)




Notes: The ...gure shows impulse responses of Italian long rates to a risk-o¤ shock obtained from weekly VARs
estimated for two subsamples using Euro Area variables. The ...rst subsample, labelled pre-WIT(Whatever it
takes), covers April 2009 to July 2012. The second subsample, labelled post-WIT, covers August 2012 to 2017.
Red (blue) solid lines and shaded areas correspond to point estimates and one standard deviation con...dence
intervals. The volatility shock is calibrated to generate a 15 vols increase in VSTOXX in the ...rst subsample. The
impulse responses in the post-ZLB sample are scaled so that the 12 week cumulative increase in the response of
VSTOXX is the same in both subsamples. The units of the vertical axes are vols for VSTOXX, basis points for
interest rates and percentage points for stock prices.




                                                         35
                            Figure 7: The e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks in Japan




Notes: The ...gure shows impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock obtained from weekly VARs estimated for two sub-
samples using US and Japan variables. The ...rst subsample, labelled pre-ZLB, covers January 1999 to September
2008. The second subsample, labelled post-ZLB, covers April 2009 to December 2015. Red (blue) solid lines and
shaded areas correspond to point estimates and one standard deviation con...dence intervals. The volatility shock
is calibrated to generate a 15 vols increase in VIX in the ...rst subsample. The impulse responses in the post-ZLB
sample are scaled so that the 12 week cumulative increase in the response of VIX is the same in both subsamples.
The units of the vertical axes are vols for VIX, basis points for interest rates and percentage points for stock
prices.




                                                       36
                             Figure 8: The e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks on EMs




Notes: The ...gure shows impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock on EMs using panel local projection as in equation
1. The sample is 2004-2017 and the countries included are Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Hong
Kong, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Poland, Russia, Singapore,
South Africa, Thailand. Red solid lines and shaded areas correspond to point estimates and 90 percent con...dence
intervals. The impulse responses are scaled to a shock that generates a 15 vols increase in VIX. The units of the
vertical axes are percentage points for stock prices and exchange rates, basis points for interest rates and millions
USD for capital ows.




                                                         37
Figure 9: The e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks on EMs during conventional and unconventional policy
periods




Notes: The ...gure shows impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock on EMs using panel local projection as in equation 1.
The left (right) column shows impulse responses obtained from estimating equation 1 over the sample 2004-2008
(2009-2017). Red solid lines and shaded areas correspond to point estimates and 90 percent con...dence intervals.
The impulse responses are scaled to a shock that generates a 15 vols increase in VIX. The units of the vertical
axes are percentage points for stock prices and exchange rates, basis points for interest rates.




                                                        38
        Figure 10: The e¤ects of risk-o¤ shock on EMs: controlling for shadow short rate




Notes: The ...gure shows impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock on EMs using panel local projection as in equation
2. The ...rst row shows the direct impact of risk-o¤ shocks. The second row plots the coe¢ cient on the risk-o¤
shock and shadow short rate interaction term. Solid lines and shaded areas correspond to point estimates and
90 percent con...dence intervals. The impulse responses are scaled to a shock that generates a 15 vols increase
in VIX. The units of the vertical axes are percentage points for stock prices and exchange rates, basis points for
interest rates.




                                                       39
                          Figure 11: The role of fundamentals: 10-year yields




Notes: The ...gure shows coe¢ cients on interaction terms and risk-o¤ shock as in equation 2. The ...rst panel shows
the direct impact of risk-o¤ shocks without any interaction term. The other panels show the coe¢ cient on risk-o¤
shock and the interaction term indicated in the title of each panel. Solid lines and shaded areas correspond to
point estimates and 90 percent con...dence intervals.




                                                        40
         Figure 12: The role of fundamentals: 10-year yields and unconventional polciies




Notes: The ...gure shows coe¢ cients on interaction terms and risk-o¤ shock as in equation 2 estimated using data
after April 2009. The ...rst panel shows the direct impact of risk-o¤ shocks without any interaction term. The
other panels show the coe¢ cient on risk-o¤ shock and the interaction term indicated in the title of each panel.
Solid lines and shaded areas correspond to point estimates and 90 percent con...dence intervals.




                                                       41
                         Figure 13: The role of fundamentals: Exchange rates




Notes: The ...gure shows coe¢ cients on interaction terms and risk-o¤ shock as in equation 2. The ...rst panel shows
the direct impact of risk-o¤ shocks without any interaction term. The other panels show the coe¢ cient on risk-o¤
shock and the interaction term indicated in the title of each panel. Solid lines and shaded areas correspond to
point estimates and 90 percent con...dence intervals.




                                                        42
                         Figure 14: The role of fundamentals: Equity markets




Notes: The ...gure shows coe¢ cients on interaction terms and risk-o¤ shock as in equation 2. The ...rst panel shows
the direct impact of risk-o¤ shocks without any interaction term. The other panels show the coe¢ cient on risk-o¤
shock and the interaction term indicated in the title of each panel. Solid lines and shaded areas correspond to
point estimates and 90 percent con...dence intervals.




                                                        43
                            Figure 15: The role of fundamentals: Bond ows




Notes: The ...gure shows coe¢ cients on interaction terms and risk-o¤ shock as in equation 2. The ...rst panel shows
the direct impact of risk-o¤ shocks without any interaction term. The other panels show the coe¢ cient on risk-o¤
shock and the interaction term indicated in the title of each panel. Solid lines and shaded areas correspond to
point estimates and 90 percent con...dence intervals.




                                                        44
                           Figure 16: The role of fundamentals: Equity ows




Notes: The ...gure shows coe¢ cients on interaction terms and risk-o¤ shock as in equation 2. The ...rst panel shows
the direct impact of risk-o¤ shocks without any interaction term. The other panels show the coe¢ cient on risk-o¤
shock and the interaction term indicated in the title of each panel. Solid lines and shaded areas correspond to
point estimates and 90 percent con...dence intervals.




                                                        45
                         Figure 17: Foreign Investors'Share of Debt and Equity
                 140.6




                                            59.1




                                                                                               60.8
                                                                                                      30


                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                      10


                                                                                                       0
            CN HK        IN   ID   KR MY PH SG TH BR   CL CO MX CZ HU      PL   RU   TR   IL   ZA
                Debt          Equity

Notes: The bars represent foreign investors' holdings in debt and equity markets as a share of each economy's
2017 GDP.




                                                       46
 A.     Appendix
 A.1.    Identi...cation of risk-o¤ shocks with external instruments

The identi...cation of risk-o¤ shocks in section 3 relies on a recursive ordering of variables that
imply that volatility does not respond contemporaneously to other shocks in the VAR. In this
section, we present an alternative identi...cation approach that does not rely on the recursive
ordering of the variables or on zero restrictions, namely the identi...cation via external instru-
ments. The idea in this approach is to use external instruments to isolate the part of reduced
form shocks in the VAR owing to a particular structural shock. Our implementation closely
follows Carriero et al. (2015).
   Formally, we start the analysis by estimating the following reduced form VAR:

                                                p
                                                X
                                     Yt = c +          Bj Yt   j   + A0 "t                     (5)
                                                j =1

   where Yt is the vector of endogenous variables. The reduced-form VAR residuals ut are linear
combinations of structural shocks, ut = A0 "t , and therefore the variance-covariance matrix of
the reduced-form residuals E [ut u0
                                  t ] is     = A0 A0
                                                   0.

   We are only interested in the e¤ects of risk-o¤ shocks; our objective is to identify the column
of the A0 corresponding to the contemporaneous e¤ect of the risk-o¤ shock. Our approach
requires our instrument to verify:


                                           E (Zt ; "v
                                                    t) =           6= 0                        (6)

                                           E (Zt ; "q
                                                    t) = 0                                     (7)

                                                                  q
where Zt is our instrument. We denote "v
                                       t as risk-o¤ shocks while "t as all other structural shocks

in the VAR. These two conditions state that in order for our external instrument to be valid,
it should be correlated with the risk-o¤ shocks and uncorrelated with all the other structural
shocks in the VAR.
   Following Carriero et al. (2015), our instrument is constructed as a dummy variable that
takes the value of 1 when movements in VIX are greater than 1.65 std of the HP ...ltered data.
When we regress the reduced-form residual from the ...rst equation on this instrument, the
regressions have large F-statistics: 33 in the ...rst subsample and 60 in the second subsample.
   Figure A.1 presents impulse responses under this identi...cation scheme. We obtain qualita-
tively identical results to our baseline ...ndings and only a marginally smaller impact of risk-o¤

                                                       47
shocks on ...nancial variables.

 A.2.    Structural VAR with shadow short rate

In our baseline VAR for the US, we use the 1-year Treasury yield as a measure of movements
in the short end of the yield curve. In this subsection, we provide a robustness exercise for our
baseline results, by employing shadow short rates instead of 1-year Treasury yields in the VAR.
Our measure of the shadow short rate is taken from Krippner (2013). Figure A.2 presents the
impulse responses obtained from this alternative VAR. Our results are robust, as the responses of
all the variables are essentially identical to the responses obtained from the baseline speci...cation.
On short rates, the response in the conventional-policy period is large (more than 100 basis
points) and persistent. In the unconventional-policy period, the short rate immediately falls
but its response is short-lived. This is possibly because the shadow short rate is derived using
information contained in the entire yield curve, and its short-lived response reects a combination
of a muted response in the short-end of the yield curve and relatively large changes in the long
rates.

 A.3.    Alternative orderings of the variables in the structural VAR


Figure A.3 and A.4 present the impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock identi...ed by ordering VIX
second, after stock prices, and by ordering VIX last.

 A.4.    Alternative dating of subsamples and the e¤ects of monetary policy
         surprises

In this subsection, we present the e¤ects of the three components of US monetary policy surprises
for an alternative dating of pre-ZLB and post-ZLB subsamples. In the main text (Table 1), pre-
ZLB includes FOMC announcements until the collapse of Lehman and post-ZLB subsample
starts in April 2009. In Table 2, the pre-ZLB sample includes announcements until the Fed
e¤ectively hit the zero lower bound (16 December 2008) and post-ZLB subsample starts with
the ...rst announcement once the interest rates were at the ZLB (28 January 2009).




                                                  48
            Table 2. The e¤ects of US monetary surprises in Asia-Paci...c
                                                        Pre-ZLB                       Post-ZLB
                                                Change in                     Change in
                                                FFR            FG             FG            LSAP
            Response of 10-year yields
            Australia                           -9.9           -33.9***       -35.3**       -5.4***
            China                               13.3           28.9**         -7.3          0.3
            Hong Kong                           -31.9***       -42.2***       -44.7**       -4.6***
            Indonesia                           -69.8          -163.5*        -94.9***      -1.9
            India                               -23.4***       -20.6**        -24.9*        0.1
            Korea                               -27.3***       3.9            -32.4**       -2.5***
            Malaysia                            -4.6           -11.8          -18.7*        -1.9***
            New Zealand                         1.8            -9.2           -24.6         -3.5***
            Philippines                         -3             -26.6          -38.5         -1.9
            Singapore                           -4.2           -27.6***       -50.7***      -2.8***
            Thailand                            -19.5***       -4.3           -43.9*        -1.2
            US                                  -20.4**        -54.4***       -34.6**       -7.5***

Notes: The Table reports the e¤ects of each component of FOMC announcements on Asia-Paci...c economies'
10-year yields; coe¢ cient   i   in equation 4. In the pre-ZLB estimates, the two components of monetary policy
announcements are changes in the federal funds rate (FFR) and forward guidance (FG). In the post-ZLB es-
timates, the two components of monetary policy announcements are changes in forward guidance and LSAPs.
* ,** and *** denote statistical signi...cance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.




                                                          49
A.5.    Data Sources
Name                          Description                                               Source
GDP per capita                GDP per capita at current prices; in USD                  IMF WEO
Current account               Net current account; in USD                               IMF BOP
Current account to GDP        Ratio of net current account to nominal GDP               IMF
Foreign reserves              Foreign reserves                                          IMF IFS
Foreign reserves to GDP       Ratio of foreign reserves to nominal GDP                  IMF
ST debt to foreign reserves   Ratio of short-term debt to foreign reserves.             BIS consolidated
                                                                                        banking stats; IMF IFS
Financial openness            Ratio of the sum of total foreign asset and liabilities   IMF
                              to nominal GDP
Gvt. 1Y                       One-year government benchmark bid yield                   Datastream
Gvt. 10Y                      Ten-year government benchmark bid yield                   Datastream
Equity index                  Datastream equity index-price index                       Datastream
Exchange rate                 Exchange rate; domestic currency per USD                  National sources
CF equity                     Net equity ows                                            EPFR
CF bond                       Net bond ows                                              EPFR
Moody'
     s rating                 Moody's long-term local currency sovereign rating         Moody's
CDS                           Sovereign CDS spread                                      IHS Markit
Local currency debt           Ratio of the general government local currency            IMF WEO
                              gross debt to nominal GDP




                                                  50
                          Figure A.1: Identi...cation via External Instruments




Notes: The ...gure shows impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock obtained from a structural VAR in which risk-o¤
shocks are identi...ed using external instruments. See text for details. The variables included in the VAR are
the VIX index, the shadow short rate, 10-year US Treasury yield and the log of the S & P 500 index. The ...rst
subsample, labelled pre-ZLB, covers January 1999 to September 2008. The second subsample, labelled post-ZLB,
covers April 2009 to December 2015. Red (blue) solid lines and shaded areas correspond to point estimates and
one standard deviation con...dence intervals. The impulse responses in the pre-ZLB sample are scaled so that the
shock generates a 15 vols increase in VIX in the ...rst subsample. The impulse responses in the post-ZLB sample
are scaled so that the 12 week cumulative increase in the response of VIX is the same in both subsamples. The
units of the vertical axes are vols for VIX, basis points for interest rates and percentage points for stock prices.




                                                         51
                Figure A.2: The e¤ets of risk-o¤ shocks in US (Shadow Short Rate)




Notes: The ...gure shows impulse responses to a risk-o¤ shock obtained from weekly VARs estimated for two
subsamples. The variables included in the VAR are the VIX index, the shadow short rate, 10-year US Treasury
yield and the log of the S & P 500 index. The ...rst subsample, labelled pre-ZLB, covers January 1999 to September
2008. The second subsample, labelled post-ZLB, covers April 2009 to December 2015. Red (blue) solid lines and
shaded areas correspond to point estimates and one standard deviation con...dence intervals. The impulse responses
in the pre-ZLB sample are scaled so that the shock generates a 15 vols increase in VIX in the ...rst subsample.
The impulse responses in the post-ZLB sample are scaled so that the 12 week cumulative increase in the response
of VIX is the same in both subsamples. The units of the vertical axes are vols for VIX, basis points for interest
rates and percentage points for stock prices.




                                                       52
                Figure A.3: The e¤ets of risk-o¤ shocks in US- VIX ordered second




Notes: See notes to Figure 2.




                                               53
                  Figure A.4: The e¤ets of risk-o¤ shocks in US- VIX ordered last




Notes: See notes to Figure 2.




                                                54
